
Supreme Court of India
Narpal Singh & Others vs State Of Haryana on 1 February, 1977Equivalent citations: 1977 AIR 1066, 1977 SCR  (2) 901
Author: S M Fazalali
Bench: Fazalali, Syed Murtaza
           PETITIONER:
NARPAL SINGH & OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/02/1977

BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BENCH:
FAZALALI, SYED MURTAZA
BHAGWATI, P.N.

CITATION:
 1977 AIR 1066		  1977 SCR  (2) 901
 1977 SCC  (2) 131


ACT:
	    Sentence--Right to be heard by the accused on the  ques-
	tion   of   sentence  and the duty of the court	 to  pass  a
	sentence after conviction--Code of Criminal Procedure (Act 2
	of 1974), 1973--Section 235(2)--De novo trial not  necessary
	in such cases on the question of convictions.



HEADNOTE:
	    Appellants Nirpal Singh, Gurdev Singh and Jagmohan Singh
	were  convicted under s. 302 J.P.C. and sentenced  to  death
	while  the  appellants Devinder Singh, and Maha	 Singh	were
	convicted  under  s. 302 but sentenced to  imprisonment	 for
	life  by  the  Sessions Judge.	The High  Court	 upheld	 the
	convictions as also the sentences while accepting the refer-
	ence under s. 366 made by the Sessions Judge and  dismissing
	the appeals by the accused.
	    On	appeal	by special leave, the  appellants  contended
	inter alia,  that  the sentence passed against them was	 bad
	as  the	 Sessions Judge, after delivering  the	judgment  of
	conviction  has not given any opportunity to them  of  being
	heard on the question of sentence separately.
	    Dismissing the appeals of Devinder Singh and Maha  Singh
	and  partly allowing the appeals of the other  three  appel-
	lants, the Court maintained their convictions set aside	 the
	sentence  of death passed on them and remitted their   cases
	to  the	 trial Court for passing sentences  on	them  afresh
	under s. 235(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code. The Court
	    HELD:  (1) Though the commitment inquiry was held  under
	the  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, since  the  procedure
	under s. 235(2) has not been adopted by the Sessions  Judge,
	the  sentence  of  death passed on  the	 appellants,  Narpal
	Singh,	Gurdev Singh and Jagmohan Singh in the instant	case
	cannot	be sustained.  Since Devinder Singh and	 Maha  Singh
	have already been given sentences of life imprisonment which
	is  the minimum sentence that could be passed under s.	302,
	remetting  their cases to the Sessions Judge was not  neces-
	sary. [902 F-G, 903 E]
	Santa Singh v. State of Punjab [1977] 1 S.C.R. 229,  reiter-
	ated.
	    (2)	 When a case is remitted by this Court to  the	Ses-
	sions Court for giving a hearing on the question of sentence
	under  s.  235(2) of the Code of  Criminal  Procedure  1973.
	there would be fresh evidence and the  principle  that	 the
	Sessions  Judge	 may not act on	 evidence  already  recorded
	before his predecessor and must conduct de novo trial  would
	not  be	 violated. The ratio of Pyare Lal's  case  [1962]  3
	S.C.R. 328 cannot be applied or projected into the facts and
	circumstances  of  the present case or to  cases  where	 the
	trial  has  ended in a conviction but the  matter  has	been
	remitted to the trial Court for hearing the case only on the
	question of sentence. [903 A-D]
	Pyare  Lal v. State of Punjab [1962] 3 S.C.R.  328,  distin-
	guished.



JUDGMENT:
	    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 149
	of 1976.
	    Appeal  by	Special Leave from the Judgment	 and   Order
	dated 19-7-1975 of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Crimi-
	nal  Appeal No. 1205 of 1974 and Murder Reference No. 60  of
	1974.
	902
	    Frank  Anthony,  Hatbans Singh and Harjender  Singh	 for
	Appellants Nos. 1, 2 and 4.
	A.N. Mulla, and Harbans Singh for Appellants Nos. 3 and 5.
	R.L. Kohli for the Respondent.
	The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	    FAZAL  ALI,	 J.--After having gone	through	 the  entire
	evidence on the record and the judgment of the courts  below
	and  after hearing counsel for the parties and for the	rea-
	sons that we have already given, we are fully satisfied	 and
	convinced .that the prosecution case against the  appellants
	has been proved beyond reasonable doubt and that the  appel-
	lants  were rightly convicted by the Sessions Judge and	 the
	High Court.
	    This,  however,  does   not	 dispose   of	the   matter
	completely,  because it appears that the commitment  inquiry
	was held under	the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the
	Sessions  Judge	 after delivering the judgment of conviction
	has not given any opportunity to the accused of being  heard
	on  the question of sentence separately. In Santa  Singh  v.
	State of Punjab(1) this Court has taken the  that under	 the
	provisions  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,  it  is
	incumbent  on  the Sessions Judge delivering a	judgment  of
	conviction  to	stay his hands and hear the accused  on	 the
	question  of sentence and give him an opportunity  to  ,lead
	evidence  which	 may also be allowed to be rebutted  by	 the
	prosecution.   This  procedure has not been adopted  by	 the
	learned	 Sessions  Judge and, therefore,  the  sentences  of
	death  passed	on  the	 appellants   Narpal  Singh,  Gurdev
	Singh  and Jagmohan Singh cannot be sustained  although	 the
	convictions  recorded against them are confirmed by  us	 and
	will not be reopened under any circumstance whatsoever.
	    Counsel  for  the State has drawn our attention  to	 the
	fact that in some cases the accused have raised the question
	that  once the case is remitted to the Sessions Judge,	then
	the  accused  is entitled to claim a de novo  trial  on	 the
	question of conviction also.  In  this	connection, reliance
	was placed on Pyare Lal v. State of Punjab(2).	In the first
	place,	this case was based on an interpretation of ss.	 251
	to  259	 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1898,  and	 the
	reason why this Court held that the proceedings by a succes-
	sor  Judge cannot be started from the stage left out by	 his
	predecessor  was that  a  Judge who had heard the  whole  of
	the evidence before had the advantage of watching the demea-
	nour  of the witnesses which would be lost if the  successor
	Judge was to proceed from the stage left by his predecessor.
	It is true that under s. 326 of the Code of Criminal Proce-
	 *Only	pages 33 to 36 of the Judgment are reported as	.per
	directions of the Court.
	(1) [1976] s.c.c. 190.
	(1) [1962] 3 S.C.R. 328.
	903
	dure,  1973,  there is a discretion given to  the  successor
	Magistrate  to act on the evidence already recorded and	 not
	to  hold  a  de novo trial and no such provision is made  in
	case  of a trial by the Sessions Judge or a  Special  Judge.
	The  ratio  of	Pyare Lal's case (supra),  however,  is	 not
	applicable  to the present case.  Once the judge  who  hears
	the evidence delivers a judgment of conviction, one part  of
	the trial comes to an end.  The second part of the trial  is
	restricted  only to the question of sentence and so  far  as
	that  is  concerned, when a case is remitted by	 us  to	 the
	Sessions  Court	 for  giving a hearing on  the	question  of
	sentence under s. 235(2) of the Code of Criminal  Procedure,
	1973,  there would be fresh evidence and the principle	that
	the Sessions Judge may not act on evidence already  recorded
	before	his  predecessor and must conduct a  de	 novo  trial
	would  not  be violated.  In these circumstances, therefore,
	the  ratio  of Pyare Lal's case mentioned  above  cannot  be
	applied or projected into the facts and circumstances of the
	present	 case  or to cases where the trial has	ended  in  a
	conviction  but	 the matter has been remitted to  the  Trial
	Court for hearing the case only on the question of sentence.
	   So  far as the case of Devinder Singh and Maha Singh	 are
	concerned as they have already been given sentences of	life
	imprisonment and this is the minimum sentence that could  be
	passed	under  s. 302 I.P.C. it is not	necessary  to  remit
	their  cases  to the  Sessions Judge.  The  convictions	 and
	sentences of these two accused are, therefore, confirmed and
	their  appeals are dismissed. As regards the appeals by	 the
	three	other  appellants,  namely, Narpal  Singh,  Jagmohan
	Singh  and  Gurdev Singh, we   confirm	 their	 convictions
	which would not be reopened under any circumstances, but set
	aside  the sentence of death passed on them and remit  their
	cases  to   the Trial Court for passing	 sentences  on	them
	afresh	after	hearing	  the accused in the  light  of	 the
	observations made by us and to this extent only the  appeals
	of  the three appellants are allowed so far as	 their	sen-
	tences are concerned.
	S.R.					    Appeals   partly
	allowed.
	904




