
Supreme Court of India
Suresh vs State Of Haryana on 21 August, 2018Author: ……………………………..J.
                                                                                      REPORTABLE



                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO (S). 1445­1446 OF 2012 
                      Suresh and Anr.                                     …Appellant (s)
                                                   Versus
                      State of Haryana                                 …Respondent (s)
                                                    With
                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1458 OF 2012 
                      Sobhat Singh                                        …Appellant (s)
                                                   Versus
                      Dharampal and Ors.                               …Respondent (s)

                                                    JUDGMENT
   N. V. RAMANA, J. 


          1. These   appeals   by   special   leave   petitions,   are   preferred   by   two

                      accused persons, namely Sobhat Singh and Suresh, against the

                      conviction   imposed   by   the   High   Court   and   the   consequential

                      acquittal of other persons, namely Dharampal and Umed Singh,

                      sons   of   Beg   Raj   and   Dharambir,   passed   by   the   High   Court   of

                      Punjab and Haryana in Crl. Appeal No. 157­DB of 2002, 273­DB

                      of 2002, 920­SB of 2002, 751­DBA of 2002 and Crl. Revision No.
Signature Not Verified



                      907 of 2004. Facts being connected and issues being similar, we
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2018.08.21
16:03:27 IST
Reason:


                      would like to deal with these appeals by a common judgment.

                                                           1
2. Few facts which are necessary for the disposal of these cases are

  that a panchayat election was held on 15.12.1994, in the village

  Sundawas,   where   there   were   two   major   contestants   namely

  Maha Singh and Dharampal son of Beg Raj. Deceased Chander

  Bhan was an election agent for the losing candidate Maha Singh.

  It  is   necessary   to   note  that there was a quarrel including  gun

  shots   being   fired   at   around   11   A.M,   on   the   day   of   election

  between   both   factions,   as   a   result   of   which   supporters   of

  Dharampal   son   of   Beg   Raj   (winning   candidate)   sustained

  injuries. In this context, a FIR No. 733 of 1994 was registered

  against   Maha   Singh   (losing   candidate)   and   one   Darya   under

  Sections   307   read   with   34   of   Indian   Penal   Code,   1860

  [hereinafter referred as  ‘IPC’  for brevity] and Sections 25 and 27

  of the Arms Act, 1959. 


3. Later, during the intervening night of 15 th  and 16th  December of

  1994, Dharampal  alias  Dharam son of Nanak Ram [accused  A­

  1], Sobhat Singh [accused  A­2], both being supporters of losing

  candidate Maha Singh, came to the house of Chander Bhan, on
                                       2
  the pretext that since Maha Singh had lost the election and was

  involved   in   a   criminal   case,   they   should   falsely   implicate

  Dharampal   son   of   Beg   Raj   also,   by   registering   a   counter   case

  against him. On this pretext, they accompanied Chander Bhan to

  Hisar.   On  their   way,   one Suresh  [accused  A­3]  is  supposed  to

  have joined them.


4. One Umed Singh son of Mahi Ram [PW­14], while waiting near

  Borstal Jail, Hisar for a conveyance at 4:00 A.M on 16.12.1994

  (morning) had seen A­1, A­2, Chander Bhan and A­3 going in an

  auto   rickshaw.   It   is   the   prosecution’s   version   that   all   of   them

  went to an abandoned house in Adarsh Nagar at Hisar, wherein

  Chander Bhan (deceased) was shot by the aforesaid accused.



5. Thereafter, A­1 and A­2 took injured Chander Bhan to the City

  Civil   Hospital,   Hisar   for   treatment.   It   is   alleged   that   in   the

  meanwhile A­3 tried to hide the gun. It is born from the record

  that Chander Bhan succumbed to his injuries 20 minutes after

  he was admitted to the aforesaid Hospital on 16.12.1994.


                                         3
6. Thereafter, accused A­2 went to the Police Station, Sadar Hisar,

   for   registration   of   a  complaint against Umed Singh son  of  Beg

   Raj, Dharam Pal son of Beg Raj [Sarpanch] and Dharambir for

   the death of Chander Bhan. Accordingly, FIR was filed before the

   police being FIR No. 736/ 1994, dated 16.12.1994, based on the

   accused A­2.


7. As   per   the   narration   of   accused   A­2,   on   16.12.1994,   at   about

   4:30 A.M, the Chander Bhan (deceased), A­2 and A­1 were going

   to Chandigarh on foot. On reaching a few kilometers ahead of the

   village Sundawas, they spotted a jeep coming towards them. One

   of the occupants Umed Singh son of Beg Raj, raised lalkara that

   enemies   were   going   and   they   should   be   taught   a   lesson   for

   helping   Maha   Singh   in   the   elections.   Dharampal   and   Umed

   Singh sons of Beg Raj and Dharambir alighted from the jeep and

   Dharam Pal son of Beg Raj, who was armed with a pistol, shot

   Chander Bhan in his stomach and ran away. It is alleged that A­

   1 and A­2, who escaped the firing, rushed Chander Bhan to the

   City Civil Hospital, Hisar, where he succumbed to his injuries.

                                         4
8. The   case   was   investigated   by   I.O.   Bhim   Singh   [PW­15],   who

  reached the spot of the alleged occurrence as per the narration of

  accused   A­2.   However,   he   could   not   trace   any   incriminating

  material as alleged. Being suspicious of the version of accused A­

  2,   the   investigating   police,   started   to   investigate   from   different

  angles.


9. On   25.12.1994,   all   the   accused­appellants   contacted   one   Zile

  Singh [PW­16] and confessed their guilt before him. To put the

  gist of their extra­judicial confessions, it may be noted that the

  accused stated to Zile Singh (PW­16) that having the motive to

  file   a   counter   case   against   Dharampal   son   of   Beg   Raj,   the

  Sarpanch,   the   accused­appellants   along   with   Chander   Bhan

  reached an abandoned house in Adarsh Nagar, Hisar and Suresh

  [A­3] fired a shot at Chander Bhan in the house at Adarsh Nagar.

  Thereupon accused A­3 fled away with the gun. Later, accused

  A­1 and A­2 took Chander Bhan to the hospital and registered a

  false   complaint   against   Dharampal   son  of   Beg  Raj,   Dharambir

  and Umed Singh son of Beg Raj under Section 302, IPC. 
                                        5
10.      It may be noted that Zile Singh produced all the accused before

      the   Police   and   thereafter   the   accused   identified   the   place   of

      occurrence. By virtue of such disclosure statements made by the

      individual   accused   persons,   the   police   are   alleged   to   have

      recovered   a   licensed   gun,   cartridges,   pellets,   some   concrete

      material  from   the   khurli  found   in   the  house  at   Adarsh  Nagar,

      Hisar. Based on the aforesaid complaint, Bhim Singh, S.I to the

      P.S Sadar, Hisar, registered a case under Sections 25, 30, 54 and

      59 of Arms Act, being FIR No. 743 [Ex. PZ/1], against Lachman

      Singh [A­4] and A­3.


11.      After the completion of the investigation, charge­sheets came to

      be filed in the Court against the accused A­1, A­2 and A­3 for

      offences   under   Section   302   read   with   Section   34   of   IPC   and

      accordingly,   were   summoned   by   the   Addl.   Sessions   Judge   on

      10.10.1995   [in   Criminal   Case   No.   76­1­0802   of   1995   (Sessions

      Case   No.   60   of   1995   in   Sessions   Trial   No.   22   of   1995)].   In   a

      connected case of FIR No. 743, the accused A­3 and Lachman (A­

      4) were being tried for usage of fire arms, which was consolidated

                                              6
      with   the   main   case,   by   order   dated   19.09.1999   and   both   the

      cases   were   tried   together.   During   the   trial,   the   Prosecution

      examined 17 witnesses and the Defense examined 4 witnesses in

      the Sessions Case No. 60 of 1995. It may be noted here that the

      accused   examined   themselves   as   defense   witnesses   under

      Section   315   of   Code   of   Criminal   Procedure,   1973   [herein   after

      referred as ‘CrPC’ for brevity]. 

12.    The Trial Court in Sessions Case No. 60 of 1995 in Sessions Trial

      No. 22 of 1995, by order dated 12.02.2002, found the accused

      guilty   of   committing   the   crime   and   convicted   them   for   the

      offences punishable as under­


            ACCUSED        CHARGES                     CONVICTION
            Sobhat        S. 302/34        RI   for   Life   and   fine   of   Rs
           Singh [A­          IPC          5,000.   In   default,   to   suffer
              2]                           RI for 6 months 
                             [1] S.        [1] RI for Life and fine of Rs
                          302/34 IPC       5,000.   In   default,   to   suffer
                           [2] S. 25       RI for 6 months. 
            Suresh         Arms Act        [2] RI for 1 year and fine of
             [A­3]                         Rs   500,   In   default,   to
                                           undergo RI for 15 days.
                                           Sentence           to           run
                                           concurrently.
           Lachman        S. 30, Arms      Fine of Rs 1,000. In default,
             [A­4]            Act          to suffer RI for 15 days.

                                           7
It may be noted, that during the trial, accused A­1 died and the

trial against him got abated. The Trial Court, held the accused

guilty, and reasoned as under­

     a) The motive is proved, wherein the crime was staged so as
        to   falsely   implicate   Sarpanch   Dharampal   belonging   to
        opposite political faction.
     b) That the accused portrayed a fake story and filed a FIR
        against   Dharampal,   Umed   Singh   sons   of   Beg   Raj   and
        Dharambir   alleging   that   they   have   murdered   Chander
        Bhan.   However,   no   evidence   was   found   against
        Dharampal,   Umed   and   Dharambir   at   the   place   of
        occurrence as described by accused A­2.
     c) There   was   no   motive   for   Dharampal,   Umed   Singh   and
        Dharambir  to  murder  Chander  Bhan. Rather, a motive
        exists on the part of the accused, since their candidate
        had lost the election. 
     d) Inference   was   drawn   that   the   probability   of   causing
        injuries to Chander Bhan by A­1 and A­2 was relatively
        higher.
     e) That PW­14, Umed Singh son of Mahi Ram, had seen the
        accused   with   the   deceased   early   in   the   morning   when
        they had a small conversation and that the Umed Singh
        (PW­14)   had   noticed   that   Suresh   was   holding   a   single
        barrel gun. 
     f) That the version of accused A­2 was not tenable due to
        many contradicting circumstances.
     g) That the accused had confessed their crime before Zile
        Singh   (PW­16),   who   later   produced   the   accused   before
        the Police on 25.12.1994.
     h) That   the   disclosure   statements   made   by   the   accused
        appellants herein, before the police, led to the recovery of
        the licensed gun and pellets.


                                  8
              i) The   FSL   Report   concludes   that   the   pellets   which   were
                 recovered   from   the   Khurli   as   per   such   disclosure   were
                 similar to those found in the dead body. 
              j) The Post­mortem report confirms the death to have been
                 caused   due   to   hemorrhage   and   shock   due   to   gunshot
                 injuries. 


13.     Aggrieved by the fact that the complainant was himself shown as

       an accused by the investigating authority, A­2 filed a complaint

       before the Magistrate against the Dharambir, Umed Singh son of

       Beg Raj and Dharam Pal son of Beg Raj, on the facts as revealed

       by accused A­2 in FIR No. 736 dated 16.12.1994.

14.     Accordingly,   the   Magistrate   separately   took   cognizance   and

       committed   the   case   to   the   Sessions   Court   against   Dharambir,

       Umed Singh son of Beg Raj and Dharam Pal son of Beg Raj, on

       25.01.1997 [in Complaint Case No. 95­1 of 1995 (Sessions case

       No. 62 of 1997] under Sections 302 read with 34 of IPC. Further

       by order dated 05.03.1997, the Sessions Judge ordered the trial

       of   all   the   cases   to   take   place   simultaneously.   All   the   accused

       pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. 




                                             9
15.      In Sessions case No. 62 of 1997, the Sessions Court by order,

      dated   12.02.2002,   acquitted  Dharampal  son  of  Beg  Raj,  Umed

      Singh son of Beg Raj and Dharambir on the following reasons­
        a) That   prosecution  failed to establish motive on the  part of
           accused­Dharampal son of Beg Raj, as he has already won
           the election.
        b) That   accused   persons   came   at   midnight   ­   15.12.1994
           ­16.12.1994,   called   the   deceased   and   told   him   that   they
           had to shoot somebody so as to falsely implicate Sarpanch
           Dharampal son of Beg Raj in a case as corroborated by the
           evidence of DW­1 (Kamla).
        c) That   the   story   of   the   prosecution   that   the   deceased   was
           shot on the road at a distance of 1­1/2 K.M. from village by
           the accused Dharampal son of Beg Raj is uncorroborated in
           the absence of any incriminating evidence in the said crime
           scene, as supported by the evidence of DW­5 Bhim Singh.
        d) That DW­2 Umed Singh corroborated that on 16.12.1994 at
           about 4:30 A.M. while waiting for conveyance to go to his
           village he had seen Sobhat Singh, Dharampal son of Nanak
           Ram and the Suresh who was carrying a single barrel gun
           along with the deceased in an auto­rickshaw. 
        e) The complainant had taken deceased to the Hospital at 6:
           30 AM. In cross­examination Sobhat Singh (PW­4/A­2) and
           Dharampal   (PW­5/A­1)   could   not   explain   when   the
           deceased   received   injuries   or   why   did   they   not   take   the
           deceased to the nearby hospital. 
        f) That complainants further failed to explain in their cross­
           examination how the three­wheeler appeared merely within
           five­minutes to take them to the Hospital at Hisar.
        g) The   evidence   of   PW5­Dharampal   son   of   Nanak   Ram,   is
           contradictory to PW­4 (Shobat Singh [A­2]) as to how they
           took the deceased to the hospital.

                                          10
         h) That the complainants failed to state the number of vehicle,
            driver of the vehicle in their cross­examination. They have
            also failed to explain why they did not immediately report
            the matter in the village and to the family members of the
            deceased   when   they   were   just   at   a   distance   of   1­1/2  km
            from the village. 
         i) That extra­judicial confession was made before DW­3 (Zile
            Singh).
         j) That   the   gun   recovered   in   the   instant   case   was   the   gun
            belonging   to   complainant   Suresh   [A­3]   and   FSL   report
            available on record proves that the pellets found in the body
            of the deceased were similar to those fired from that gun.
         k) Therefore,   the   prosecution   failed   to   prove   a   case   beyond
            reasonable doubt against the accused. So, all the accused
            were acquitted of the charge against them.

16.      Aggrieved by the judgments of the Trial Court, in Session Case

      No. 60, accused A­2, A­3 and A­4 filed Criminal Appeal No. 273­

      DB, 157­DB, 920­SB respectively before the High Court. On the

      other hand, accused A­2 filed a Criminal Appeal No. 751­DBA of

      2002, against the acquittal, of Dharampal son of Beg Raj, Umed

      Singh   son   of   Beg   Raj   and   Dharambir,   passed   by   the   Sessions

      Court in Sessions Case No. 62 of 1997. It may be noted that the

      High Court clubbed all the appeals and dismissed them through

      a   common   impugned   judgment   dated   03.01.2012.   The   High

      Court had further directed accused A­2 and A­3 to pay a sum of


                                           11
       Rs. One  Lac as damages to Smt. Kamla and her two children.

17.     The   High   Court   while   upholding   the   conviction   emphasized

       following grounds­
              a) That it was admitted by accused A­2 and A­1 that they had
                  called for Chander Bhan at his house, in the presence of his
                  wife, on 16.12.1994.
             b)   That   the   evidence   produced   by   the   I.O   indicates   that   the
                  accused   took   Chander   Bhan   to   a   room   in   Adarsh   Nagar,
                  Hisar,   where   he   was   shot   by   accused   A­3   using   his   single
                  barrel gun.
             c)   The accused­appellants had confessed to their crime, which
                  led to the recovery of certain incriminating articles.
             d)   Sufficient evidence is on record like recovery of pellets, gun
                  and some concrete material etc. to prove that Chander Bhan
                  was shot inside that Kotha (Room) by the accused and not by
                  the other gang, as alleged.
             e)   There was a crystal­clear motive on the part of the accused A­
                  2 to commit such crime so as to implicate Dharampal son of
                  Beg Raj (Sarpanch) in a false case.
             f)   Apart from the testimony of wife­Kamla and the recovery of
                  the   incriminating   materials,   the   evidence   of   PW   14   (Umed
                  Singh), who deposed that he had seen the accused along with
                  Chander  Bhan   (deceased)  earlier  that   morning  with   Suresh
                  was also a major circumstance going against the accused.
             g)   Lastly,  the extra judicial confession  made before Zile Singh
                  (PW­16), is found to be true and voluntary and since PW­16
                  is an independent witness, his evidence cannot be doubted.

             h) The chain of circumstances are complete so as to bring
                home the guilt of the accused.
             i) Further,   the   gun   used   was   a   licensed   gun   which
                belonged to Lachman, father of A­3, who had allowed the
                gun   to   be   taken  from   his  custody  and  misused  by  his
                son.   Hence,   the   conviction   under   Arms   Act   was   also
                justified.


                                              12
18.    Aggrieved by the judgment and order of conviction passed by the

      High Court, accused A­2 and A­3 have preferred Criminal Appeal

      No (s). 1445­1446 of 2012 (arising out of SLP (Crl.) No (s). 2868­

      2869 of 2012) in Sessions Case No. 60 of 1995 in Sessions Trial

      No. 22 of 1995. Further accused A­2 preferred a Criminal Appeal,

      being Criminal Appeal No. 1458 of 2012 (arising from SLP (Crl.)

      No. 2926 of 2012), against the acquittal of Dharampal son of Beg

      Raj, Umed Singh son of Beg Raj and Dharambir in Sessions Case

      No. 62 of 1997 in Sessions Trial No. 97 of 1997.



19.    Learned senior counsel, Ms. Anjana Prakash, appearing on behalf

      of the appellant accused has mainly contended as under­
      a) That   the   case   involves   no   direct   evidence   and   the   chain   of
         circumstantial   evidence   is   not   complete;   therefore,   the
         conviction   of   the   appellants   on   the   basis   of   unfounded
         evidence should not be sustained. 
      b) That PW­13 (wife of the deceased), when materially confronted,
         denied   the   statement  that  she  had  stated  to  the   police  that
         accused A­1 and appellant accused A­2 had told the deceased
         that they had to fire a shot at somebody to implicate Sarpanch
         Dharampal son of Beg Raj.
      c) That   PW­14   presence   at  spot   is   doubtful.     He   made   out   an
         illogical  story   that  while  waiting  for   conveyance to  go to  his
         village at 4:00 AM, he had seen the appellant and Dharampal
         with the deceased. But in Cross examination he was not able
         to explain why he was waiting for the conveyance 3½ hours
                                           13
     early,   especially   when   the   first   bus   for   his   village   leaves   at
     7:30 AM. 
d)   That PW­14 has also admitted that he did not tell PW­13 that
     he   had   seen   accused   persons   carrying   gun   along   with   the
     deceased in the said auto­ rickshaw. PW­14 inter alia has also
     admitted that he and PW­16 had injured the deceased at an
     earlier point of time and denied the fact that brother of PW16
     had fired upon the deceased. 
e)   That alleged extra­judicial confession made on 25.12.94 before
     PW­16 is not admissible on the ground that it was made under
     suspicious circumstances. PW­16 inter­alia, also admitted that
     Maha   Singh   had   defeated   him   previously   in   the   Sarpanch
     election; therefore, election rivalry is evident against accused
     persons. 
f)   That if the accused persons were arrested on 18.12.94, then
     the   question   of   alleged   extrajudicial   confession   made   on
     25.12.94 before PW16 casts doubt in the prosecution story. 
g)     That the FIR was lodged by the appellants and it is also an
     admitted   fact   that   it   was   the   appellant­accused   who   had
     brought the injured at the hospital for treatment. 
h)   That the gun recovered in the instant case is the licensed gun
     of the father of the accused Suresh and there is no forensic
     evidence available on record to prove that pellets found in the
     body of the deceased was fired from that gun.
i)   That   the   motive   plays   an   important   role   in   a   case   of
     circumstantial evidence. In the present case there is no strong
     motive that can be inferred on the part of accused person on
     the ground of election rivalry.
j)   That the role of investigating officer is doubtful in this case as
     there are contradictions in respect of the date of arrest of the
     accused persons. As the IO stated that he had found evidence
     against appellants within two days of occurrence but denied
     arresting them then. However, from the materials on record it
     is   evident   that   date   of   arrest   of   accused   persons   is   on

                                         14
         18.12.1994.   That   it   can   be   said   that   IO   is   exonerating   the
         actual accused and falsely implicating the appellants. 

20.    On the Other hand, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      State, Dr. Monika Gusain, while supporting the judgment of the

      lower   courts,   has   drawn   our   attention   to   the   fact   that   the

      accused, were hard core criminals, who would not stop short of

      killing their own for political rivalry. She has also contended that

      the recovery at the place in Adarsh Nagar bolsters the case of the

      prosecution.   She   argues   that   if   for   a   moment,   the   version   of

      accused   A­1   is   taken   into   consideration,   then   there   was   no

      question   of   taking   the   deceased   to   a   Hospital   24   KM   away   in

      Hisar, while there was a Hospital near the vicinity of the alleged

      crime scene. 

   21. Having   heard   the   Learned   counsel   for   either   side   and   given

      our anxious consideration to the facts and circumstances of the

      case on hand, at the outset, it would be apt to observe certain

      statements   of   prosecution   witnesses,   on   whose   evidence   the

      courts below have excessively placed reliance. For this purpose,

      it   would   be   necessary   for   us   to   deal   with   the   two   cases

      separately. First, we would like to take up the Criminal Appeal
                                           15
       NO. 1445­1446 OF 2012 and thereafter consider Criminal Appeal

       No. 1458 of 2012.

22.     PW­1(Dr. Bishnoi), SMO General Hospital, Tohana, deposed that

       he   was   the   person,   who   conducted   the   post­mortem   of   the

       deceased. Regarding the nature of the injury, he states that­

                Multiple  rounded and oval shaped wounds of the
                size of 1/3 cm into 1/3 cm present on the front of
                trunk and pelvic area along with upper part of the
                front of both thighs numbering about (50). Majority
                of   these   wounds   were   present   on   the   left   side   of
                front   part   of   the   body.   These   were   covered   with
                clotted   blood   with   inverted   margins   with
                lacerations.   No   blackening   or   tattooing   were
                present. … All structures in the pelvic and in the
                lower abdomen including small and large intestine
                and vessels were injured. Abdominal cavity was full
                of red colored blood.

       Further   he   has   deposed   that   the   death   of   Chander   Bhan

       (deceased)   resulted   because   of   hemorrhage,   and   shock   due   to

       gun­shot   injuries.   All   injuries   were   opined   to   have   been   ante­

       mortem   in   nature   and   sufficient   in   the   usual   course   to   cause

       death.

23.     PW­2   (Dr.   Surinder   Singh),   Medical   Officer,   who   treated   the

       Chander Bhan (deceased) at the Hospital. He avers that from the

       perusal of the bed­head ticket, the Chander Bhan (deceased) was

                                             16
        brought to the Hospital at Hisar, by accused A­1 and A­2.  It is

        important   to   note   that   the   deceased   was   brought   in   a   semi­

        conscious state to the Hospital.

24.    PW­ 13 ­ Smt. Kamla, widow of deceased Chander Bhan states

        that   on   15.12.1994,   an   election   was   held   in   the   village   of

        Sundawas, wherein the deceased Chander Bhan, was an election

        agent for Maha Singh. She deposed that persons in support of

        Maha Singh, supposedly fired gun shots and the supporters of

        Dharampal son of Beg Raj, allegedly had received injuries in the

        aforesaid firing. In the intervening night of 15­16 th, A­1 and A­2,

        came to meet the deceased Chander Bhan. She states that her

        husband   had   enquired   with   the   aforesaid   accused,   who   had

        revealed to him that they had to go to Hisar and had to shoot

        somebody so as to involve Dharampal son of Beg Raj in a false

        case. In that pretext she states that all the three accused (A­1, A­

        2 and A­3) and Chander Bhan (deceased) left for Hisar.

25.       It   may   be   of   some   significance   to   note   that,   during   her   cross

        examination, she states as under­

                  I   had   told   in   my   statement   to   the   police   that
                  accused Dharma and Sobhat has told my husband

                                                17
               that   somebody   was  to   be  fired  at.  I  had  told  the
               police in my statement that accused Dharma and
               Sobhat had told my husband that they would fire
               shots   at   their   own   brother   in   order   to   involve
               Dharampal Sarpanch. 


      Appellant­accused   has   extensively   placed   reliance   on   the

      aforesaid  statement,   to point that the statement of PW­13  was

      ridden   with   improvements,   which   questions   the   reliability   and

      credibility of her statements. The consequence of the same, will

      be discussed at a later stage.

26.     PW­14 (Umed Singh son of Mahi Ram), states that he belongs to

      the village of Sundawas. On 15.12.1994, after casting his vote,

      he   returned   to   Hisar   in   the   evening   for   purchase   of   seed   and

      fertilizers.   Following   morning,   at   about   4   AM,   while   he   was

      standing near the Borstal Jail, Hisar, waiting for a bus to go back

      to   his   village   Sundawas.   Around   that   time,   one   auto   rickshaw

      came   from   the   side   of   Hisar   City   and   stopped   near   him.   The

      occupants of the auto­rickshaw were accused A­1, A­2, A­3 and

      Chander Bhan. He states that accused A­3 was holding a single

      barrel gun in his hand. When the occupants enquired about him,

      he replied to them that he was waiting for the conveyance to go

                                            18
      back to his village and the occupants of the auto supposedly told

      him that they were going for some urgent work.

27.      PW­15­ Bhim Singh, the Investigating Officer has deposed that

      accused   A­2   had   registered   a   complaint   against   Umed   Singh,

      Dharampal sons of Beg Raj and Dharambir on the grounds that

      they have shot the deceased Chander Bhan on account of prior

      rivalry. He further deposed that in furtherance of the enquiry, on

      reaching the alleged scene of the crime, he did not find any tyre

      marks of the jeep or any incriminating marks whatsoever. It may

      be noted that his evidence is a crucial link to portray that the

      case   of   false   prosecution   against   the   winning   candidate

      Dharampal son of Beg Raj was given full effect by misleading the

      police   authority   as   to   the   scene   of   the   incident.   He   further

      recorded the statement of PW­13­Smt. Kamla and found out that

      on 16.12.1994 the accused A­2 and A­1 came to the house of the

      deceased   at   around   midnight   and   took   Chander   Bhan   on   the

      pretext   that   since   Maha   Singh   had   lost   the   election   and   was

      involved in a criminal case, hence they should falsely implicate




                                           19
       Sarpanch   Dharampal   son   of   Beg   Raj,   by   registering   a   counter

       case against him.

28.       PW­15   further   deposed that PW­14  informed  that  while  Umed

       Singh (PW­14) was waiting at Borstal Jail, Hisar for conveyance

       at 4:00 A.M on 16.12.1994, he had seen that accused A­1, A­2,

       deceased   Chander   Bhan   and   A­3   were   going   for   some   urgent

       work  and  that he  had  also noticed A­3 holding  a single barrel

       gun. 

29.    Furthermore, PW­15 had also deposed that later, on 25.12.1994,

       PW­16, Zile Singh had produced the accused before him where

       he recorded the statement of Zile Singh with regard to the extra

       judicial   confession   made   to   him   by   the   accused.   It   may   be

       relevant   to   note   PW­15   in   the   examination­in­chief   states   that

       the Zile Singh (PW­16), left the Police Station and did not wait till

       the   completion   of   the   interrogation.   Whereas,   in   the   cross­

       examination he contradicts himself that Zile Singh (PW­16) was

       present during the interrogation of the appellant­accused. PW­15

       also deposed that by virtue of the disclosure statements made by

       the   individual   accused   persons,   the   recovery   of   the   gun,


                                           20
      cartridges, pellets and some concrete material from room and the

      khurli of the Adarsh Nagar House were made. 



30.      PW­16 (Zile Singh), deposes that on 25.12.1994, when he had

      come   to   the   village   Sundawas,   accused   A­1,   A­2   and   A­3   had

      confessed   before   him   by   detailing   the  modus   operandi  of   the

      crime   and   subsequent   cover­up   of   the   incident.   Thereafter,   he

      states   that   he   handed   over   the   accused   to   the   police   for

      interrogation   and   the   interrogation   was   conducted   in   his

      presence. At the appropriate stage, we will examine the relevance

      of the aforesaid confession made before Zile Singh (PW­16) and

      its impact on the prosecution’s case.


31.     As regards to the evidence of other witnesses who supported the

      prosecution case, PW­17, Mewa Singh, is the panch witness for

      the  seizures made by the police from crime scene. He deposed

      that on 25.12.1994, he went to the police station along with one

      Sant   Lal   on   getting   the   information   that   the   real   culprits   in

      Chander   Bhan's   murder   case   have   been   arrested.   He   further

      deposed   that   I.O.   Bhim   Singh   interrogated   the   accused   in   his
                                           21
      presence. That during such interrogation, accused A­1 and A­3

      pointed out that they will be able to show the scene of the crime

      as well as the hidden gun. He had further deposed that he and

      Sant Lal were witnesses to the subsequent recoveries made by

      the investigating officer.

32.    After having appreciated the evidence of certain crucial witnesses,

      we   would   like   to   clarify   at   the   outset   that   this   is   a   case   of

      circumstantial   evidence.   Jurisprudentially   the   meaning   of

      circumstantial evidence has never been settled. Although we may

      not require a detailed analysis of the jurisprudential dichotomy

      which exists as to what amounts to ‘circumstantial evidence’, we

      may indicate certain precedents and legal literature have given a

      definite   shape   for   the   aforesaid   term.  In Thomas   Starkie,   A

      Practical   treatise   on   the   law   of   evidence,   and   digest   of

      proofs,   in   civil   and   criminal   proceedings   (vol.   I,   4 th  Eds.,

      1876), it is said that­


                "In   criminal   cases,   proof   that   the   party   accused
                was   influenced   by   a   strong   motive   of   interest   to
                commit the offence proved to have been committed,
                although   exceedingly   weak   and   inconclusive   in
                itself,   and   although   it   be   a   circumstance   which
                                              22
              ought   never   to   operate   in   proof   of   the   corpus
              delicti,   yet   when   that   has   once   been   established
              aliunde,   it   is   a   circumstance   to   be   considered   in
              conjunction   with   others   which   plainly   tend   to
              implicate the accused".

      Sir Fitz James Stephen, while writing his Introduction to Indian

      Evidence Act, 1872, writes as under­

              Facts   relevant   to   the   issue   are   facts   from   the
              existence of which inferences as to the existence of
              the facts in issue may be drawn.
              A   fact   is   relevant   to   another   fact   when   the
              existence of the one can be shown to be the cause
              or   one   of   the   causes,   or   the   effect   or   one   of   the
              effects,   of   existence   of   the   other,   or   when   the
              existence of the one, either alone or together with
              other   facts,   renders   the   existence   of   the   other
              highly   probable,   or   improbable,   according   to   the
              common course of events.

      Wharton's Criminal Evidence (1955)­
            "In   prosecutions   for   homicide,   as   in   criminal
            prosecutions generally, evidence to show motive is
            competent and considerable latitude is allowed in
            its introduction. When proof has been made of the
            corpus   delicti,   all   facts   and   circumstances   that
            tend to show motive on the part of the accused are
            relevant".


33.    Peacock v. The King, 13 CLR 619, expounded the circumstantial

      evidence to mean­

              Whether   the   fact,   or   that   body   of   facts   which   is
              called the 'case' is capable of bearing a particular
                                             23
                inference,   is   for   the   Court,   and   unless   it   is   so
                capable, the Court's duty is to withhold it from the
                jury, as a single fact or as a case. But when the
                case   is   undoubtedly   capable   of   the   inference   of
                guilt,   albeit   some   other   inference   or   theory   be
                possible, it is for the jury, properly directed, and for
                them alone, to say not merely whether it carries a
                strong   probability   of   guilt,   but   whether   the
                inference   exists   actually   and   clearly, and   so
                completely   overcomes   all   other   inferences   or
                hypotheses,   as   to   leave   no   reasonable   doubt   of
                guilt in their minds.

34.      In  Anant Chintaman Lagu v. State of Bombay,  AIR 1960 SC

       500, this court defined circumstantial evidence­

                Circumstantial   evidence   in   this   context   means,   a
                combination   of   facts   creating   a   network   through
                which there is no escape for the accused, because
                the   facts   taken   as   a   whole   do   not   admit   of   any
                inference but of his guilt.

35.    In line with the aforesaid definition, this Court in catena of cases

       has   expounded   the   test   of   ‘complete   chain   link   theory’   for   the

       prosecution to prove a case beyond reasonable doubt based on

       the circumstantial evidence. In Hanumant and Others v. State

       of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1952 SC 343 [hereinafter referred as

       ‘Hanumant   Case’  for   brevity],   this   Court   explained   one   of   the




                                             24
        possible ways to prove a case based on circumstantial evidence,

        in the following manner ­
                 in cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial
                 nature,   the   circumstances   from   which   the
                 conclusion   of   guilt   is   to   be   drawn   should   in   the
                 first instance be fully established, and all the facts
                 so established should be consistent only with the
                 hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. Again, the
                 circumstances   should   be   of   a   conclusive   nature
                 and   tendency   and   they   should   be   such   as   to
                 exclude every hypothesis but the one proposed to
                 be proved.


36.     It   was   for   the   first   time   that   this   Court   formulated   a   test

        concerning circumstantial evidence. Subsequently, the aforesaid

        test   was   applied   on   multiple   occasions   by   this   Court   in

        Deonandan   Mishra   v.   State   of   Bihar,   AIR   1955   SC   801,

        Govinda Reddy v. State of Mysore, AIR 1960 SC 29.

37.    In Charan Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1967 SC 520,

        this Court expounded the proposition laid down in  Hanumant

        Case (supra), and observed as under­

                 It   is   well   established   that   in   cases   where   the
                 evidence   is   of   a   circumstantial   nature,   the
                 circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is
                 to be drawn should, in the first instance, be fully
                 established, and the circumstances so established
                 should   be   consistent   only   with   the   hypothesis   of

                                              25
               the   guilt   of   the   accused   person;   that   is,   the
               circumstances   should   be   of   such   a   nature   as   to
               reasonably   exclude   every   hypothesis   but   the   one
               proposed to be proved.  To put it in other words,
               the chain of evidence must be so far complete
               as   not   to   leave   any   reasonable   ground   for   a
               conclusion consistent with the innocence of the
               accused person.

      We   may   note   that   this   Court   for   the   first   time   explained   the

      general test applicable for evaluating circumstantial evidence and

      brought in the concept of ‘completion of chain of evidence’. 

38.      In  Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, AIR

      1984   SC   1622.   Therein,   while   dealing   with   circumstantial

      evidence, it has been held that the onus was on the prosecution

      to prove that the chain is complete and the infirmity or lacuna in

      the prosecution cannot be cured by a false defense or plea. The

      conditions precedent in the words of this Court, before conviction

      could   be   based   on   circumstantial   evidence,   must   be   fully

      established. They are ­


                 (1) the circumstances from which the conclusion
               of guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.
               The circumstances concerned ‘must or should’ and
               not merely ‘may be’ established;


                                            26
                   (2)  the  facts  so established should be consistent
                 only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused,
                 that is  to say, they  should not be explainable on
                 any   other   hypothesis   except   that   the   accused   is
                 guilty;
                   (3)   the   circumstances   should   be   of   a   conclusive
                 nature and tendency;
                   (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis
                 except the one to be proved; and
                  (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete
                 as   not   to   leave   any   reasonable   ground   for   the
                 conclusion   consistent   with   the   innocence   of   the
                 accused   and   must   show   that   in   all   human
                 probability   the   act   must   have   been   done   by   the
                 accused.
        The aforesaid tests are aptly referred as ‘Panchsheel of proof in

        Circumstantial Cases’ [refer Prakash v. State of Rajasthan, AIR

        2013   SC   1474].   The   expectation  is  that  the  prosecution’s case

        should reflect careful portrayal of the factual circumstances and

        inferences   thereof   and   their   compatibility   with   a   singular

        hypothesis wherein all the intermediate facts and the case itself

        are proved beyond reasonable doubt.


39.       Circumstantial   evidence   are   those   facts,   which   the   court   may

        infer further. There is a stark contrast between direct evidence

        and circumstantial evidence. In cases of circumstantial evidence,
                                            27
      the courts are called upon to make inferences from the available

      evidences, which may lead to the accused’s guilt. In majority of

      cases, the inference of guilt is usually drawn by establishing the

      case from its initiation to the point of commission wherein each

      factual   link   is   ultimately   based   on   evidence   of   a   fact   or   an

      inference thereof. Therefore, the courts have to identify the facts

      in the first place so as to fit the case within the parameters of

      ‘chain link  theory’ and then see whether the case is made out

      beyond   reasonable   doubt.   In   India   we   have   for   a   long   time

      followed  the  ‘chain link theory’ since  Hanumant Case  (supra),

      which of course needs to be followed herein also.

40.     We need to consider five aspects and their impact on the case at

      hand,   before   we   put   forth   our   analysis.   It   is   well   settled   that

      motive is an important aspect in circumstantial evidence case. In

      Shivaji Genu Mohite v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 55

                “In case the prosecution is not able to discover an
                impelling   motive,   that   could   not   reflect   upon   the
                credibility of a witness proved to be a reliable eye­
                witness. Evidence as to motive would, no doubt, go
                a   long   way   in   cases   wholly   dependent   on
                circumstantial evidence. Such evidence would form
                one   of   the   links   in   the   chain   of   circumstantial
                evidence in such a case. But that would not be so
                                             28
                  in   cases   where   there   are   eye­witnesses   of
                  credibility, though even in such cases if a motive is
                  properly proved, such proof would strengthen the
                  prosecution   case   and   fortify   the   court   in   its
                  ultimate conclusion. But that does not mean that if
                  motive is not established, the evidence of an eye­
                  witness is rendered untrustworthy”.

        In   this   case   the   motive   has   an   important   role   as   this   case   is

        based on circumstantial evidence, motive herein forms one of the

        intermediate   fact/circumstances.   In   this   case,   the   motive   of

        killing   Chander   Bhan   (deceased)   was   to   foist   a   false   case   on

        Dharampal son of Beg Raj. If the motive was to foist a false case,

        then it is quite strange to believe that the accused went to the

        extent of killing their own (supporter of Maha Singh) to avenge

        the loss in the elections. Even if the motive is taken to be proved,

        then this too only forms one of the circumstances for adducing

        the guilt of the accused.

41.     The   credibility   of   the   witnesses,   which   the   prosecution   mainly

        relies   on   to   prove   the   case   on   the   basis   of   the   circumstantial

        evidence is an important aspect. In this case the evidence of PW­

        13   (wife   of   the   deceased)   is   crucial.   Her   statements  should   be

        carefully appreciated. The statements, as indicated above, clearly


                                               29
      portray that there were material improvements in the statements,

      which   makes   her   statement   unreliable   and   doubtful.   The

      vindictive   statements   which   were   made   during   the   cross

      examination,   clearly   bars   us   from   taking   her   testimony   into

      consideration.  There  is no dispute that there was prior enmity

      between the wife and the accused appellants, which makes her

      statements unreliable. It is revealed from her evidence that, even

      though   she   knew   that   her   husband   was   taken   for   shooting

      somebody,   she   kept  quiet   and   did   not   stop   her   husband   from

      accompanying the accused. Such behavior would be suspicious

      as it does not fit with the natural human behavior to inspire any

      confidence.

42.    Although this Court, on number of occasions, reiterated that mere

      relationship with the deceased will not be sufficient to discredit a

      witness,   in   the   present   circumstances,   it   is   apparent   that   the

      wife was an interested witness due to earlier enmity between the

      accused.   Hence,   we   are   of   the   considered   opinion   that   the

      aforesaid witness does not inspire confidence for us to rely on the

      same.


                                           30
43.      Coming to the testimony of the PW­14 (Umed Singh), the defense

            has   tried   to   exposé   the   aforesaid   witness   on   certain

            contradictions   and   improvements,   which   needs   our

            consideration. At the  outset, they question the presence of the

            aforesaid witness at Hisar, as the veracity of him being a chance

            witness is questionable. Learned senior counsel for the accused­

            appellant,   has   strenuously   contended   that   PW­14   is   a   chance

            witness, and contends that not much reliance may be placed on

            his statement. 

      44.   Generally,   the   chance   witness,   who   reasonably   explains   his

            presence   in   the   named   location   at   the   relevant   time,   may   be

            taken into consideration and should be given due regard, if his

            version   inspires   confidence   and   the   same   is   supported   by

            surrounding   circumstances.   Nonetheless,  the   evidence   of   a

            chance   witness   requires   a   very   cautious   and   close   scrutiny.   A

            chance   witness   must   adequately   explain   his   presence   at   the

            place of occurrence [refer  Satbir v. Surat Singh, (1997) 4 SCC

            192; Harjinder Singh v. State of Punjab, (2004) 11 SCC 253].

            Deposition of a chance witness whose presence at the place of

                                                31
      incident   remains   doubtful   should   be   discarded   [refer

      Shankarlal   v.   State   of  Rajasthan, (2004)  10  SCC   632].  The

      behavior of the chance witness, subsequent to the incident may

      also   be   taken   into   consideration   particularly   as   to   whether   he

      has informed anyone else in the village about the incident. [refer

      Thangaiya v. State of Tamil Nadu, (2005) 9 SCC 650].

45.    It may be noted that the (PW­14) has not explained as to why he

      was standing near the Bristol Prison so early at 4:00 AM in the

      morning of a peak winter day, when the first bus to the village

      was   at   7:00   AM.   Moreover,  it  is  doubtful  that  A­3  would  have

      brandished   a   gun,   while   travelling   in   the   auto­rickshaw.   It   is

      suspicious   that  even   after  getting  to  know  that Chander   Bhan

      was killed at Hisar, PW­14 did not reveal to anybody that he saw

      the   deceased   in   the   company   of   the   accused­appellant   in   the

      morning travelling towards Hisar. Indeed, it is quite unbelievable

      that a man, during peak of north Indian winter, would wait at 4

      A.M for a bus, which is scheduled to leave at 7:00 AM morning.

      These   suspicious   circumstances   impugn   the   general




                                           32
        trustworthiness   of   PW­14.   Therefore,   this   Court   cannot   accept

        the evidence of this witness as being credible.



46.      Now coming to the evidence of Zile Singh (PW­16). He narrates

        that the three accused met him in the bus stop on the morning of

        25.12.1993, when they confessed to their crime individually. We

        may   note   that   his   statements   are   ridden   with   following   un­

        clarified doubts­

              a. That   the   Zile   Singh   (PW­16)   accompanied   the   accused,
                 after   they   confessed,   from   the   bus   stand   to   the   police
                 station.
              b. Not taking the accused to the Police personnel present in
                 the Bus stand.
              c. That his presence in the police station itself is suspicious
                 as   the   I.O.   Bhim   Singh   (PW­15)   has   contradicted   Zile
                 Singh (PW­16) on this aspect.
              d. That there is no signature of Zile Singh (PW­16) on any of
                 the documents in the Police Station.


        In   light   of   these   circumstances,   we   need   to   be   cautious   in

        considering the statements of this witness.

47.     Now   we   need   to   concentrate   on   the   relevance   of   the   alleged

        confessions of the co­accused made before Zile Singh (PW­16). In

        Re   Periyaswami   Moopan,  AIR   1931   Mad.   177,   Reilly   J.


                                             33
      observed  “where   there   is   evidence   against   the   co­accused

      sufficient, if believed, to support his conviction, then the kind of

      confession described in Section 30 may be thrown into the scale

      as an additional reason for believing that evidence”. Therefore, the

      aforesaid extra­judicial confession against the co­accused needs

      to   be   taken   into   consideration   if   at   all   it   is   one,   only   if   other

      independent   evidence   on   record   have   established   the   basic

      premise   of   the   prosecution.   The   confession   of   the   co­accused

      cannot   be   solely   utilized   to   convict   a   person,   when   the

      surrounding   circumstances   are   improbable   and   creates

      suspicion. [refer Haricharan Kurmi v. State of Bihar, AIR 1964

      SC   1184].   As   the   confession   of   a   co­accused   is   weak   piece   of

      evidence, we need to consider whether other circumstances prove

      the prosecution’s case.

48.    On the aspect of recovery of pellets from a house at Adarsh Nagar,

      Hisar, it is an argument of the learned senior counsel, appearing

      on   behalf   of   the   appellant   accused,   that   the   FSL   Report

      indicating   the   possibility   of   pellets   being   fired   from   the   gun

      recovered   from   the   confession   of   accused   A­3,   should   not   be

                                                34
      considered   as   the   person,   who   made   the   report   was   not

      examined­is of some relevance. The FSL report forms part of the

      evidence, which is shown to point out that the crime had taken

      place in the house at Adarsh Nagar, Hisar and gun of 0.15 bore

      belonging   to   A­3   was   used   for   the   same.   The   prosecution   was

      expected   to   examine   the   author   of   the   report,   and   non­

      examination   of   the   same   is   a   fatal   error   in   the   case   at   hand.

      Moreover, at the scene of occurrence, there was no blood or foot

      marks found, which is apparent from the evidence of PW­8.

49.    The last circumstance, pointed out by the learned senior counsel

      for appellant is that, if the intention of the accused­appellant was

      indeed to murder the deceased, then, why would they take him

      to the Hospital. Thereby, she extends this argument, to portray

      that the accused, never had an intention to kill the deceased. It

      has not been explained by the prosecution, as to why such action

      would   be   undertaken   by   the   accused   and   risk   taking   an   alive

      person,   who   was   shot,   to   the   hospital.   The   contention   of   the

      State that this was a diabolic act of perverted criminals, may not

      fit the evidence available on record.


                                             35
50.      In line with the aforesaid discussion on various circumstances,

       we may now identify the intermediate circumstances, which we

       are called upon to infer guilt from­

       1.)  On   15.12.1994,   there   was   a   local   election,   wherein   main
            candidates   were   Maha   Singh   and   Dharampal   son   of   Beg
            Raj.
       2.) Chander Bhan (deceased) was the election agent as well as
            the supporter of Maha Singh.
       3.) On the day of the election, there was a fight between two
            factions, in which Maha Singh and one Darya were charged
            for firing gun shots at the supporters of Dharampal son of
            Beg Raj.
       4.) Maha   Singh   lost   the   elections,   which   was   known   to   the
            accused party as well as deceased.
       5.) That Sobhat Singh [A­2], Dharampal son of Nanak Ram [A­
            1]   and   Chander   Bhan   (deceased),   met   on   15 th­16th  mid
            night.
       6.) Near   Hisar,   the   Chander   Bhan   was   seen   going   with   the
            accused   around   the   time   of   the   incident.   [of   doubtful
            veracity]
       7.) Injured Chander Bhan was alive when he was brought to
            Hospital in Hisar by Sobhat Singh [A­1] and Dharampal [A­
            2].
       8.) Chander   Bhan’s   body   was   found   to   have   sustained   more
            than fifty ante mortem gun shot wounds.
       9.) Gun and pellets were recovered from an abandoned house
            in Adarsh Nagar.
       10.) Extra­judicial   confession   recorded   before   Zile   Singh   on
            25.12.1994.


51.     From   the   aforesaid   circumstances,   we   may   note   that   the

       hypothesis canvassed by the prosecution cannot be said to have

                                          36
been   proved   beyond   reasonable   doubt   as   there   exist   apparent

gaps   in   the   prosecution   story,   which   are   left   incomplete   or

insufficiently proved. In  Latesh v. State of Maharashtra, AIR

2018 SC 659, this court had observed the ‘When you consider the

facts, you have a reasonable doubt as to whether the matter is

proved or whether it is not a reasonable doubt in this sense. The

reasonableness of a doubt must be a practical one and not on an

abstract   theoretical   hypothesis.   Reasonableness   is   a   virtue   that

forms   as   a   mean   between   excessive   caution   and   excessive

indifference to  a doubt.’   In view of this proposition, we accept

that   there   is   no   direct   evidence   which   led   the   prosecution   to

clearly prove that deceased was shot at Adarsh Nagar in Hisar.

Even   the   circumstantial   evidence   which   is   led,   has   gaps   in

between. In the narration above, there is a big hiatus between

the time the accused left the village and the accused­appellants

were seen in the Hospital, at Hisar. Neither the intermediate facts

are   established   with   certainty,   nor   the   case   as   a   whole   is

established beyond reasonable doubt.


                                     37
52.      We may note that every acquittal in a criminal case has to be

      taken   with   some   seriousness   by   the   investigating   and

      prosecuting authorities, when a case of this nature is concerned.

      We are aware of the fact that there has been a death of a person

      in this incident and there is no finality to the aforesaid episode as

      it ends with various unanswered questions, which point fingers

      at the lack of disciplined investigation and prosecution. Although

      Courts   cannot   give   benefit   of   doubt   to   the   accused   for   small

      errors   committed   during   the   investigation,  we   cannot  however,

      turn a blind eye towards the investigative deficiencies which goes

      to the root of the matter. 

53.     Now, coming to the case foisted against Dharambir, Umed Singh

      and Dharampal (sarpanch) sons of Beg Raj, in Criminal Appeal

      No. 1458 of 2012 (Sessions Case No. 62 of 1997 in Sessions Trial

      No. 97 of 1997). The prosecution had examined PW­1 (Dr. R.S.

      Bishnoi),   PW­2   (Dr.   Surendra   Singh),   PW­3   (ASI­Jagbir   Singh),

      PW­4 (Sobhat Singh [A­1]) and PW­5 (Dharampal son of Nanak

      Ram   [A­2]).   While   the   defense   had   led   DW­1   (Kamla),   DW­2




                                           38
      (Umed Singh), DW­3 (Zile Singh), DW­4 (Mewa Singh) and DW­5

      (Bhim Singh).

54.    We have considered the reasoning of the court below in this case,

      which we accept. Although this case was foisted to be a case of

      direct evidence, there  is no credibility in the statements of the

      accused­appellant   as   the   surrounding   circumstances   have

      shown, as already indicated in the earlier parts of the judgment,

      to be against them. We may note the golden rule of evidence that

      ‘men   may   tell   a   lie,   but   the   circumstances   do   not’,   which   is

      squarely  applicable   in  this case at hand.  Therefore, we cannot

      also  accept the  narrative of the accused­appellant in the other

      appeals, as a gospel of truth.

55.      In view of  the  discussion above, we allow the Criminal Appeal

      No(s).   1445­1446   of   2012,   before   us   and   simultaneously   set

      aside   the   conviction   and   punishment   as   provided   by   the   Trial

      Court in Sessions Case No. 60 of 1995 in Sessions Trial No. 22 of

      1995,   and   dismiss   the   Criminal   Appeal No. 1458 of 2012.




                                            39
Further   the   concerned   authorities   are   directed   to   release   the

appellants­accused, if not required in any other case.



                                              ……………………………..J.
                                                (N. V. Ramana)




                                             ……………………………..J.
                                         (Mohan M. Shantanagoudar) 
AUGUST 21, 2018
NEW DELHI




                                   40

