
Supreme Court of India
Ranjit Kumar Haldar vs The State Of Sikkim on 25 July, 2019Author: Hemant Gupta
Bench: L. Nageswara Rao, Hemant Gupta
                                                          REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 427 OF 2014



RANJIT KUMAR HALDAR                                     .....APPELLANT(S)


                                   VERSUS


STATE OF SIKKIM                                       .....RESPONDENT(S)



                               WITH


                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 458 OF 2015



                         JUDGMENT

HEMANT GUPTA, J.


1)   The present appeals arise out of common judgment dated

     November 25, 2011, maintaining conviction and sentence on the

     appellants for causing death of Netai Mohanta.


2)   An FIR was lodged by Bhola Mohanta (PW-1), brother of the

     deceased, on December 28, 2004. The original FIR was lodged in

     Bengali language (Exh. 1), which was later translated in Nepali

     language. Bhola Mohanta (PW-1) in his statement has stated that

     his brother had gone to Rabom Power House at Lachung along with


                                                             Page 1 of 16
         his family with the accused Ranjit Haldar to work as Carpenter. He

         further stated that his deceased brother, Netai Mohanta, was

         murdered by accused Ranjit Haldar along with his nephew Puran

         Bandhu Mondal and Mamta Mohanta, wife of the deceased.          He

         also stated that the body of his deceased brother was buried inside

         the house at Rabom where they used to stay.


3)       On the basis of his statement, the investigations were undertaken

         by Rinzing Palzor Bhutia (PW-15). He deposed that he availed the

         services of one Krishna Kanta Burman for translating the contents

         of FIR, lodged by Bhola Mohanta, from Bengali language to Nepali

         language.      He visited the place of occurrence at the house

         belonging to one Jamyang Bhutia (PW-5) and prepared rough

         sketch map and also arranged to take photographs of the place of

         occurrence. Accused Mamta Mohanta was present at the place of

         occurrence who was brought by Bhola Mohanta (PW-1).            The

         statement (Exh. 4) of accused Mamta Mohanta was recorded under

         Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 1.    On the basis of

         statement, the dead body of deceased Netai Mohanta concealed

         underneath the wooden flooring at the place of residence was

         recovered after the flooring was removed. Dr. S.D. Sharma (PW-

         12), a medical consultant of STNM Hospital, was also present at the

         time of recovery of dead body. The dead body was found packed in

         a gunny bag with its opening tied by a rope. The body has not

         decomposed but dried to certain extent as the weather condition

1    for short, ‘Act’

                                                                 Page 2 of 16
        at Rabom being cold. The dead body was identified by Ravi Deb

        (PW-3).     The postmortem report is Exh. 27.      The investigating

        officer took into possession one plane ( randa), one local made

        ‘angethi’, one ‘batali’ (carpenter tool) and a lock. He also took into

        possession two gunny bags smeared with mud, two pieces of rope

        of different sizes from the place of occurrence.


4)      Learned counsel for the appellants have vehemently argued that

        the original FIR was recorded in Bengali which was translated in

        Nepali but prosecution has not examined Krishna Kanta Burman

        who facilitated translation of the FIR from Bengali to Nepali. The

        prosecution has examined Kumar Tamang (PW-14) who has written

        the First Information Report as told by Krishna Kanta Burman. Still

        further, the FIR was not sent to the Magistrate, therefore, the first

        version in the FIR is not creditworthy. Since the foundation itself is

        shaky, the entire prosecution story is doubtful.


5)       Learned counsel for the appellants relied upon the judgment in

        Sudam Charan Dash v. State of Orissa & Anr. 2 to contend that

        information to the Magistrate is necessary chain of events in the

        investigation. It is also argued that there is no evidence that the

        dead body recovered is that of deceased Netai Mohanta as there

        was no DNA examination conducted. The statements of witnesses

        in respect of identification of dead body are discrepant therefore,

        the prosecution cannot be said to have completed the chain of


2    (2014) 2 SCC 141

                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     circumstances so as to convict the appellants.


6)   It is also argued by the learned counsel for the appellants that

     appellants were not residing in the house at the time of recovery of

     alleged dead body, therefore, the prosecution has failed to prove

     that the house continued to be in possession of the appellants at

     the time of recovery of dead body.


7)   The prosecution examined Jamyang Bhutia (PW-5) who deposed

     that he has given two rooms in his house on rent to Ranjit Haldar.

     He further deposed that he has engaged him in the construction

     work of his another house.    He deposed that one boy who was

     initially residing with the accused left the place. Later, one more

     Carpenter along with his wife and two small children started living

     together in the same two rooms. After residing in his house for less

     than a month, they all left the house after locking the door. He has

     not seen them leaving the house. It is after one month, the Police

     came to find out whether any Carpenter was residing in his house.

     He   showed   the   house   where    the   Carpenter   was     residing.

     Thereafter, the Police along with the female accused came to his

     house.   The lady accused standing in the dock pointed the spot

     below the wooden floor of the house where the dead body of her

     husband was concealed. The Police removed the wooden planks

     from the floor and found the dead body packed in a gunny bag.

     The dead body was in a decomposed state and foul smell was

     coming out therefrom. The dead body was examined by a Doctor


                                                                  Page 4 of 16
     present there. The witness deposed that he does not reside in the

     house from where the dead body was recovered.       He lives in a

     separate house with his family. The accused lived for less than a

     month in the said house. The lady accused joined later. He further

     deposed that the door of the house remained under lock and key

     till the arrival of the Police.


8)   Ravi Deb (PW-3) is also a Carpenter. He knew both the accused.

     He was informed of the death of Nitai Mohanta and was called by

     the Police. The Police in his presence broke open the lock of the

     door of a portion of the house. The appellant Mamta Mohanta was

     asked where the dead body of her husband was. On her pointing

     out to a spot under a bed as being the place where dead body of

     the deceased was concealed, the Police with the help of persons

     present there removed wooden planks. Under the wooden planks,

     there were stones and mud. After stones and mud was removed, a

     dead body found concealed wrapped in a jute gunny bag whose

     opening was tied with a string. The dead body was then brought

     out.    He identified the deceased from his wearing apparels

     particularly a sweater and one mala (tulsi) around his neck which

     he used to wear and also from the appearance of the face.


9)   Doma Lepcha (PW-2) is the Vice President of Kazor Block

     Panchayat. She deposed that one Bhola Mohanta (PW-1) has filed a

     written report at his Gram Panchayat in respect of missing of his

     deceased brother Netai Mohanta. Appellant Mamta Mohanta was


                                                            Page 5 of 16
     brought by Bhola Mohanta (PW-1). Mamta Mohanta disclosed that

     her husband has been murdered by Ranjit Haldar with ‘randa’ and

     the dead body has been concealed in the same rented house in

     which they were last residing in North Sikkim. She also disclosed

     that, during the incident, her husband was strangulated with a rope

     by Ranjit Haldar and his nephew Puran Bandhu Mondal and she had

     helped them.    Doma Lepcha (PW-2) is a witness of extra-judicial

     confession of Mamta Mohanta. In cross-examination, Doma Lepcha

     (PW-2) deposed that she knew the deceased Netai Mohanta as he

     was staying near her house.


10) Phurba Lepcha (PW-4) is a resident of Kazor Busty, Mangan and a

     witness of the disclosure statement made by Mamta Mohanta

     which led to recovery of dead body.


11) Dr. S.D. Sharma (PW-12) was associated at the time of recovery of

     dead body. He deposed that the body was in the advance stage of

     putrefaction. He deposed that time since death was more than two

     weeks and the cause of death was combined effect of antemortem

     head injury produced by blunt force and antemortem strangulation

     by ligature.   The Medical Legal Autopsy Report is Exh. 25.    The

     postmortem was conducted at the site where the dead body was

     recovered.


12) Bhola Mohanta (PW-1) is the brother of the deceased Netai

     Mohanta and the informant on whose information the prosecution

     was set in motion. He stated that he does not know English, Hindi

                                                             Page 6 of 16
      or Nepali and only knows Bengali. He deposed that he had never

      met Ranjit Haldar earlier.


13) Before we examine respective contentions of the learned counsel

       for the parties, it would be appropriate to extract Section 106 of

       the Act, which reads as under:

                  “106.     Burden of proving fact especially within
                  knowledge. – When any fact is especially within the
                  knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that
                  fact is upon him.”


14) The general rule is that the burden of proof is on the prosecution.

 Section 106 of the Act was introduced not to relieve the

      prosecution of their duty but it is designed to meet the situation in

      which it would be impossible or difficult for the prosecution to

      establish facts which are especially within the knowledge of the

      accused.


15) In Shambu Nath Mehra v. State of Ajmer3, the Court held as

      under:

                  “8.     …Section 106 is an exception to Section 101.
                  Section 101 lays down the general rule about the
                  burden of proof.
                      “Whoever desires any court to give judgment as
                      to any legal right or liability dependent on the
                      existence of facts which he asserts, must prove
                      that those facts exist.”



                  Illustration (a) says—

                      “A desires a court to give judgment that B shall
                      be punished for a crime which A says B has

3   AIR 1956 SC 404

                                                                     Page 7 of 16
    committed.

    A must prove that B has committed the crime.”



9.       This lays down the general rule that in a
criminal case the burden of proof is on the prosecution
and Section 106 is certainly not intended to relieve it of
that duty. On the contrary, it is designed to meet
certain exceptional cases in which it would be
impossible, or at any rate disproportionately difficult,
for the prosecution to establish facts which are
“especially” within the knowledge of the accused and
which    he      could    prove    without   difficulty  or
inconvenience. The word “especially” stresses that. It
means facts that are pre-eminently or exceptionally
within his knowledge. If the section were to be
interpreted otherwise, it would lead to the very startling
conclusion that in a murder case the burden lies on the
accused to prove that he did not commit the murder
because who could know better than he whether he did
or did not. It is evident that that cannot be the intention
and the Privy Council has twice refused to construe this
section, as reproduced in certain other Acts outside
India, to mean that the burden lies on an accused
person to show that he did not commit the crime for
which he is tried. These cases are Attygalle v. Emperor
 [AIR 1936 PC 169] and Seneviratnev. R. [(1936) 3 All
ER 36, 49].

             xx              xx            xx

11.       We recognise that an illustration does not
exhaust the full content of the section which it
illustrates but equally it can neither curtail nor expand
its ambit; and if knowledge of certain facts is as much
available to the prosecution, should it choose to
exercise due diligence, as to the accused, the facts
cannot be said to be “especially” within the knowledge
of the accused. This is a section which must be
considered in a commonsense way; and the balance of
convenience and the disproportion of the labour that
would be involved in finding out and proving certain
facts balanced against the triviality of the issue at stake
and the ease with which the accused could prove them,
are all matters that must be taken into consideration.
The section cannot be used to undermine the well
established rule of law that, save in a very exceptional

                                                      Page 8 of 16
                  class of case, the burden is on the prosecution and
                  never shifts.”


16) In another judgment reported as Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State

      of Maharashtra4, the Court considered a situation wherein

      accused is alleged to have committed the murder of his wife. The

      prosecution succeeded in leading evidence to show that shortly

      before the commission of the crime, they were seen together or the

      offence takes place in the dwelling house where the appellant

      normally resided. The Court held as under:

                  “22.       Where an accused is alleged to have
                  committed the murder of his wife and the prosecution
                  succeeds in leading evidence to show that shortly
                  before the commission of crime they were seen
                  together or the offence takes place in the dwelling
                  home where the husband also normally resided, it has
                  been consistently held that if the accused does not offer
                  any explanation how the wife received injuries or offers
                  an explanation which is found to be false, it is a strong
                  circumstance which indicates that he is responsible for
                  commission of the crime. In Nika Ram v. State of
                  H.P. [(1972) 2 SCC 80 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 635 : AIR 1972
                  SC 2077] it was observed that the fact that the accused
                  alone was with his wife in the house when she was
                  murdered there with “khukhri” and the fact that the
                  relations of the accused with her were strained would,
                  in the absence of any cogent explanation by him, point
                  to his guilt. In Ganeshlal v. State of Maharashtra [(1992)
                  3 SCC 106 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 435] the appellant was
                  prosecuted for the murder of his wife which took place
                  inside his house. It was observed that when the death
                  had occurred in his custody, the appellant is under an
                  obligation to give a plausible explanation for the cause
                  of her death in his statement under Section 313 CrPC.
                  The mere denial of the prosecution case coupled with
                  absence of any explanation was held to be inconsistent
                  with the innocence of the accused, but consistent with
                  the hypothesis that the appellant is a prime accused in
                  the commission of murder of his wife. In State of

4   (2006) 10 SCC 681

                                                                       Page 9 of 16
U.P. v. Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal [(1992) 3 SCC 300 :
                  1992 SCC (Cri) 642 : AIR 1992 SC 2045] the medical
                  evidence disclosed that the wife died of strangulation
                  during late night hours or early morning and her body
                  was set on fire after sprinkling kerosene. The defence of
                  the husband was that the wife had committed suicide
                  by burning herself and that he was not at home at that
                  time. The letters written by the wife to her relatives
                  showed that the husband ill-treated her and their
                  relations were strained and further the evidence
                  showed that both of them were in one room in the
                  night. It was held that the chain of circumstances was
                  complete and it was the husband who committed the
                  murder of his wife by strangulation and accordingly this
                  Court reversed the judgment of the High Court
                  acquitting the accused and convicted him under Section
                  302 IPC. In State of T.N. v. Rajendran [(1999) 8 SCC
                  679 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 40] the wife was found dead in a
                  hut which had caught fire. The evidence showed that
                  the accused and his wife were seen together in the hut
                  at about 9.00 p.m. and the accused came out in the
                  morning through the roof when the hut had caught fire.
                  His explanation was that it was a case of accidental fire
                  which resulted in the death of his wife and a daughter.
                  The medical evidence showed that the wife died due to
                  asphyxia as a result of strangulation and not on account
                  of burn injuries. It was held that there cannot be any
                  hesitation to come to the conclusion that it was the
                  accused (husband) who was the perpetrator of the
                  crime.”

17) In another Judgment reported as Nika Ram v. State of Himachal

      Pradesh5, it was held that the absence of any cogent explanation

      by the accused would indicate that the accused is responsible for

      commission of the crime. The Court held as under:

                  “16.     It is in the evidence of Girju PW that only the
                  accused and Churi deceased resided in the house of the
                  accused. To similar effect are the statements of Mani
                  Ram (PW 8), who is the uncle of the accused, and
                  Bhagat Ram school teacher (PW 16). According to
                  Bhagat Ram, he saw the accused and the deceased
                  together at their house on the day of occurrence. Mani
                  Ram (PW 8) saw the accused at his house at 3 p.m.,

5   (1972) 2 SCC 80

                                                                     Page 10 of 16
                  while Poshu Ram (PW 7) saw the accused and the
                  deceased at their house on the evening of the day of
                  occurrence. The accused also does not deny that he
                  was with the deceased at his house on the day of
                  occurrence. The house of the accused, according to
                  plan PM, consists of one residential room, one other
                  small room and a verandah. The correctness of that
                  plan is proved by A.R. Verma overseer (PW 5). The fact
                  that the accused alone was with Churi deceased in the
                  house when she was murdered there with the khokhri
                  and the fact that the relations of the accused with the
                  deceased, as would be shown hereafter, were strained
                  would, in the absence of any cogent explanation by
                  him, point to his guilt.”



18) In State of Rajasthan v. Thakur Singh6, this Court reiterated the

      principle that burden of proving guilt of the accused is on the

      prosecution but there may be certain facts pertaining to a crime

      that can be known only to the accused. The Court held as under:

                  “22.      The law, therefore, is quite well settled that
                  the burden of proving the guilt of an accused is on the
                  prosecution, but there may be certain facts pertaining
                  to a crime that can be known only to the accused, or
                  are virtually impossible for the prosecution to prove.
                  These facts need to be explained by the accused and if
                  he does not do so, then it is a strong circumstance
                  pointing to his guilt based on those facts.”

19) In Dnyaneshwar v. State of Maharashtra7, this Court held as

      under:

                  “10.     It has not been disputed before us that the
                  deceased was murdered in her matrimonial home. It is
                  not the case of the appellant that the offence was
                  committed by somebody else. It is also not his case that
                  there was a possibility of an outsider to commit the said
                  offence. One of the circumstances which is relevant is
                  that when the couple was last seen in a premises to

6   (2014) 12 SCC 211
7   (2007) 10 SCC 445

                                                                     Page 11 of 16
which an outsider may not have any access, it is for the
husband to explain the ground for unnatural death of
his wife. In Raj Kumar Prasad Tamarkar v. State of
Bihar [(2007) 10 SCC 433: (2007) 3 SCC (Cri) 716:
(2007) 1 Scale 19] this Court held: (SCC p. 440, paras
22-23)

      “22. The conspectus of the events which
      had been noticed by the learned Sessions
      Judge as also by the High Court categorically
      goes to show that at the time when the
      occurrence took place, the deceased and
      the respondent only were in the bedroom
      and the terrace connecting the same. There
      was no other person. The cause of death of
      the deceased Usha Devi i.e. by a gunshot
      injury is not disputed. The fact that the
      terrace and the bedroom are adjoining each
      other is not in dispute.

      23. The autopsy report shows that ‘a
      blackening and charring’ existed so far as
      Injury (i) is concerned. The blackening and
      charring keeping in view the nature of the
      firearm, which is said to have been used
      clearly go to show that a shot was fired from
      a short distance. Blackening or charring is
      possible when a shot is fired from a distance
      of about 2 feet to 3 feet. It, therefore cannot
      be a case where the death might have been
      caused by somebody by firing a shot at the
      deceased from a distance of more than 6
      feet. The place of injury is also important.
      The lacerated wound was found over
      glabella (middle of forehead). It goes a long
      way to show that the same must have been
      done by a person who wanted to kill the
      deceased from a short distance. There was,
      thus, a remote possibility of causation of
      such type of injury by any other person, who
      was not on the terrace. Once the
      prosecution has been able to show that at
      the relevant time, the room and terrace
      were in exclusive occupation of the couple,
      the burden of proof lay upon the respondent
      to show under what circumstances death
      was caused to his wife. The onus was on
      him. He failed to discharge the same.”

                                                    Page 12 of 16
20) In Ram Gulab Chaudhary & Ors. v. State of Bihar8, this Court

      held as under:

               “24. Even otherwise, in our view, this is a case where Section 106
               of the Evidence Act would apply. Krishnanand Chaudhary was
               brutally assaulted and then a chhura-blow was given on the
               chest. Thus chhura-blow was given after Bijoy Chaudhary had
               said “he is still alive and should be killed”. The appellants then
               carried away the body. What happened thereafter to Krishnanand
               Chaudhary is especially within the knowledge of the appellants.
               The appellants have given no explanation as to what they did
               after they took away the body. Krishnanand Chaudhary has not
               been since seen alive. In the absence of an explanation, and
               considering the fact that the appellants were suspecting the boy
               to have kidnapped and killed the child of the family of the
               appellants, it was for the appellants to have explained what they
               did with him after they took him away. When the abductors
               withheld that information from the court, there is every
               justification for drawing the inference that they had murdered the
               boy. Even though Section 106 of the Evidence Act may not be
               intended to relieve the prosecution of its burden to prove the guilt
               of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, but the section would
               apply to cases like the present, where the prosecution has
               succeeded in proving facts from which a reasonable inference can
               be drawn regarding death. The appellants by virtue of their
               special knowledge must offer an explanation which might lead
               the Court to draw a different inference. We, therefore, see no
               substance in this submission of Mr Mishra.”

21)     With this background, the argument of learned counsel for the

      appellants is that recovery of dead body was at the instance of

      Mamta Mohanta and that there is no recovery in pursuance of

      disclosure statement made by appellant-Ranjit Haldar. Therefore,

      the recovery of dead body on the statement of wife of the

      deceased cannot be used against the appellant.             We do not find

      any merit in the said argument. The consistent statement of the

      prosecution witnesses such as Jamyang Bhutia (PW-5) corroborated

8   (2001) 8 SCC 311

                                                                      Page 13 of 16
     by Ravi Deb (PW-3) is that the house in Rabom was taken on rent

     by the appellant- Ranjit Haldar. The dead body was recovered in a

     gunny bag concealed under the wooden planks covered by mud

     and stones.   The cross-examination conducted on the witnesses

     does not suggest that the renting of the premises by Ranjit Haldar

     is disputed in any manner. There is no dispute that the lock of the

     house was opened by the Police for the first time after Ranjit Haldar

     locked the house and went to his native village. Therefore, in the

     absence of any question on these aspects that the house was in his

     possession and no one had access to that house, the burden of

     proving the fact that somebody had access to the house during his

     absence was on him in terms of Section 106 of the Act.           The

     appellant Ranjit Haldar has not even suggested to the prosecution

     witnesses of possibility of access to the house rented by him. The

     testimony of Jamyang Bhutia (PW-5) that the house was taken on

     rent by Ranjit Haldar is proved and on the basis of statement of

     Ravi Deb (PW-3), who is a Carpenter and was residing in the same

     area, the appellant Ranjit Haldar has miserably failed to disprove

     the presumption under Section 106 of the Act.


22) In respect of the appellant Mamta Mohanta, there is evidence of

     recovery of dead body concealed in a house on the basis of her

     disclosure statement, where she was allegedly living with the other

     appellant along with the deceased and her two children.          The

     recovery of dead body concealed under the wooden planks covered

     by mud and stones is very strong incriminating circumstance

                                                              Page 14 of 16
     against Mamta Mohanta to maintain her conviction.           Apart from

     such incriminating circumstance, there is a statement of Doma

     Lepcha (PW-2) before whom she has confessed.          Phurba Lepcha

     (PW-4) is the husband of Doma Lepcha (PW-2) who supports this

     testimony.


23) The argument that Krishna Kanta Burman who translated the

     Bengali version into Nepali was not examined when the above

     mentioned    First   Information   Report   was    lodged    is   wholly

     inconsequential. Such First Information Report was only in respect

     of information of death. The Investigating Officer has carried out

     investigation de-hors the version given by the informant in the First

     Information Report. Therefore, non-examination of Krishna Kanta

     Burman does not create any doubt on the prosecution case.


24) In respect of an argument that no DNA Test was conducted to

     identify the dead body, is not tenable.           The dead body was

     recovered on the statement of wife of the deceased who has stated

     in the disclosure statement that dead body of her husband is

     concealed under the wooden planks in a room which was in her

     possession. Apart from the said statement, Ravi Deb (PW-3)

     identified the dead body from the wearing apparels of the deceased

     such as sweater and a mala. None of the witnesses have been

     cross-examined to the effect that dead body was not of the

     deceased. Therefore, the argument raised is not tenable.


25) Both the Courts below have rightly recorded conviction of the

                                                                 Page 15 of 16
     appellants as the persons responsible for causing death of the

     deceased Netai Mohanta. Consequently, we do not find any error

     in the judgment passed by the Courts below which does not

     warrant any interference.   Accordingly, both the appeals are

     dismissed.


                                  .............................................J.
                                                 (L. NAGESWARA RAO)




                                  .............................................J.
                                                       (HEMANT GUPTA)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 25, 2019.


                                                                 Page 16 of 16

