
Supreme Court of India
Rajesh vs State Of Rajasthan & Anr on 23 January, 2009Author: D A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Asok Kumar Ganguly
                                                                          REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

              TRANSFER PETITION (Crl.) NO. 71 OF 2007



Rajesh                                                     ...Petitioner

                                     Vs.

State of Rajasthan and Anr.                                ...Respondents



                              JUDGMENT

DR. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.


1.    The petitioner has sought for transfer of Criminal Case FIR No.352

dated 7.12.2005 under Sections 406, 498A read with Section 34 IPC titled

Sangeeta v. Rajesh pending in the Court of Judicial Magistrate, First Class,

Chittorgarh, to a court of competent jurisdiction in Hissar.



2.    This transfer petition was posted before Supreme Court Lok Adalat

on 6.12.2008. The parties and their lawyers appeared and filed a joint
petition stating that their disputes have been settled under the guidelines of

the mediators who acted as Amicus Curiae.

3.    The following were the terms of settlement:


      A.     It is agreed between the parties that Shri Rajesh will pay
      a sum of Rs.8 lakhs by way of a demand draft to Smt. Sangeeta
      on or before 30th June, 2009.

      B.     It is further agreed that the articles, as agreed upon by
      the parties in a separate list, shall be sent by Shri Rajesh to the
      house of Smt. Sangeeta at Chitorgarh.

      C.     It is further agreed that the custody of the minor child
      named Lucky who is now been with Smt. Sangeeta shall
      remain with her and Shri Rajesh will not claim anything with
      regard to child's custody from Smt. Sangeeta or her family
      hereinafter.

      D.     It has been agreed that the cases filed by both the
      parties:-

             (i)    Criminal Case filed by Smt. Sangeeta under
             Section 498(A) of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in
             short the `Code') against Rajesh at Chittorgarh;

             (ii) Criminal case filed against Shri Rajesh under
             Section 125 of the Code at Chittorgarh;

                                      2
             (iii) Petition under Section 13 of Hindu Marriage Act
             for grant of divorce filed by Shri Rajesh against Smt.
             Sangeeta pending before the Family Court at
             Chittorgarh;

             (iv) Present Transfer Petition No. 71/2007 filed by
             Shri Rajesh pending before this Court


                    shall be withdrawn/settled.

             It is further agreed that in terms of this settlement arrived
      at hereinabove a decree for divorce may be passed. No further
      claim of any kind shall be raised against each other or with
      regard to the minor child Lucky hereinafter.

4.    It is heartening to note that the parties have settled their disputes

amicably and have agreed to the aforesaid terms. The transfer petition is

disposed of in terms of the settlement. The petition incorporating the terms

of settlement shall form a part of the record.




                                          ..........................................J.
                                          (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                          ..........................................J.
                                          (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY)
New Delhi,
January 23, 2009

                                      3
4

