
Supreme Court of India
Harpal Singh vs State Of Punjab on 4 December, 2007Author: G P Mathur
Bench: G.P. Mathur, G.S. Singhvi
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  548 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Harpal Singh

RESPONDENT:
State of Punjab

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/12/2007

BENCH:
G.P. Mathur & G.S. Singhvi

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 548 OF 2007

 
G. P. MATHUR, J.

	This Appeal has been preferred under Section 19 of the 
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 against the 
judgment and order dated 16.3.2007 of Designated Court, Kapurthala 
at Jalandhar in TADA Sessions Case No. 4 of 2006 by which the 
appellant has been convicted under Section 5 of the Explosive 
Substances Act, 1908 and has been sentenced to 5 years R.I. and a 
fine of Rs.1,000/-.
2.	The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that on 12.3.1992 
Kamaljit Singh, SHO, Santokh Singh, SI and some other police 
personnel were going from village Kukar Pind to village Raipur in 
connection with investigation of a case bearing FIR No. 31 under 
Section 302/34 IPC, Section 25 Arms Act and Sections 3, 4 and 5 of 
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (hereinafter 
referred to as 'TADA').  When they reached on Byen Bridge in 
village Kukar Pind, they saw a person coming on foot.  On seeing the 
police party he tried to run away but he was apprehended after a chase 
and on inquiry he disclosed his name as Harpal Singh (appellant in 
this appeal).  On his personal search explosive powder wrapped in a 
glazed paper was recovered from the "jhola" (bag) which he was 
having in his right hand.  The bag contained one kilogram explosive 
powder which was taken into possession.  A ruka was sent to the 
police station on the basis of which FIR was registered against the 
appellant.
3.	After investigation and receipt of the sanction and report of the 
Forensic Science Laboratory charge-sheet was submitted in the court 
on 24.2.1994 for prosecution of the appellant under Sections 4, 5, and 
9B(b) of the Explosives Act, 1884.  There was no mention of any 
offence under TADA or under the Explosive Substances Act, 1908.  
The charge-sheet was submitted in the Designated Court which took 
cognizance of the offence and proceeded with the trial of the 
appellant.  Ultimately the Designated Court acquitted the appellant for 
the offences under TADA and the Explosives Act, 1884, but 
convicted him only under Section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act, 
1908 and sentenced him to 5 years R.I. and a fine of Rs.1,000/-.
4.	Shri Sushil Kumar, learned senior counsel for the appellant, has 
submitted that the case against the appellant is not established from 
the evidence adduced by the prosecution but instead of going into the 
facts and appraisal of evidence the appeal can be allowed on a legal 
ground.
5.	Part III of TADA deals with Designated Courts.  Sub-section 
(1) of Section 9 of TADA provides that the Central Government or a 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Designated Courts for such area or areas, or for 
such case or class or group of case as may be specified in the 
notification.  Sub-section (1) of Section 11 of TADA lays down that 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, every offence punishable under any provision of this Act 
or any rule made thereunder shall be triable only by the Designated 
Court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed or, as the case 
may be, by the Designated Court constituted for trying such offence 
under sub-section (1) of Section 9.  Sections 12 and 18 of TADA read 
as under:-
 	"12.	Power of Designated Courts with respect 
to other offences. - (1) When trying any offence, a 
Designated Court may also try any other offence with 
which the accused may, under the Code, be charged at 
the same trial if the offence is connected with such other 
offence. 
 	(2) If, in the course of any trial under this Act, of 
any offence, it is found that the accused person has 
committed any other offence under this Act or any rule 
made thereunder or under any other law, the Designated 
Court may convict such person of such other offence and 
pass any sentence authorised by this Act or such rule or, 
as the case may be, such other law, for the punishment 
thereof." 
	"18. Power to transfer cases to regular courts. - 
Where, after taking cognizance of any offence, a 
Designated Court is of opinion that the offence is not 
triable by it, shall, notwithstanding that it had no 
jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the 
trial of such offence to any court having jurisdiction 
under the Code and the court to which the case is 
transferred may proceed with the trial of the offence as if 
it had taken cognizance of the offence." 

By Act No. 43 of 1993 Section 20-A was introduced in TADA with 
effect from 22.5.1993 and the said section reads as under: -
"20-A. Cognizance of offence. - (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code, no information about the 
commission of an offence under this Act shall be 
recorded by the police without the prior approval of the 
District Superintendent of Police. 
 	(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
under this Act without the previous sanction of the 
Inspector-General of Police, or as the case may be, the 
Commissioner of Police."

Therefore, with effect from 22.5.1993, in view of sub-section (1) of 
Section 20-A, no FIR about the commission of an offence under 
TADA can be recorded by the police without prior approval of the 
District Superintendent of Police.  Similarly on account of sub-section 
(2) of Section 20-A no court can take cognizance of any offence under 
TADA without the previous sanction of the Inspector General of 
Police, or as the case may be, the Commissioner of Police.  The effect 
of this amendment is that the Designated Court is debarred from 
taking cognizance of any offence under TADA without the previous 
sanction of the Inspector General of Police or, as the case may be, the 
Commissioner of Police.
6.	As mentioned earlier, the alleged recovery of the incriminating 
article from the appellant took place on 12.3.1992 and the case was 
registered under Sections 4 and 5 of the Explosives Act, 1884.  The 
police, after investigation, submitted charge-sheet before the 
Designated Court on 24.2.1994.  In the charge-sheet there was no 
reference to any case under TADA or under the Explosive Substances 
Act, 1908 against the appellant.  The appellant was granted bail in the 
case under the Explosives Act on 1.7.1992.  Thereafter he went away 
to USA and applied for political asylum.  He was declared as 
absconder on 20.1.1995.  The US authorities deported him to India in 
2006.  Thereafter the police submitted supplementary charge-sheet 
against the appellant on 29.5.2006 for his prosecution under TADA 
and the Explosive Substances Act.  The Designated Court thereafter 
tried the appellant for offences under TADA besides Sections 4 and 5 
of the Explosives Act and also under Sections 4 and 5 of the 
Explosive Substances Act.
7.	The important feature which is to be noted is that the 
prosecution did not obtain sanction of the Inspector General of Police 
or of the Commissioner of Police for prosecution of the appellant 
under TADA at any stage as is required by Section 20-A(2) of TADA.  
The trial of the appellant before the Designated Court proceeded 
without the sanction of the Inspector General of Police or the 
Commissioner of Police.  In absence of previous sanction the 
Designated Court had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence 
or to proceed with the trial of the appellant under TADA.
8.	The Designated Court, while trying an offence under TADA, is 
undoubtedly empowered to try any other offence with which the 
accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, be charged at the 
same trial if the offence is connected with such other offence in view 
of Section 12 of TADA and may convict such person of such other 
offence and may pass any sentence authorized by TADA or by such 
other law for the punishment thereof.  But for application of Section 
12 it is absolutely essential that the Designated Court should be trying 
an offence under TADA.  If the Designated Court is not trying an 
offence under TADA it will have no jurisdiction to try any other 
offence.  Section 18 also points out the same situation which says that 
where, after taking cognizance of any offence, a Designated Court is 
of opinion that the offence is not triable by it, shall, notwithstanding 
that it had no jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the 
trial of such offence to any court having jurisdiction under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure.  Thus the Designated Court gets the jurisdiction 
to try any other offence only if it has the jurisdiction and is trying an 
offence under TADA.  In Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi vs. 
Jitendra Bhimraj Bijja and others AIR 1990 SC 1962, it was observed 
as under: -
"Section 12(1) no doubt empowers the Designated Court 
to try any offence punishable under any other statute 
along with the offence punishable under the Act if the 
former is connected with the latter.  That, however, does 
not mean that even when the Designated Court comes to 
the conclusion that there exists no sufficient ground for 
framing a charge against the accused under S.3(1) it must 
proceed to try the accused for the commission of offences 
under other statutes.  That would tantamount to usurping 
jurisdiction.  Section 18, therefore, in terms provides that 
where after taking cognizance of any offence the 
Designated Court is of the opinion that the offence is not 
triable by it, it shall, notwithstanding that it has no 
jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for the 
trial of such offence to any Court having jurisdiction 
under the Code."

9.	At this stage it will be useful to refer to the dictionary meaning 
of the word 'Jurisdiction': -
	Black's Law Dictionary : "Court's power to decide a case 
or issue a decree".
	Words and Phrases  Legally defined  Third Edition 
(p.497) : "By 'jurisdiction' is meant the authority which a 
court has to decide matters that are litigated before it or 
to take cognizance of matters presented in a formal way 
for its decision.  The limits of this authority are imposed 
by the statute, charter, or commission under which the 
court is constituted, and may be extended or restricted by 
similar means.  If no restriction or limit is imposed the 
jurisdiction is said to be unlimited.  A limitation may be 
either as to the kind and nature of the actions and matters 
of which the particular court has cognizance, or as to the 
area over which the jurisdiction extends."
	Law Lexicon by P. Ramanatha Aiyar  2nd Edn. Reprint 
2000 : "An authority or power, which a man hath to do 
justice in causes of complaint brought before him 
(Tomlin's Law Dic.).  The power to hear and determine 
the particular case involved; the power of a Court or a 
judge to entertain an action, petition, or other proceeding; 
the legal power of hearing and determining controversies.  
As applied to a particular claim or controversy, 
jurisdiction is the power to hear and determine the 
controversy."

Jurisdiction, therefore, means the authority or power to entertain, hear 
and decide a case and to do justice in the case and determine the 
controversy.  In absence of jurisdiction the court has no power to hear 
and decide the matter and the order passed by it would be a nullity.
10.	As mentioned earlier, in the first charge-sheet which was filed 
on 24.2.1994 there was no mention of TADA at all.  It was in the 
supplementary charge-sheet filed on 29.5.2006 that the prosecution 
introduced the offence under TADA.  But there was no sanction of the 
Inspector General of Police or of the Commissioner of Police as 
required under Section 20-A(2) of TADA and, therefore, the 
Designated Court had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of the 
offence.  Since the Designated Court lacked inherent jurisdiction to 
try the offence under TADA it could not have tried the appellant even 
for offences under the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 or the 
Explosives Act, 1884.  Thus the conviction of the appellant under 
Section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 is illegal.
11.	The aforesaid view has also been taken by this Court in 
Rambhai Nathabhai Gadhvi and others vs. State of Gujarat (1997) 7 
SCC 744 and para 8 of the report is reproduced below: -
"8. 	Taking cognizance is the act which the Designated 
Court has to perform and granting sanction is an act 
which the sanctioning authority has to perform. Latter is 
a condition precedent for the former. Sanction 
contemplated in the sub-section is the permission to 
prosecute a particular person for the offence or offences 
under TADA. Sanction is not granted to the Designated 
Court to take cognizance of the offence, but it is granted 
to the prosecuting agency to approach the court 
concerned for enabling it to take cognizance of the 
offence and to proceed to trial against the persons 
arraigned in the report. Thus a valid sanction is sine qua 
non for enabling the prosecuting agency to approach the 
court in order to enable the court to take cognizance of 
the offence under TADA as disclosed in the report. The 
corollary is that, if there was no valid sanction the 
Designated Court gets no jurisdiction to try a case against 
any person mentioned in the report as the court is 
forbidden from taking cognizance of the offence without 
such sanction. If the Designated Court has taken 
cognizance of the offence without a valid sanction, such 
action is without jurisdiction and any proceedings 
adopted thereunder will also be without jurisdiction." 

12.	In view of the discussion made above there cannot be any 
escape from the conclusion that the Designated Court had no 
jurisdiction to try and convict the appellant under the Explosive 
Substances Act, 1908 in view of the fact that it could not have taken 
cognizance of the offence under TADA for lack of sanction by the 
competent authority under Section 20-A(2) of TADA.  In view of the 
fact that the Designated Court could not try the offence under TADA 
being debarred from taking cognizance thereof on account of want of 
sanction by the competent authority under the mandatory provisions 
of Section 20-A(2), it could not try any offence under any other Act as 
well.
13.	The appeal is accordingly allowed and the conviction of the 
appellant under Section 5 of the Explosive Substances Act and the 
sentence imposed thereunder are set aside.  The appellant shall be 
released forthwith unless wanted in some other case.

