
Supreme Court of India
Satya Narayan Agarwal vs State Of Assam on 26 April, 2007Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, D.K. Jain
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  629 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Satya Narayan Agarwal

RESPONDENT:
State of Assam

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/04/2007

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT & D.K. JAIN

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.     629            OF 2007
(Arising out of SLP (CRL.) No.2033 OF 2006)



Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Leave granted. 

2.	Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment rendered 
by a learned Single Judge of the Guwahati High Court 
dismissing the revision petition filed by the appellant. 

3.	Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:

4.	The appellant was found guilty of offences punishable 
under Section 7 read with Section 16(1) of the Prevention of 
Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (in short the 'Act') by the trial 
Court. First Appellate Court dismissed the appeal. The 
revision, as noted above, was dismissed by the High Court. 

5.	Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:

	On 20.5.1987 the Food Inspector collected sample of 
chilli powder from the shop of the appellant. The sample 
was sent for analysis to the prescribed laboratory and on 
such analysis it was found to be adulterated. The appellant 
was tried. On conclusion of the trial, the trial Court 
convicted the appellant for offences punishable under 
Section 7 read with Section 16(1) of the Act and sentenced 
him to imprisonment for six months and to pay a fine of 
Rs.1,000/-. 

6.	An appeal was preferred before the learned Sessions 
Judge, Dibrugarh, which was dismissed. As noted above, 
the revision before the learned Single Judge was also 
dismissed. 

7.	Learned counsel for the appellant re-iterated the 
submissions made before the courts below and submitted 
that it is a case of misbranding and, therefore, it is not a 
case where minimum sentence is to be imposed. The High 
Court did not accept the contention. It was of the view that 
it is not a case of misbranding. Additionally, it was 
submitted that the High Court should have directed release 
of the appellant on probation, or instead of custodial 
sentence, sentence of fine could have been imposed. 

8.	Learned counsel for the respondent-State on the other 
hand supported the judgment. It is to be noted that the 
High Court found that there was no scope for interference. 
However,  
it enhanced the fine to Rs.5,000/- and permitted the 
appellant to move the State Government under Section 433 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short the 
'Code'). 

9.	In N. Sukumaran Nair v. Food Inspector, Mavelikara 
(1997 (9) SCC 101) this Court observed as follows:

	"The offence took place in the year 
1984. The appellant has been awarded six 
months' simple imprisonment and has also 
been ordered to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/. 
Under clause (d) of Section 433 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, "the appropriate 
government" is empowered to commute the 
sentence of simple imprisonment for fine. 
We think that this would be an appropriate 
case for commutation of sentence where 
almost a decade has gone by. We, therefore, 
direct the appellant to deposit in the trial 
Court a sum of Rs.6000 as fine in 
commutation of the sentence of six months' 
simple imprisonment within a period of six 
weeks from today and intimate to the 
appropriate Government that such fine has 
been deposited. On deposit of such fine, the 
State Government may formalize the matter 
by passing appropriate orders under clause 
(d) of Section 433 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure."

10.	In Santosh Kumar v. Municipal Corporation and Anr. 
(2000 (9) SCC 151), similar view was expressed in the 
following terms:

	"We, therefore, direct the appellant to 
deposit in the trial court a sum of 
Rs.10,000/- as fine in commutation of the 
sentence of 6 months' imprisonment within 
a period of 6 weeks from today and intimate 
to the appropriate Government that such 
fine has been deposited. On deposit of the 
fine the State Government may formalize 
the matter by passing appropriate order 
under clause (d) of Section 433 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure. In the meanwhile 
the appellant will remain on bail."

11.	It is to be noted that in both the cases there was no 
direction to formalize the sentence. On the other hand it 
was clearly noted that the State Government may formalize 
the sentence. It is pointed out by learned counsel for the 
respondent that an application in terms of Section 433 of 
the Code was made which has been rejected. 

12.	We find no merit in this appeal which is accordingly 
dismissed. However, the appellant, may, if so advised, 
challenge the order stated to have been passed by the State 
Government under Section 433 of the Code.

