
Supreme Court of India
K. Sadanandam vs State Of Tamil Nadu, Rep.By ... on 30 March, 2009Bench: S.B. Sinha, Mukundakam Sharma
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 607-612          OF 2009
                       [Arising out of SLP(Crl.) Nos. 6721-6726/2008]


K. SADANANDAM                                                    ...    APPELLANT(S)

                                         :VERSUS:

STATE OF TAMIL NADU REP. BY INSPECTOR OF POLICE                  ...    RESPONDENT(S)




                                         ORDER

             Leave granted.

             The appellant before us was a Special Officer of Peenalurpettai Primary

    Agricultural Co-operative Bank. According to the appellant, the allegation made as

    against the accused persons including the appellant, was that they, in conspiracy with

    each other, misappropriated the amount belonging to the said Bank while purporting

    to grant loan.


             Indisputably, the main accused, namely, M. Dhasarathiah committed suicide.

    It also appears from the records that his wife had deposited the entire amount alleged

    to have been misappropriated.


                                        -2-
         The appellant had filed an application under Section 482 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure (Cr.P.C.) before the High Court for quashing the charge-sheet

filed by the respondent. While the said application was pending, other accused

persons filed applications for their discharge which were allowed on identical facts as

pertaining to the case of the appellant. In the aforementioned situation, the appellant

filed an application for discharge before the Trial Court. However, before filing of the

said application by the appellant, an order directing framing of charge(s) had already

been passed on 13.8.2004. In that view of the matter, the learned Trial Judge refused

to entertain the discharge application filed by the appellant, which, in our opinion,

was correct as charges having already been framed the question of entertaining the

discharge application did not arise.

         The appellant filed a revision application thereagainst before the High

Court. By reason of the impugned order the High Court has dismissed the revision

application filed by the appellant.


                                       -3-
         However, keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case,

we are of the opinion that as similar matters have been dealt with in a particular

manner by the learned Trial Judge; for doing complete justice to the parties, we in
exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, hereby set

aside the order dated 13.8.2004 framing charge against the appellant and

consequently the impugned judgments and direct that the learned Trial Judge shall

proceed to dispose of the application for discharge filed by the appellant as if no order

framing charge had been passed by it.

         The appeals are disposed of with the aforementioned observation and

direction.

         We make it clear that we have passed this order in                   exercise of our

extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India and it shall

not be treated as a precedent.

                                               ...........................J
                                               (S.B. SINHA)



                                               ...........................J
                                              (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)

NEW DELHI,
MARCH 30, 2009.

