
Supreme Court of India
Radhey Shyam vs Union Of India on 26 September, 2012Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.828  OF 2008

RADHEY SHYAM                                             APPELLANT

                          VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA                             RESPONDENT


                                  O R D E R

   1. Being aggrieved by the judgment and order passed by the High Court of
   Judicature of Madhya Pradesh in Criminal Appeal No. 369 of  2003,  dated
   05.12.2006, the appellant is before us in this appeal.  By the  impugned
   judgment and order, the High Court has confirmed the judgment and  order
   passed by the learned Special  Judge  (under  the  Narcotic,  Drugs  and
   Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985) in Sessions Trial  No.76/2002,  dated
   31.01.2003.

   2. The appellant-accused is alleged to have sold 10 bags of  poppy  husk
   (total quantity of about 162 Kg.) for Rs.1500/- to other two  co-accused
   Bhuma and Rama, who were found in possession of  the  said  poppy  husk.
   The only evidence that was  led  by  the  Prosecution,  insofar  as  the
   appellant is concerned, is the statement made  by  the  appellant  under
   Section 67 of the Narcotic, Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,  1985
   (hereinafter, for the sake brevity, referred  to  as  “the  NDPS  Act”).
   Based on the aforesaid statement so made, the learned Sessions Judge has
   convicted and sentenced the appellant to  rigorous  imprisonment  for  a
   period of 10 years with fine of Rs.1  lac  under  Section  8  read  with
   Section 15(c) of the NDPS Act.

   3. It is the aforesaid order  which  was  questioned  by  the  appellant
   before the High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 369 of  2003.  As  we  have
   already noticed, the High Court has confirmed the orders passed  by  the
   learned Sessions Judge.

   4. Shri Ranbir Singh Kundu, learned counsel appearing for the appellant,
   would contend that the learned Sessions Judge ought not to  have  placed
   total reliance on the statement of the accused made under Section 67  of
   the NDPS  Act  (“the  statement”  for  short)  and  have  convicted  and
   sentenced the appellant for  the  offence  under  Section  8  read  with
   Section 15(c) of the NDPS Act. Exhibit P-19, the statement  supposed  to
   have been made by the accused, was produced and marked in  the  evidence
   of the Investigating Officer.  According to  the  learned  counsel,  the
   document is a fabricated document and, therefore, the  learned  Sessions
   Judge ought  not  have  placed  reliance  on  the  said  document  while
   convicting the appellant for the aforesaid offence.

   5. In support of his  contention,  the  learned  counsel  has  taken  us
   through the evidence of the Investigating Officer,  in  particular,  his
   cross-examination. We have carefully perused the statement recorded when
   the Investigating Officer was in the witness box. The suggestion of  the
   learned counsel for the defence that all proceedings at the  appellant’s
   house  were  counter  signed  by  two  witnesses  was  accepted  by  the
   Investigating Officer. He would go to the  extent  of  saying  that  the
   proceedings which were conducted at the house of the appellant  and  the
   statement of the appellant were counter signed  by  the  two  witnesses,
   namely, Radhey Shyam and Govind.  A further suggestion was made  to  the
   Investigating  Officer  that  since  Exhibit  P-19  does  not  bear  the
   signatures of the two witnesses, the said document is a forged  document
   for which there is denial by the Investigating Authority.

   6.  Shri P.K.Dey, learned counsel appearing  for  the  Union  of  India,
   would submit that the statement does not require to be counter signed by
   witnesses and, therefore, the learned Sessions Judge  was  justified  in
   relying upon the statement made by the appellant under Section 67 of the
   NDPS Act and thereby convicting and sentencing  the  appellant  for  the
   offence stated earlier.

   7. Having considered the submissions made by  learned  counsel  for  the
   parties to the lis, we are of the opinion that in the present case,  the
   question that whether  the  statement  requires  to  be  signed  by  two
   witnesses or not does  not  need  any  discussion.   What  requires  our
   consideration in this case is whether the reliance placed by the learned
   Sessions Judge on the statement, Exhibit P-19, justified  or  not.   For
   that  purpose  the  evidence  of  the  Investigating  Officer,  who  had
   categorically stated that the entire  proceeding  was  recorded  in  the
   house of the appellant, needs to be evaluated.  In the said evidence, he
   further states that when the proceedings were conducted,  two  witnesses
   were present and the statement of the appellant was  recorded  in  their
   presence and they had counter signed the same.

   8. In order to verify the correctness or otherwise of the said document,
   we have looked into the Original Records.  The said  document  does  not
   bear the signatures of the two witnesses.  This generates a doubt in the
   mind of this Court that the document  so  produced  and  marked  in  the
   evidence may not be the original statement of  the  appellant,  recorded
   under Section 67 of the NDPS Act.

   9. In view of the above, in our opinion, some  doubt  would  arise  with
   regard to the complicity of the appellant for the offence under  Section
   8 read with Section 15 (c) of the NDPS Act.  We are, therefore,  of  the
   opinion that the benefit of doubt requires to be given to the appellant.
    Accordingly, we  allow  this  appeal,  set  aside  the  conviction  and
   sentence awarded by the Trial Court and confirmed by the High Court,  by
   giving the benefit of doubt to the appellant.

   10.     We further direct that the appellant be released  forthwith,  if
   not required in any other case and any  fine  amount  deposited  by  the
   appellant-accused shall be returned forthwith to  the  appellant.  Since
   the appellant is on bail, his bail bonds are discharged.

            Ordered accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)








                                                   .......................J.
                                                   (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)


      NEW DELHI;
      SEPTEMBER 26, 2012

