
Supreme Court of India
Pudhu Raja & Anr vs State Tr.Insp.Of Police on 19 September, 2012Author: ……..………………………J.
Bench: B.S. Chauhan, Fakkir Mohamed Kalifulla
                                                     REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1517  OF 2008




      Pudhu Raja & Anr.
      …Appellants

                                   Versus

       State, Rep. by Inspector of Police
       …Respondent




                                  O R D E R

      1.      This appeal has been preferred against the final judgment  and
      order dated 21.8.2008, passed by  the  High  Court  of  Judicature  at
      Madras in Criminal Appeal No.337 of 2005, by way of  which,  the  High
      Court has allowed the State appeal  against  the  judgment  and  order
      dated 22.12.2004 in  Sessions  Case  No.618  of  2003  passed  by  the
      Additional  District  &  Sessions  Judge,  (Fast  Track  Court  No.1),
      Chengalpet,  Kachipuram  District,  by  which,  the  Trial  Court  had
      acquitted the appellants of the charges under  Sections  302  r/w  34,
      304(b) and 201 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to
      as the ‘IPC’).

      2.    The facts and circumstances giving rise to this  appeal  as  per
      prosecution are as follows:

      A.    Padhu Raja (A-1), son of Smt. Angammal (A-2), got married to one
      Jayalakshmi (deceased), on  6.9.1998  at  Gudalur.   At  the  time  of
      marriage the appellant (A-1) demanded 50 Sovereigns of jewels and Rs.2
      lacs in cash, however the parents of the deceased gave  35  sovereigns
      of jewels and cash to the tune of Rs.50,000/-.  Thereafter, there were
      persistent demand for dowry by  the  appellants  from  time  to  time,
      particularly on festive  occasions.   Those  demands  were  even  met.
      Appellant (A-1) made a demand for a motor bike which was also  met  by
      the parents of the deceased in  the  presence  of  several  villagers,
      including the village Head, namely Bose, (PW.6).  However, even  after
      this, the demands continued.  In July 2000, Jayalakshmi  came  to  her
      parent’s house and told them that  a  demand  had  been  made  by  the
      husband for 15 sovereigns of  jewels, without  fulfilling  which,  she
      must not return.

      B.    A Panchayat was convened and thereupon, the appellant (A-1), and
      Jayalakshmi (deceased), started living separately in a house belonging
      to Chandran  (PW.2),  at  9,  C.N.  Krishna  Street,  Bharathi  Nagar,
      Perianatham.  Karthikeyan (PW.4) and his wife Mrs. Malliga (PW.3) were
      living in close proximity to the  appellants.   Jayalakshmi  had  told
      Mrs. Malliga (PW.3) on certain occasions, that the appellants had been
      torturing her.

      C.    On 17.4.2001, at about 1  A.M.,  Mrs.  Malliga  (PW.3),  noticed
      smoke rising up  from  the  ground  floor  where  the  appellants  and
      deceased were living.  She immediately  informed  Karthikeyan   (PW.4)
      and then also came out to ascertain the cause for the smoke  alongwith
      her husband, Karthikeyan (PW.4).  Chandran  (PW.2) and his  wife  also
      came out of their house. Chandran (PW.2) found the appellants standing
      outside the gate.  On being asked by Chandran (PW.2)  about the key of
      the house, as the same was locked from the outside, the appellant  (A-
      1), replied that  the  second  appellant  had  thrown  away  the  key.
      Chandran (PW.2) went upstairs, brought a duplicate key and opened  the
      door of their house.  Chandran (PW.2) found the room full of smoke and
      Jayalakshmi lying dead on the  bed,  with  burn  injuries.   The  Fire
      Brigade was informed. Mr. Mahalingam, Station Officer, Fire Department
      Chengalpet, (PW.8) arrived at the spot with  his  personnel,  at  1.45
      A.M. and extinguished the fire.   Mr.  Ezhamparuthi  (PW.1),  a  close
      relative of the deceased came to the spot  upon  being  informed,  and
      thereafter went to the Police  Station at 8.30 A.M. on  18.4.2001  and
      made a complaint to Mr. Kotteswaran (PW.12), on the basis of which,  a
      case in Crime No.157 of 2001 was registered. The said FIR  was  handed
      over to Mr. Durairaj (PW.13), the Investigating Officer who then  took
      up the investigation.

      D.     Durairaj  (PW.13)  recovered  the  dead  body  of   Jayalakshmi
      (deceased), after taking photographs of the place  of  occurrence  and
      also of the dead body of the deceased, through the photographer Balaji
      (PW.11). Durairaj (PW.13) also  recovered  all  material  objects  and
      prepared the mahazar.

      E.    As Jayalakshmi had died within 2-1/2 years of her marriage,  the
      matter was reported to the Sub-Collector, Ms. Pila Rajesh, IAS (PW.10)
      who came to the spot and conducted inquest on the dead  body   in  the
      presence of witnesses and a panchnama was prepared.  Ms.  Pila  Rajesh
      (PW.10) also recorded the statements of the witnesses after which, the
      dead body was sent for post-mortem.

      F.    Prof. Muguesan (PW.9), who is attached  to  the  Govt.  Hospital
      Chengalpet, conducted the post-mortem and opined that the deceased had
      died of smothering and burn injuries.

      G.    The case was converted into one under Section 302  IPC and  both
      the appellants were arrested and sent  into  judicial  remand.   After
      completing the investigation, a charge sheet was  filed.   Before  the
      trial court, both the appellants pleaded not  guilty  and,  therefore,
      claimed trial.  In the course of the trial, the  prosecution  examined
      13 witnesses, and relied upon 14 exhibits and 3 material objects.  The
      defence also examined one witness, and relied upon 4 documents for the
      purpose of their defence.  The Trial Court after the conclusion of the
      trial, upon considering the material on record, and after appreciating
      the available evidence, acquitted both the  appellants  vide  judgment
      and order dated 22.12.2004.

      H.    Aggrieved, the State preferred an appeal before the  High  Court
      and the High Court vide its impugned judgment and order, convicted and
      sentenced both the appellants, thereby reversing the judgment  of  the
      Trial Court, as referred to hereinabove.

           Hence, this appeal.

      3.    Dr. A. Francis Jullian,  learned  Senior  counsel  appearing  on
      behalf of the appellants has submitted that the High  Court  committed
      an error by interfering with the order of acquittal as was recorded by
      the Trial Court.   While reversing the judgment of acquittal, the High
      Court has not complied with the parameters laid down by this Court  in
      such matters.  This is because there is  no  direct  evidence  on  any
      issue, and the case is one of circumstantial evidence wherein, several
      links are missing in the chain of events.  The  Trial  Court  recorded
      acquittal, as it came to the conclusion that there were a large number
      of material inconsistencies that went to the root of the  case.  There
      is also considerable embellishment/improvement in the  depositions  of
      the prosecution witnesses. There was also an  inordinate  delay  after
      the incident, in lodging the  FIR.   The  appellant  (A-1),  had  been
      arrested immediately, however, such arrest was  shown  to  have  taken
      place at 9 A.M. on 18.4.2001.  There could  have  been  absolutely  no
      motive on the part of the appellants, to  commit  the  murder  of  the
      deceased. Thus, the present appeal deserves to be allowed.

      4.     Shri  Rakesh  Sharma  with  Shri  B.  Balaji,  learned  counsel
      appearing on  behalf  of  the  respondent-State,  opposed  the  appeal
      contending that, the High Court had  most  certainly  appreciated  the
      evidence as  a  whole   and  dealt  with  the  case  in   the  correct
      perspective.  The deceased had  died  in  the  house  where  only  the
      appellants were residing with her.  Despite this, they were unable  to
      furnish any reasonable explanation with respect to  the  circumstances
      under which Jayalakshmi had died.   The  conduct  of  the  appellants,
      therefore, points only towards their guilt.  At the relevant time when
      the deceased was burning, both  the  appellants  were  found  standing
      outside their house.  The gate  was  locked  from  the  outside.   The
      appellants did not even produce the key of the house upon being  asked
      to do so. It was Mr. Chandran (PW.2), who brought a duplicate key from
      his house and opened the door to the said house.  The  appellants  did
      not inform the police, or the  fire  brigade  when  the  deceased  was
      burning.  No attempt  was made by either of them,  to  extinguish  the
      said fire and they made no efforts to  inform the  family  members  of
      the deceased.  Had  the  prosecution  witnesses  not  come  out  after
      noticing the smoke coming from the house of the appellants, they would
      have walked away scot free, as they had already locked the house, from
      the outside. The appellants had further, also been demanding dowry and
      harassing the deceased in this context. Thus, they most definitely had
      a very strong motive to get rid of the deceased.  The  inconsistencies
      on the basis of which, the trial Court had accorded acquittal  to  the
      appellants, were all trivial in nature and none of them  could  be  so
      material, that it could be termed to go to the root of the case.   The
      impugned judgment of the High Court, therefore, does not  warrant  any
      interference and thus, the present appeal is liable to be dismissed.

      5.    We have considered the rival submissions made by learned counsel
      for the parties and perused the record.

      6.    The following injuries were found on the person of the deceased:

           Scratches:

              1. An injury on the right side of the upper lip measuring 1  x
                 0.5 c.m.

              2. An injury on the central part of the upper lip measuring  1
                 x 0.5 c.m. The cells below these injuries were  with  clots
                 and there was also swelling.

           Clotted injuries:

              1. A clotted injury on the centre part of the  lower  lip  and
                 its surrounding, measuring 2 x 1 x 0.5 c.m.

              2. A clotted injury on the right cheek, on the upper  part  of
                 the right jaw, measuring 3 x 2 x 0.5 c.m.

              3. A clotted injury on the left cheek, on the  upper  part  of
                 the left jaw, measuring 2 x 1 x 0.5 c.m.

              4. A clotted injury on the central part to the upper  part  of
                 the breast, measuring 6 x 5 x 0.5 c.m.

              5. A clotted injury on the front side and the  outer  part  of
                 the left leg 3 c.m. above the left heel, measuring 6 x 4  x
                 0.5 c.m.

           Injuries by fire:

                 The upper skin, inner skin and two types of fire injuries.
           The body skin was burnt and the fat and  cells  under  the  skin
           appeared to be red and heated. All over the body, including  the
           upper side of the neck, the lower side of the  neck,  the  upper
           part of both hands, palms,  both  legs  in  entirety,  the  back
           portion of the breast, the entire front and back portions of the
           stomach, and the female organ bore injuries by fire.  All  these
           injuries by fire, were suffered by her while she was alive.

      7.    The law on the issue of interference with an order of  acquittal
      is to the effect that  only  in  exceptional  cases  where  there  are
      compelling circumstances and the judgment in appeal  is  found  to  be
      perverse, the appellate court can interfere  with  the  order  of  the
      acquittal. The appellate court should bear in mind the presumption  of
      innocence of the accused and further that the trial court's  acquittal
      bolsters the presumption  of  innocence.  Interference  in  a  routine
      manner where the other view is  possible  should  be  avoided,  unless
      there are good reasons for interference.

     8.     In a case of  circumstantial  evidence,  the  prosecution  must
     establish each instance  of  incriminating  circumstance,  by  way  of
     reliable and clinching evidence, and the circumstances so proved, must
     form a complete chain of events, on the basis of which, no  conclusion
     other than one of guilt of the accused can be  reached.   Undoubtedly,
     suspicion, however grave  it  may  be,  can  never  be  treated  as  a
     substitute for proof.  While dealing with  a  case  of  circumstantial
     evidence, the court must take  utmost  precaution  whilst  finding  an
     accused guilty, solely on the basis of the circumstances proved before
     it.

      9.    Furthermore, in such a case, motive assumes  great  significance
      and importance, as the absence of motive puts the court on  its  guard
      and causes it to scrutinize each piece of  evidence  very  closely  in
      order to ensure that suspicion, emotion  or conjecture do not take the
      place of proof.   The evidence regarding  existence  of  motive  which
      operates in the minds of assailants is very often, not  known  to  any
      other person.  The  motive  may  not  even  be  known,  under  certain
      circumstances, to the victim of the crime.  It may be  known  only  to
      the accused and to none other.  It is therefore, only the  perpetrator
      of the crime alone, who knows as to what circumstances prompted him to
      adopt a certain course of action, leading to  the  commission  of  the
      crime.

     10.   It is obligatory on the part of the accused while being examined
     under Section 313 Cr.P.C., to furnish some explanation with respect to
     the incriminating circumstances associated with  him,  and  the  Court
     must take note of such explanation even in a  case  of  circumstantial
     evidence, in order to decide, as to  whether  or  not,  the  chain  of
     circumstances is complete.  When the attention of the accused is drawn
     to circumstances that inculpate him in relation to the  commission  of
     the crime, and he fails to offer an appropriate explanation, or  gives
     a false answer with respect to the same, the said act may  be  counted
     as providing a missing link for completing the chain of circumstances.
     (See : The Transport Commissioner, A.P., Hyderabad & Anr. v. S. Sardar
     Ali & Ors., AIR 1983 SC 1225; State of Maharashtra v. Suresh, (2000) 1
     SCC 471; and Musheer Khan v. State of Madhya  Pradesh,  (2010)  2  SCC
     748).

     ?11.    While appreciating the evidence, the court  has  to  take  into
     consideration  whether  the  contradictions/omissions  were  of   such
     magnitude so as to materially affect the trial. Minor  contradictions,
     inconsistencies, embellishments or improvements in relation to trivial
     matters, which do not effect the core of the case of the  prosecution,
     must not be made a ground for rejection of evidence, in its  entirety.
     The trial court, after going through the  entire  evidence  available,
     must form an opinion about the credibility of the witnesses,  and  the
     appellate court in the normal course of action, would not be justified
     in reviewing the same again, without providing justifiable reasons for
     the same. (Vide: State v. Saravanan, AIR 2009 SC 152).

      12.    Where the omission(s) amount to  a  contradiction,  creating  a
      serious doubt regarding the truthfulness of a witness, and  the  other
      witness also makes material improvements before the court, in order to
      make the evidence acceptable, it would not be safe to rely  upon  such
      evidence.  The discrepancies in the evidence of eyewitnesses, if found
      not to be minor in nature,  may  be  a  ground  for  disbelieving  and
      discrediting their evidence. In such circumstances, the witnesses  may
      not inspire confidence and  if  their  evidence  is  found  to  be  in
      conflict and contradiction with other evidence  available  or  with  a
      statement that has already recorded, then, in such a case it cannot be
      held that the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.

      13.  The present  case  requires  to  be  examined  in  light  of  the
      aforesaid settled legal propositions.

           The trial Court decided in favour of the accused, and  acquitted
      them on ground of material contradictions in the deposition of the eye-
      witnesses, as Karthikeyan (PW.4) had deposed that he  had  gone  along
      with Mr. Chandran (PW.2) to  inform  the  police  and  also  the  fire
      service station. On the contrary, Mr. Chandran (PW.2), deposed that at
      the time of occurrence he did not accompany Karthikeyan (PW.4), to the
      police station. According to the  deposition  of  Karthikeyan  (PW.4),
      regarding the opening of the door of the house of  the  deceased,  the
      statements of Mr. Chandran (PW.2), and Karthikeyan (PW.4), were  found
      to be contrary to the statement of Mr. Mahalingam (PW.8), Fire Service
      Officer as he stated that, he reached the place of occurrence at about
      1.45 A.M. and found the house  to  be  locked.  Mr.  Chandran  (PW.2),
      brought the key, opened the door and it was then that the fire was put
      out.  Mr. Mahalingam (PW.8) has further deposed that the body  of  the
      deceased was on the cot and the fire had  burnt  the  said  cot  also.
      However, the photographs taken by the police proved to be contrary  to
      the said deposition. The photograph revealed that the body  was  lying
      on the floor while the  cot was lying upside  down.  The  trial  court
      further relied upon the statement of Devaraj (DW.1) who deposed,  that
      after the said incident, Kodirasu, father of the deceased Jayalakshmi,
      had fraudulently taken away land from the father of the appellant  (A-
      1) by filing Suit No. 14/2002 in the  Civil  Court  and  further  that
      Jayalakshmi had been in love with one Selvam  and  further  that,  her
      marriage to the appellant (A-1), was against her wishes  and  was  the
      reason for her committing suicide. More so, the  trial  court  doubted
      the time taken for recording  FIR, and found the explanation furnished
      for  the  delay  regarding  the  same,  totally   unacceptable.    The
      explanation so furnished by the  prosecution  was  that,  Ezhamparuthi
      (PW.1), was informed by the incident and, thereafter, he went  to  the
      place of  occurrence and upon  seeing the place, he then went  to  the
      police station and lodged the said FIR.

      14.   The High Court noted that it is an admitted fact  that,  at  the
      time of occurrence of the incident, the appellants were  in  the  said
      house. Mr. Chandran (PW-2), saw them both standing outside  the  house
      of the deceased. Appellant (A-2) even tried to explain  the  situation
      by stating that, they were watching TV in an adjoining room  and  came
      out to find fumes coming from the next room, and also  further  stated
      that the deceased had committed suicide.

           The High Court did not accept the story of suicide, saying  that
      the same was not plausible, in the given situation.  It stated that as
      the appellants were present at the place of  occurrence,  they  should
      have been able to give a reasonable answer  regarding  the  manner  in
      which the deceased died, but  failed  to  do  so.  Instead,  they  all
      attempted to screen the offence.

      15.   The trial court did not take note of the  fact  that  there  was
      sufficient evidence on record, to indicate  the  possibility  and  the
      likelihood of dowry harassment and death, caused  due  to  failure  to
      give dowry, as demanded.

      16.   The trial court did not consider that, if the  deceased  had  in
      fact committed suicide, the natural reaction of the  co-accused  would
      not have been to rush out of the house, after locking her inside,  but
      to make an attempt to rescue her.  Further, when Mr.  Chandran  (PW-2)
      asked for the house key, the same was not provided, stating  that  the
      appellant (A-2) had thrown it away. Mr. Chandran (PW-2), had  to  then
      fetch a duplicate key to enter the house. This is a  clear  indication
      of the fact that the accused were trying to  lock  up  the  house  and
      leave.

      17.   The theory of suicide can further be negated by  the  fact  that
      the  doctor  who  conducted  the  post-mortem,  did  not  mention  the
      possibility of suicide at all.

      18.   All the circumstances,  therefore,  clearly  indicate  that  the
      deceased did not die a natural death, nor was she  the  victim  of  an
      accident and neither did she commit suicide. She was therefore  killed
      and no one except the accused could have committed the said offence.

      19.   A delay in the registration of the  case  would  not  materially
      affect the case of the prosecution in  any  way,  as  PW-1  was  first
      summoned, then he went to the spot of the  incident,  after  which  he
      went to the police station. Such a delay was  therefore,  natural  and
      acceptable.

      20.   So far as the discrepancies and contradictions  pointed  out  by
      the trial court are concerned, the same are not material and  none  of
      them can be held to go to the root of the  case.    Further,  even  if
      there has been a transfer of property in favour of Kodirasu, father of
      Jayalakshmi, the deceased, from the father of the appellant (A-1),  as
      the same is a transaction, subsequent to the incident, it can have  no
      bearing on the case.  The trial court unnecessarily gave advantage  to
      the appellants in this regard, even though the vendor himself was  not
      examined. Thus, no motive can be attributed to the complainant on this
      count. Furthermore, had Jayalakshmi been in love with Selvam, the same
       could not have been a ground for her to commit suicide 2 ½ years from
      the date of her  marriage,  as  she  would  have  in  all  likelihood,
      attempted the said act,  either  at  the  time  of  her  marriage,  or
      immediately thereafter.

      21.   In view of the above,  we  do  not  see  any  cogent  reason  to
      interfere with the impugned judgment of the High  Court.   The  appeal
      has no merit and is, therefore, accordingly dismissed.

            The appellant no.2 is on bail.  Her bail  bonds  are  cancelled.
      She is directed to surrender within a period of four weeks from  today
      before the Chief Judicial Magistrate. In case she does not  surrender,
      we direct the Chief Judicial Magistrate to take her into  custody  and
      send her to jail to serve out the remaining sentence.

            A  copy  of  the  order  may  be  sent  to  the  Chief  Judicial
      Magistrate, Chengalpet, Tamil Nadu, by the Registry of this Court  for
      compliance.

                                             ……..………………………J.

                                        (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)




                                   ....…..…………………….….………………………J.

                       (FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA)




      New Delhi,

      September 19, 2012










      -----------------------
18
