
Supreme Court of India
Swapan Kumar Jha @ Sapan Kumar vs State Of Jharkhand on 15 November, 2018Author: …………………………………….….J.
                                                      1

                                                                        NON­REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1396­97 OF 2012

  Swapan Kumar Jha @ Sapan Kumar                                   .. Appellant

                                                   Versus
  State of Jharkhand &Anr.                                         .. Respondents
                                                    WITH

                                   Criminal Appeal No.1453 of 2018
                                     (@SLP (Crl.) No.7902 of 2012)

                                                    WITH

                                   Criminal Appeal No.1435 of 2012


                                             J U D G M E N T



                      Leave granted in SLP (Criminal) No.7902 of 2012.


  2.                  The   instant   appeals   have  been  filed against   the  final  common

  judgment   and   order   dated   29.07.2011   of   the   High   Court   of

  Jharkhand at Ranchi in a batch of three appeals (Criminal Appeal No.

  669 of 2010, Criminal Appeal No. 905 of 2010 and Criminal Appeal
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2018.11.26

  No. 779 of 2010) and Death Reference No. 2 of 2010. 
17:34:32 IST
Reason:
                                        2
3.   By   the   impugned   judgment,   the   High   Court   dismissed   the

aforementioned   appeals   arising   out   of   the   judgment   and   order   of

conviction   and   sentence   dated   1.07.2010   and   7.07.2010   of   the

Additional   Sessions   Judge,   Dhanbad  in   Sessions   Trial   No.  88/200.

The   Sessions   Court   had   convicted   the   three   accused   for   offences

punishable   under   Sections   364­A,   302   and   201/34,   IPC   for

kidnapping for ransom and murder of Sumit Kumar Ojha @ Govind, a

19­year­old student, and causing disappearance of evidence (i.e the

body of the deceased). 


      Vide the judgment of the Sessions Court, the appellant Swapan

Kumar Jha @ Sapan Kumar (hereinafter “appellant Swapan Kumar”),

was sentenced to death, and the appellant Amarendra Kumar Sharma

@ Vicky (hereinafter “appellant Vicky”) and the appellant Rocky Dutta

herein (hereinafter “appellant Rocky”) were sentenced to R.I. for life

and fine of Rs. 10,000 each (6 months’ R.I. in case of default) for the

offences   punishable   under   S.   364­A   and   302,   IPC.   All   the   three

accused   were   further   sentenced   to   7   years’   rigorous   imprisonment

and fine of Rs. 10,000 each (6 months’ R.I. in case of default) for the

offence punishable under Section 201/34, IPC.
                                         3
4.   Criminal   Appeal  No.   1396­97   of  2012  arises  out   of  the   order  of

confirmation of the conviction and sentence of the appellant Swapan

Kumar by the High Court in Death Reference No. 2 of 2010 and Crl.

Appeal No. 905 of 2010. At the same time, Criminal Appeal No. 1435

of 2012 and Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Criminal) 7902/2012

by the convicted accused Vicky and Rocky respectively arise out of

the confirmation of their conviction and sentence by the High Court in

Crl. Appeal Nos. 905 and 779 of 2010. 


5.    The case for the prosecution in brief is that on 28.09.2008 at

about 4.30 p.m., the deceased Sumit left his home after receiving a

phone call, stating that he would be back within half an hour, but did

not return. Eventually, a missing person’s report was lodged at the

Jharia Police Station on 29.09.2008 by the informant, the deceased’s

father. On the morning of 1.10.2008, an unidentified ransom call for

Rs. 20 lakhs was received at the landline telephone at the deceased’s

house, pursuant to which a written report was lodged at Jharia Police

Station under section 364­A, IPC.   On the basis of call records, two

mobile phones were seized and the accused were arrested. Based on

the confessional statements of the accused, the deceased’s body was

recovered, after which Section 302/201/34, IPC were also added, on
                                            4

23.10.2008. During the investigation, a white Indica car used by the

accused was also seized.


6.    According to the prosecution, the appellant Swapan Kumar and

the appellant Vicky had initially attempted to kidnap Gautam (PW6),

the older brother of the deceased. These brothers were the sons of the

appellant Swapan Kumar’s mother’s brother, i.e. the informant. The

accused Swapan Kumar & Vicky had travelled to Kolkata, in a hired

Indica (driven by the driver DulalMahto (PW2)), where Gautam was

studying, and invited him to go for a ride with them, on the pretext

that they had purchased a new car. But they dropped their plans of

kidnapping   him   once   he   informed  his   roommate   over   SMS   that   he

was in their company. Next, they set sights on the deceased, inducing

him   to   meet   up   with   them.   They   picked   him   up   in   their   Indica   at

Children’s Park, Jharia. They visited a place called Khalsa Hotel for

drinking alcohol, where the deceased refused to drink, and the two

accused   later   purchased   more  liquor  and forced him  to  drink, and

took him to the appellant Vicky’s houseat Giridih, where the appellant

Rocky also joined them. Here, the deceased was drugged, and then

was taken towards Kolkata. They then made a call demanding Rs. 20

lakhs as ransom from the informant. 
                                           5
      The   dead   body   of   Sumit   was   recovered   from   the   graveyard   at

Bhandaridih,   district   Giridih   on   19.10.2008,   in   the   presence   of   an

Executive   Magistrate,   witnesses   and   several   other   members   of   the

public, on the basis of the statement of the appellant Swapan Kumar.

The process of exhumation was videographed. The body was identified

by   the   deceased’s   parents,   brother   and   uncle   (PW   9,   8,   6   and   1).

Though   the   body   was   somewhat   putrefied,   the   witnesses   identified

the   victim’s   clothes   and  janeoandmauli  (holy   threads)   and   noticed

surgical marks on the body for an appendix removal operation, which

had   been   performed   on   the   deceased   at   an   earlier   age.   Later,   the

absence of the appendix was confirmed through the testimony of the

doctor who conducted the post mortem (PW10), speaking about the

post mortem report (Exhibit 4). The cause of death was found to be

asphyxia caused by strangulation.


7.     The Trial Court, upon a meticulous examination of the evidence,

proceeded   to   convict   the   appellants   for   kidnapping   for   ransom,

murder   and   causing   disappearance   of   evidence.   Notably,   under   S.

364­A and 302, IPC the appellant Swapan Kumar was sentenced to

death,   but   the   two   other   accused   were   awarded   life   imprisonment.

The High Court confirmed the judgment and order of conviction and
                                            6

sentence after looking at the material on record. Both Courts found

that there was an unbroken chain of circumstance pointing towards

the guilt of the appellants. It is worthwhile to note that the High Court

agreed with the Trial Court on the aspect of the prominence of the

role played by the appellant Swapan Kumar.


8.     Heard the counsel on both the sides.


9.    On   a   close   reading   of   the   evidence   on   record,   as   well   as   the

judgments of the Trial Court and the High Court, it is evident that

those   Courts   had   sufficient   reasons   to   conclude   that   the   three

appellants   were   guilty   of   the   offences   of   kidnapping   for   ransom,

murder and disappearance of evidence.


      As far as the offence of kidnapping is concerned, the testimony

of the family of the victim (especially his father, the informant (PW9),

his mother (PW8), and his brother (PW6)), as well as the testimony of

the driver of the hired Indica (PW2), clearly establishes that the victim

was   last   seen   in   the   company   of   the   accused,   and   points   to   the

manner in which the informant’s sons were identified to target him for

ransom, and the victim enticed by the appellants. While PW8 and 9

described how the victim had left to meet a “friend” on receiving a call

at home, PW4 and 5 (persons who knew the victim) witnessed him
                                          7

getting   into   a   white   Indica   with   three   occupants.   The   testimony   of

PW2   has   been   crucial   in   indicating   how   the   appellants   had   first

attempted to kidnap PW6, before moving on to the victim. This is also

corroborated   by   the   testimony   of   PW6,   who   described   how   he   was

dropped back by the appellants after he informed his roommate of his

whereabouts. According to PW2, after this attempt, he had eventually

driven the appellants Swapan Kumar and Vicky to Jharia, where they

called   and   picked   up   the   victim.   PW2   has   described   in   detail   the

events   of   the   evening,   which   culminated   in   the   appellants   Swapan

Kumar   and   Vicky   taking   the   victim   to   the   house   of   the   appellant

Vicky, where the appellant Rocky joined them.   


      The evidence pertaining to the call records and phones and SIM

cards seized from the accused also establishes that they made several

ransom calls to the informant’s house. This is also corroborated by

the   discussion   about   ransom   overheard   by   the   driver,   and   the

testimony of the parents of the victim.


      As   rightly   observed   by   the   Trial   Court,   though   the   appellants

have   confessed   to   kidnapping   the   victim,   the   confession   of   the

appellants is to be relied upon only to the extent of the recovery of the

deceased’s body, as per Section 27 of the Evidence Act. This strongly
                                          8

points   towards   their   involvement   in   hiding   the   body   and   causing

disappearance of the evidence, as the body was recovered from a spot

of which only they could have had knowledge—buried deep into the

ground   in   a   graveyard,   hidden   below   layers   of   soil   and   wood.   The

factum   of   recovery   was   also   substantiated   by   the   evidence   of   the

investigating officers, constables, and the authority in charge of the

graveyard where the body was found, and the electronic evidence of

the videotape of the recovery.


      Although the role of the appellants in the murder of the victim

has   not   been   established   based   on   any   direct   evidence,   it   can   be

inferred beyond doubt from the circumstances pertaining to the entire

sequence   of   events,   which   in   turn   have   been   proved   through   the

testimony of several witnesses, and the necessity for the accused to

kill the victim to avoid the detection of their crime. The Courts have

rightly concluded that there is an unbroken chain of circumstances

pointing unequivocally towards the guilt of the appellants, from the

point when the appellants hired the car for the offence till the point of

the   recovery   and   due   identification   of   the   deceased’s   body,   with

particular reference to the testimony of the driver who saw the victim

last in thecompany of the appellants.
                                         9
10.   We   are   also   in   agreement   with   the   Courts   on   the   point   of

sentencing of the appellant Vicky and the appellant Rocky. Moreover,

it may be noted that there is no appeal by the state for enhancement

of sentence against the appellants Vicky and Rocky. 


      The sole point on which we find ourselves in disagreement with

the Trial Court and the High Court is the sentence of death awarded

to the appellant Swapan Kumar. 


      Before we proceed further, it would be useful to recall the well­

settled legal proposition first enunciated in  Bachan Singh v. State

of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684, that the death penalty is to be imposed

only when the alternative of life imprisonment is totally inadequate,

and therefore unquestionably foreclosed, i.e. if it is the only inevitable

conclusion.   While determining the sentence, it is equally important

for the Court to consider the aggravating circumstances of the crime

as well as the mitigating circumstances. Since the decision in Machhi

Singh v. State of Punjab, (1983) 3 SCC 470, a balancing approach

of such aggravating and mitigating circumstances has been adopted

by the courts to see if the crime is among the rarest of rare cases.

Thus, it cannot be doubted that life imprisonment is the rule and the

death penalty is the exception.
                                          10
11.   We have considered each of the circumstances of the crime as

well   as   the   planned   crime   of   the   appellant   carefully.   Though   we

acknowledge the gravity of the offence, we have been unable to satisfy

ourselves   that   the   offence   involves   exceptional   depravity   or

heinousness.   The   offence   has   undoubtedly   been   committed   in   the

premeditated manner, and involved the heartless betrayal of trust of

the victim, who was a first cousin of the appellant Swapan Kumar,

but this is not a sufficient reason to bring it within the ambit of the

rarest of rare cases, especially when there is nothing to show that the

offence itself was not committed in an unspeakably brutal manner.

This   is   clear   if   we   consider   the   entire   sequence   of   events   as

reconstructed from the testimony of the prosecution witnesses, from

which   we   can   infer   that   the   victim   was   not   aware   of   the   devious

designs of the appellants even up to the point of reaching the house of

the   appellant   Rocky.   Moreover,   the   murder   of   the   victim   seems   to

have   taken   place   by   throttling,   as   is   indicated   by   the   medical

evidence. Even on this point it is difficult to conclude that the murder

was   committed   in   an   exceptionally   heinous   manner.   However,   we

must emphasize that we do not intend to undermine the plight that

the   victim   must   have   felt   when   he   realized   the   truth,   nor   to

undermine the gravity of the crime itself.
                                              11
         At   the   same   time,   we   feel   that   the   Trial   Court   and   the   High

Court have not given due weight to the mitigating circumstances of

the   appellant   Swapan   Kumar.   To   begin   with,   the   crime   was

committed at a young age, when it is easy for people to get swayed by

the   lure   of   short­cuts   to   earn   money.   In   fact,   he   is   still   a   young

person,   and   there   is   nothing   to   show   that   he  is  absolutely   beyond

reform   and   rehabilitation.   It   is   worth   noting   at   this   point   that   the

Trial Court considered this to be a mitigating factor in favour of the

other accused, but held that the appellant Swapan Kumar’s role in

the   entire   narrative   discloses   that   he   is   beyond   reform.   We   find

ourselves unable to agree with this view. Though it is indeed a deeply

condemnable act to destroy one’s own family for short­term pecuniary

gain, it is a dangerous presumption that a perpetrator of such an act

is   incapable   of   reform   and   rehabilitation   just   by   virtue   of   having

committed the crime, and indeed flies in the face of the concept of

reform to begin with.


         Moreover, we also do not find that the appellant Swapan Kumar

poses   such   a   menace   to   society  that   he  cannot   be  allowed   to   stay

alive.
                                           12
      In   such   circumstances,   we   are   of   the   view   that   the   above

mitigating   factors   outweigh   the   aggravating   circumstances   of   the

crime, and the same cannot be brought into the ambit of the rarest of

rare cases. Therefore, we find it fit to commute the death sentence of

the appellant Swapan Kumar to life imprisonment.


12.  At the same time, it cannot be doubted that the conduct of the

appellant Swapan Kumar must be placed on a different footing than

the   other   appellants,   given   that   he   betrayed   the   trust   of   his   own

cousin, and indeed caused agony to his own blood relations, in the

most heartless manner.  We agree with the view taken by the Courts

that the offence was committed in a premeditated manner, and that

the factum of targeting of the informant’s sons is a clear indication of

how the appellant Swapan Kumar must have spearheaded the entire

plan. As the informant was his mother’s brother, he would have had

intimate knowledge of his background and prosperity. On the other

hand, the other two accused seem to have played a secondary role

and were possibly only lured in by the appellant Swapan Kumar with

the   promise   of   riches.   Thus,   it   is   evident   that   the   conduct   of   the

appellant   Swapan   Kumar   is   more   culpable   than   that   of   the   other

accused. Indeed, placing  all the three accused on the same footing
                                           13

would   also   be   insensitive   to   the   plight   that   the   victim’s   family   is

enduring   because   of   their   betrayal   at   the   hands   of   the   appellant

Swapan Kumar. We are also mindful of the need to curb the menace

of kidnappings for ransom, and the need to respond to such crimes

with stringent punishment.


      In   these   circumstances,   we   find   that   a   sentence   of   life

imprisonment  simpliciter  would   be   inadequate   for   the   appellant

Swapan Kumar, as that includes the possibility of claiming remission

after the expiry of as little as 14 years. In our opinion, a mere effective

sentence of 14 years would be grossly inadequate in the case of this

appellant.


      Due to the aforesaid reasons, we wish to adopt the  via media

that this Court has frequently resorted to in matters involving grave

offences, which nonetheless do not fall into the realm of the rarest of

rare   cases   so   as   to   attract   the   punishment   of   death—i.e.,   the

restriction   of   the   convict   to   claim   remission   in   his   sentence,   for   a

specific period.


13.   This   Court   has   elucidated   this   proposition   in   much   detail   in

Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC
                                          14

767, and in the decision of the Constitution Bench in Union of India

v. V. Sriharan, (2016) 7 SCC 1. It would be useful to reproduce the

conclusions reached by this Court in Sriharan case supra:


           “Answers to the Questions Referred in seriatim

     Question  52.1: Whether imprisonment for  life in terms of
     Section 53 read with Section 45 of the Penal Code meant
     imprisonment for rest of the life of the prisoner or a convict
     undergoing   life   imprisonment   has   a   right   to   claim
     remission and whether as per the principles enunciated in
     paras   91   to   93   of   Swamy   Shraddananda   (2) [Swamy
     Shraddananda   (2) v. State   of   Karnataka,   (2008)   13   SCC
     767   :   (2009)   3   SCC   (Cri)   113]   , a   special   category   of
     sentence   may   be   made   for   the   very   few   cases   where   the
     death penalty might be substituted by the punishment of
     imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term in excess
     of   fourteen   years   and   to   put   that   category   beyond
     application of remission?

     Answer

     177. Imprisonment for life in terms of Section 53 read with
     Section 45 of the Penal Code only means imprisonment for
     the   rest   of   the   life   of   the   convict.   The   right   to   claim
     remission,   commutation,   reprieve,   etc.   as  provided  under
     Article 72 or Article 161 of the Constitution will always be
     available being constitutional remedies untouchable by the
     Court.
     178. We   hold   that   the   ratio   laid   down   in Swamy
     Shraddananda   (2) [Swamy   Shraddananda   (2) v. State   of
     Karnataka,   (2008)   13   SCC   767:   (2009)   3   SCC   (Cri)   113]
     that a special category of sentence; instead of death can be
     substituted by the punishment of imprisonment for life or
     for a term exceeding 14 years and put that category beyond
     application of remission is well founded and we answer the
     said question in the affirmative.” 
                                           15

                                                         (emphasis supplied)


      We may also refer to the decision of this Court in Tattu Lodhi

v. State of M.P., (2016) 9 SCC, explaining the utility of taking such

an approach:


      “11. The   innovative   approach   reflected   in   the   aforesaid
      judgments, on the one hand helps the convict in getting rid
      of death penalty in appropriate cases, on the other it takes
      care of genuine concerns of the victim including the society
      by   ensuring   that   life   imprisonment   shall   actually   mean
      imprisonment   for   whole   of   the   natural   life   or   to   a   lesser
      extent as indicated by the court in the light of facts of a
      particular case. Since there is no party who is actually a
      loser on account of such an approach in appropriate cases,
      we   feel   no   hesitation   in   accepting   the   submissions
      advanced by the appellant. Hence, the law is reiterated that
      in   appropriate   cases   where   this   Court   is   hesitant   in
      maintaining death sentence, it may order that the convict
      shall undergo imprisonment for whole of natural life or to a
      lesser extent as may be specified.” 


14.   In the  given circumstances, we think that it would be in the

interest   of   the   justice   to   restrict  the   right   of   the  appellant   Swapan

Kumar to claim remission in his sentence of life imprisonment for a

period of 25 years. Such a minimum mandatory sentence would be

commensurate with the gravity of the crime and with the heightened

culpability of this appellant compared to the other accused.


15.  Thus, the following order is made :
                                        16
      a.   Criminal   Appeal   Nos.   1396­1397   of   2012   pertaining   to   the

appellant Swapan Kumar Jhaare disposed of by commuting the death

sentence to one of life imprisonment, out of which the said accused

shall serve out mandatorily a minimum of 25 years without claiming

remission. 


      b. Criminal Appeal No.1435 of 2012 of the appellant Amarendra

Kumar   Sharma   @   Vickey,   and   Criminal   Appeal   arising   out   of   SLP

(Criminal) No. 7902 of 2012 of the appellant Rockey Dutta @ Rocky

Dutta stand dismissed.


                                    …………………………………….….J.
                                    [N.V. RAMANA]



                                    ………………………………………..J.
                                    [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]



                                     ………………………………………..J.
                                    [M. R. SHAH]
New Delhi;
November 15, 2018.

