
Supreme Court of India
State Of Rajasthan vs Bharat Bhushan Pareek & Ors on 9 September, 2011Bench: Dalveer Bhandari, Deepak Verma
                                        1



                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

             CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION 



          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1768    OF 2011
         (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.1840/2010)

STATE OF RAJASTHAN                        Appellant(s)
                     :VERSUS:

BHARAT BHUSHAN PAREEK & ORS.              Respondent(s)

                             WITH

          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1769    OF 2011
         (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.1846/2010)
STATE OF RAJASTHAN                        Appellant(s)

                     :VERSUS:

BHARAT BHUSHAN PAREEK & ORS.              Respondent(s)

                              AND

      SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (Crl.) No. 2332 /2011

BHOLU @ SURJEET YADAV                      Appellant(s)
                     :VERSUS:

STATE OF RAJASTHAN             

Respondent(s)





                          O R D E R

CRIMINAL APPEALS @ SLP(CRL) Nos.1840 & 1846 OF 2010:
1.      Leave granted.

2.      These   appeals   emanate   from   the   judgment   and 

orders dated 15.12.2009 passed by the learned Single 

Judge  of   the  High   Court  of   Judicature  at   Rajasthan 

in   S.B.   Criminal   Miscellaneous   Petition   Nos.595   of 

2009 and 599 of 2009.   


                              2
3.      This   is   a   gang   rape   case.   In   the   impugned 

judgment   the   High   court   has   observed   that   ample 

opportunities   were   provided   to   the   prosecution   to 

produce   the   witnesses   but   the   same   have   not   been 

availed   by   the   prosecution,   on   the   contrary,   the 

Special Public Prosecutor remained absent on several 

occasions   and   he   appears   to   be   not   interested   in 

completion of the trial of this case.  




4.      In   the   impugned   judgment   the   High   Court   was 

justified   in   observing   that   the   conduct   of   the 

prosecution   in   the   entire   case   has               been 

reprehensible. Ordinarily this Court would not have 

interfered   with   the   impugned   judgment   but   for   the 

fact that this is a very serious crime of gang rape, 

therefore,   this   unusual   latitude   is   granted   to   the 

State.   Otherwise   order-sheet   of   the   Trial   Court 

clearly   reveal   the   conduct   of   the   prosecution   in 

this case. 


5.      All the accused, including Rajesh Chaudhary, 

Harish   Sihag   and   Narendra   Sihag   have   already   been 

released on bail.  


                               3
6.       In the facts and circumstances of this case, 

looking   to   the   conduct   of   the   State   in   the   entire 

case, we direct the State of Rajasthan to pay Rs.2 

lakhs as costs to the Rajasthan State Legal Services 

Authority within four weeks from today. 




7.       The   concerned   District   &   Sessions   Judge   is 

directed to conduct an inquiry as to why this matter 

has   been   proceeded   in   this   manner   and   take   action 

against erring officials/persons and submit a report 

to this Court within four months from today.  




8.       Dr.   Manish   Singhvi,   learned   Additional 

Advocate   General   appearing   for   the   State   of 

Rajasthan   submitted   that   accused   Nos.1   to   7   have 

already cross-examined the prosecutrix in this case. 

Accused   Nos.8   to   12   have   not   cross-examined   the 

prosecutrix.  


9.       Looking to the fact that this is a gang rape 

case and in the larger interest of justice, we grant 

one   more   opportunity   to   the   State   of   Rajasthan   to 

lead   evidence   in   this   case   including   cross-

examination   of   the   prosecutrix.   Let   the   entire 


                               4


prosecution   evidence   be   concluded   positively   on   or 

before 30th November, 2011. 

10.      We   direct   the   parties   to   appear   before   the 

Fast Track Court on 19th September, 2011. 




11.      The learned Presiding Judge of the Fast Track 

Court   shall   proceed   to   conduct   the   trial   of   this 

case   on   day-to-day   basis   and   shall   not   grant 

unnecessary   adjournments   either   on   behalf   of   the 

State or any of the accused and conclude the trial 

as   expeditiously   as   possible,   in   any   event,   within 

six   months   from   the   date   of   communication   of   this 

order.          

12.      In   view   of   the   order   passed   above,   the 

impugned   orders   passed   by   the   High   Court   are   set 

aside and the appeals are disposed of accordingly. 




S.L.P.(CRL.) No. 2332 OF 2011:

13.      The   petitioner   would   be   at   liberty   to   move 

the   Trial   Court   for   grant   of   bail.   We   request   the 

Trial Court to conclude the trial in this case also 

as   expeditiously   as   possible,   in   any   event,   within 

six   months   from   the   date   of   communication   of   this 

order.  


                           5
14.    The special leave petition is dismissed with 

the aforementioned observation.




                            .....................J
                      (DALVEER BHANDARI)





                            .....................J
                            (DEEPAK VERMA)

New Delhi;
September 9, 2011.



