
Supreme Court of India
Nandakumar vs The State Of Kerala on 20 April, 2018Author: A K Sikri
                                                                              ‘REPORTABLE’
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018
                              (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 4488 of 2017)


                      NANDAKUMAR & ANR.                                       Appellants

                                                      VERSUS

                      THE STATE OF KERALA & ORS.                              Respondents


                                                 J U D G M E N T

                      A. K. SIKRI, J.


                           Leave granted.

                           The brief facts leading to the present appeal are that

                      appellant No. 1 has married Ms.Thushara.           According to the

                      appellant, this marriage was solemnised on 12.04.2017 at the

                      Chakkulathukavu Bagavathi Temple situated in the Trivandrum

                      District, Kerala.       Insofar as Thushara is concerned, as on

                      the date of marriage, she was admittedly 19 years of age and

                      was, therefore, competent to enter into wedlock.            It appears

                      that after that marriage, she started living with appellant

                      No. 1 as his wife.

                           Respondent No. 4 is the father of Thushara.             He filed

                      Habeas Corpus petition being W.P.(Crl.) No. 149/2017(S) in

                      the High Court of Kerala alleging therein that ever since
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA           10.04.2017,   his    daughter   Thushara   was   missing.     He   also
Date: 2018.05.03
17:01:05 IST
Reason:

                      stated in the said petition that Thushara was in the illegal


                                                                                                1
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018

custody of appellant No. 1.                      In fact, respondent No. 4                    had

lodged FIR regarding missing of his daughter on 10.04.2017.

Stating this fact in the writ petition, he averred that

though          the    said       FIR     was    registered,          but       no   effective

investigation had been conducted in the matter.                                        On that

basis, prayer made in the petition was to issue writ of

Habeas          Corpus      commanding          the   appellants           to    produce      his

daughter in the High Court.                      This writ petition was admitted

on    25.04.2017            and    notice       was    ordered        to    the      appellants

herein by special messenger.                          On that day, the High Court

also       directed         respondent         Nos.    1    to    3   to    trace      out   and

produce the respondent No. 4’s daughter in the Court.                                          On

28.04.2017, when the writ petition was taken up, respondent

No.    4    and       his    wife       were    present.          Appellants         were    also

present.          The Sub Inspector of Police, Vatgtiyoorkavu Police

Station produced the detenue in the Court.                                  The High Court

interacted with the parties, including Thushara.

           As     pointed         out      above,          insofar     as       Thushara       is

concerned, she was 19 years of age and, therefore, competent

to marry, as the marriageable age for females is 18 years.

However, dispute arose about the age of appellant No. 1

herein.           It was the contention of respondent No. 4 that

appellant          No.      1     was    less     than       21    years        of   age     and,

therefore, he was not of marriageable age.                                      To ascertain

this fact, the High Court asked appellant No. 1 to inform

his date of birth.                      He stated his date of birth to be

                                                                                                    2
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018

30.05.1997, and in support thereof, produced driving licence

issued by the licensing authorities.                     Treating it to be the

date of birth of appellant No. 1, the High Court found that

he   would       be     attaining   the       age   of     21   years   only    on

30.05.2018.       Therefore, on 12.04.2017, when the marriage was

solemnised between appellant No. 1 and Thushara, appellant

No. 1 was not of marriageable age.                  On that basis, the High

Court concluded that the daughter of respondent No. 4 is not

the lawfully wedded wife of appellant No. 1.                     The High Court

also remarked that apart from the photographs of marriage

which were produced in the High Court, there was no evidence

to show that a valid marriage was solemnised between the

parties and that a certificate issued by the local authority

under the Kerala Registration of Marriages (Common) Rules,

2008, was also not produced.              On these facts, the High Court

allowed    the        writ   petition    by    entrusting       the   custody    of

Thushara to her father i.e., respondent No. 4 herein, as is

clear     from        the    following    directions        contained    in     the

impugned order:

              “We accordingly dispose of the writ petition
        by entrusting custody of Ms. Thushara, the daughter
        of the petitioner with the petitioner.      The Sub
        Inspector of Police, Vattiyoorkavu shall, to ensure
        their safety accompany them to their residence at
        Thirvananthapuram.”



        Assailing the aforesaid order, the present appeal is

preferred.

                                                                                      3
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018

        Notice was issued to the respondents.                  Respondent No.

1/State of Kerala as well as official respondent Nos. 2 and

3, viz., the Superintendent of Police and Sub-inspector of

Police,    have     put    in    their   appearance     through       the      State

counsel.      Nobody has appeared on behalf of respondent No. 4

in   spite     of    service       of    notice.        In     the    aforesaid

circumstances,       we    have     heard     learned    counsel         for    the

appellants as well as learned counsel for the State.

        A neat submission which is made by the learned counsel

for the appellants is that the High Court has adopted an

approach which is not permissible in law by going into the

validity of marriage.            It is submitted that when Thushara is

admittedly a major i.e., more than 18 years of age, she has

right to live wherever she wants to or move as per her

choice.      As she is not a minor daughter of respondent No. 4,

“custody” of Thushara could not be entrusted to him.

        Learned counsel for the appellants is right in his

submission.       Even the counsel for the State did not dispute

the aforesaid position in law and, in fact, supported this

submission     of    the    learned      counsel   for       the     appellants.

Insofar as marriage of appellant No. 1 (who was less than 21

years   of    age   on     the    date   of   marriage       and   was    not    of

marriageable age) with Thushara is concerned, it cannot be

said that merely because appellant No. 1 was less than 21

years of age, marriage between the parties is null and void.

Appellant No. 1 as well as Thushara are Hindus.                             Such a

                                                                                       4
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018

marriage is not a void marriage under the Hindu Marriage

Act, 1955, and as per the provisions of section 12, which

can be attracted in such a case, at the most, the marriage

would be a voidable marriage.

 Section 5 and Section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act

make this position clear which are reproduced below:

    “5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage. - A Marriage
    may be solemnised between any two Hindus, if the
    following conditions are fulfilled, namely-

                        xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx

    (iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty
    one years and the bride, the age of eighteen years
    at the time of the marriage;”

    12. Voidable marriages.-(1) Any marriage solemnised,
    whether before or after the commencement of this
    Act, shall be voidable and may be annulled by a
    decree of nullity on any of the following grounds,
    namely:-

    1(a)    that the marriage has not been consummated
    owing to the impotence of the respondent; or
    (b)     that the marriage is in contravention of the
    condition specified in clause (ii) of section 5; or
    (c)     that the consent of the petitioner, or where
    the consent of the guardian in marriage of the
    petitioner was required under section 5 as it stood
    immediately before the commencement of the Child
    Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act, the 1978 (2 of
    1978), the consent of such guardian was obtained by
    force or by fraud as to the nature of the ceremony
    or   as   to  any   material  fact  or   circumstance
    concerning the respondent; or
    (d) that the respondent was at the time of the
    marriage pregnant by some person other than the
    petitioner.”

       We need not go into this aspect in detail.       For our

purposes, it is sufficient to note that both appellant No. 1

and Thushara are major.       Even if they were not competent to


                                                                   5
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018

enter into wedlock (which position itself is disputed), they

have right to live together even outside wedlock.                  It would

not be out of place to mention that ‘live-in relationship’

is now recognized by the Legislature itself which has found

its place under the provisions of the Protection of Women

from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.

       In a recent judgment rendered by this Court in the

case   of   ‘Shafin    Jahan   v.   Asokan    K.M.    &   Ors.’   [2018   SCC

Online SC 343], after stating the law pertaining to writ of

Habeas Corpus, this writ has been considered as “a great

constitutional privilege” or “the first security of civil

liberty”.        The     Court      made     the     following    pertinent

observations: -

    “28. Thus, the pivotal purpose of the said writ is to
    see that no one is deprived of his/her liberty
    without sanction of law.    It is the primary duty of
    the State to see that the said right is not sullied
    in any manner whatsoever and its sanctity is not
    affected by any kind of subgterfuge. The role of the
    Court is to see that the detenue is produced before
    it, find out about his/her indpendent choice and see
    to it that the person is released form illegal
    restraint.   The issue will be a different one when
    the detention is not illegal. What is seminal is to
    remember that the song of liberty is sung with
    sincerity and the choice of an individual is
    appositely respected and conferred its esteemed
    status as the Constitution guarantees.    It is so as
    the expression of choice is a fundamental right under
    Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution, if the said
    choice does not transgress any valid legal framework.
    Once   that   aspect  is   clear,  the   enquiry  and
    determination have to come to an end.
    29.   In the instant case, the High Court, as is
    noticeable from the impugned verdict, has been
    erroneously guided by some kind of social phenomenon
    that was frescoed before it.     The writ court has

                                                                                6
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018

    taken exception to the marriage of the respondent No.
    9 herein with the appellant. It felt perturbed. As
    we see, there was nothing to be taken exception to.
    Initially, Hadiya had declined to go with her father
    and expressed her desire to stay with the respondent
    No. 7 before the High Court and in the first writ it
    had so directed.     The adamantine attitude of the
    father, possibly impelled by obsessive parental love,
    compelled him to knock at the doors of the High Court
    in another Habeas Corpus petition whereupon the High
    Court directed the production of Hadiya who appeared
    on the given date along with the appellant herein
    whom the High Court calls a stranger.      But Hadiya
    would insist that she had entered into marriage with
    him.   True it is, she had gone with the respondent
    No. 7 before the High Court but that does not mean
    and can never mean that she, as a major, could not
    enter into a marital relationship.     But, the High
    Court unwarrantably took exception to the same
    forgetting that parental love or concern cannot be
    allowed to fluster the right of choice of an adult in
    choosing a man to whom she gets married.    And, that
    is where the error has crept in.      The High Court
    should have, after an interaction as regards her
    choice, directed that she was free to go where she
    wished to.”


       The Court also emphasised due importance to the right

of choice of an adult person which the Constitution accords

to an adult person as under:

    “54. It is obligatory to state here that expression
    of choice in accord with law is acceptance of
    individual identity.   Curtailment of that expression
    and the ultimate action emanating therefrom on the
    conceptual structuralism of obeisance to the societal
    will destroy the individualistic entity of a person.
    The social values and morals have their space but they
    are not above the constitutionally guaranteed freedom.
    The said freedom is both a constitutional and a human
    right.    Deprivation     of that freedom which is
    ingrained in choice on the plea of faith is
    impermissible.   Faith of a person is intrinsic to
    his/her meaningful existence. To have the freedom of
    faith is essential to his/her automony; and it
    strengthens the core norms of the Constitution.
    Choosing a faith   is the substratum of individuality
    and sans it, the right of choice becomes a shadow. It

                                                               7
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018

    has to be remembered that the realization of a right
    is more important than the conferment of the right.
    Such actualization indeed ostracises any kind of
    societal notoriety and keeps at bay the patriarchal
    supremacy. It is so because the individualistic faith
    and expression of choice are fundamental for the
    fructification of the right. Thus, we would like to
    call it indispensable preliminary condition.

    55. Non-acceptance of her choice would simply mean
    creating discomfort to the constitutional right by a
    Constitutional Court which is meant to be the
    protector of fundamental rights.     Such a situation
    cannot remotely be conceived. The duty of the Court
    is to uphold the right and not to abridge the sphere
    of the right unless there is a valid authority of law.
    Sans lawful sanction, the centripodal value of liberty
    should allow an individual to write his/her script.
    The individual signature is the insignia of the
    concept.


       We also reproduce the following discussion from the

concurring judgment rendered by Dr. Justice D.Y. Chandrachud

in the said case:

     “81. In a more recent decision of a three Judge Bench
     in Soni Gerry v. Gerry Douglas’, this Court dealt
     with a case where the daughter of the appellant and
     respondent, who was a major had expressed a desire to
     reside in Kuwait, where she was pursuing her
     education, with her father.      This Court observed
     thus:
        “9…..She has, without any hesitation, clearly
        stated that she intends to go back to Kuwait to
        pursue her career. In such a situation, we are of
        the considered opinion that as a major, she is
        entitled to exercise her choice and freedom and
        the Court cannot get into the aspect whether she
        has been forced by the father or not.    There may
        be ample reasons on her behalf to go back to her
        father in Kuwait, but we are not concerned with
        her reasons.    What she has stated before the
        Court, that alone matters and that is the heart of
        the reasoning for this Court, which keeps all
        controversies at bay.
        10. It needs no special emphasis to state that
        attaining the age of majority in an individual’s
        life has its own significance. She/He is entitled

                                                               8
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 597 OF 2018

        to make her/his choice.    The courts cannot, as
        long as the choice remains, assume the role of
        parens patriae. The daughter is entitled to enjoy
        her freedom as the law permits and the court
        should not assume the role of a super guardian
        being moved by any kind of sentiment of the mother
        or the egotism of the father.   We say so without
        any reservation.”


       It may be significant to note that insofar as Thushara

is   concerned,   she   has    expressed   her   desire   to   be   with

appellant No. 1.

       Accordingly, we allow this appeal and set aside the

impugned    judgment    of    the   High   Court.    However,       since

Thushara has not appeared as she was not made party in these

proceedings, while setting aside the directions of the High

Court entrusting the custody of Thushara to respondent No.

4, we make it clear that the freedom of choice would be of

Thushara as to with whom she wants to live.




                                     …………………………………………………………., J.
                                     [ A.K. SIKRI ]




                                     …………………………………………………………., J.
                                     [ ASHOK BHUSHAN ]

New Delhi;
April 20, 2018.


                                                                            9

