
Supreme Court of India
Mahender Chawla vs Union Of India Ministry Of Home ... on 5 December, 2018Author: A Sikri
Bench: S A Nazeer, A Sikri
                                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                               CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                         WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 156 OF 2016


                         MAHENDER CHAWLA & ORS.                                       .....PETITIONER(S)

                                                                VERSUS

                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                      .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                           JUDGMENT

                         A.K. SIKRI, J.

                                        The instant writ petition filed by the petitioners under Article

                                32 of the Constitution of India raises important issues touching

                                upon the efficacy of the criminal justice system in this country. In

                                an adversarial system, which is prevalent by India, the court is

                                supposed to decide the cases on the basis of evidence produced

                                before it. This evidence can be in the form of documents. It can

                                be oral evidence as well, i.e., the deposition of witnesses. The

Signature Not Verified
                                witnesses, thus, play a vital role in facilitating the court to arrive at
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.12.05


                                correct findings on disputed questions of facts and to find out
16:10:52 IST
Reason:

                                where the truth lies. They are, therefore, backbone in decision
                         Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                 Page 1 of 41
       making process. Whenever, in a dispute, the two sides come out

       with conflicting version, the witnesses become important tool to

       arrive at right conclusions, thereby advancing justice in a matter.

       This principle applies with more vigor and strength in criminal

       cases inasmuch as most of such cases are decided on the basis

       of testimonies of the witnesses, particularly, eye-witnesses, who

       may have seen actual occurrence/crime. It is for this reason that

       Bentham stated more than 150 years ago that “witnesses are

       eyes and ears of justice”.

2)      Thus, witnesses are important players in the judicial system, who

        help the judges in arriving at correct factual findings.         The

        instrument of evidence is the medium through which facts, either

        disputed or required to be proved, are effectively conveyed to the

        courts. This evidence in the form of documentary and oral is

        given by the witnesses.        A witness may be a partisan or

        interested witness, i.e., a witness who is in a near relation with

        the victim of crime or is concerned with conviction of the accused

        person. Even his testimony is relevant, though, stricter scrutiny is

        required while adjudging the credence of such a victim. However,

        apart from these witnesses or the witnesses who may themselves

        be the victims, other witnesses may not have any personal


Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                              Page 2 of 41
        interest in the outcome of a case. They still help the judicial

        system. In the words of Whittaker Chambers, a witness is “a

        man whose life and faith are so completely one that when the

        challenge comes to step out and testify for his faith, he does so,

        disregarding all risks, accepting all consequences 1.”


3)      The importance of the witness, particularly in a criminal trial is

        highlighted in a book in the following manner:

               "In search of truth, he plays that sacred role of the sun,
               which eliminates the darkness of ignorance and illuminates
               the face of justice, encircled by devils of humanity and
               compassion.

               xxx     xxx     xxx

               The value of witnesses can’t be denied, keeping in view
               the dependency of the criminal proceedings on the
               testimonies and cooperation of witnesses in all the stages
               of the proceedings, especially in those cases where the
               prosecution has to establish the guilt with absolute
               certainty via oral cross-examination of witnesses in
               hearings open to the world at large. In such cases, the
               testimony of a witness, even if not as an eye witness, may
               prove to be crucial in determining the circumstances in
               which the crime might have been committed...”2


               Notwithstanding the same, the conditions of witnesses in

        Indian Legal System can be termed as ‘pathetic’.                          There are

        many threats faced by the witnesses at various stages of an

        investigation and then during the trial of a case. Apart from facing


1  Whittaker Chambers, WITNESS QUOTES (January 7, 2014, 10.30 am),
   http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/keywords/witness.
2 Witness Protection in Criminal Trial in India by Girish Abhyankar & Asawari Abhyankar
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                                 Page 3 of 41
        life threatening intimidation to himself and to his relatives, he may

        have to face the trauma of attending the court regularly. Because

        of the lack of Witness Protection Programme in India and the

        treatment that is meted out to them, there is a tendency of

        reluctance in coming forward and making statement during the

        investigation and/or testify in courts. These witnesses neither

        have any legal remedy nor do they get suitably treated. The

        present legal system takes witnesses completely for granted.

        They are summoned to court regardless of their financial and

        personal conditions. Many times they are made to appear long

        after the incident of the alleged crime, which significantly

        hampers their ability to recall necessary details at the time of

        actual crime. They are not even suitably remunerated for the loss

        of time and the expenditure towards conveyance etc.


4)      In Swaran Singh vs. State of Punjab3, this Court speaking

        through Wadhwa, J. expressed view on conditions of witnesses

        by stating that:

               "The witnesses are harassed a lot. They come from
               distant places and see the case is adjourned. They have
               to attend the court many times on their own. It has
               become routine that case is adjourned till the witness is
               tired and will stop coming to court. In this process lawyers
               also play an important role.        Sometimes witness is
               threatened, maimed, or even bribed.            There is no
3 (2000) 5 SCC 68 at 678.
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 4 of 41
               protection to the witnesses. By adjourning the case the
               court also becomes a party to such miscarriage of justice.
               The witness is not given respect by the court. They are
               pulled out of the court room by the peon. After waiting for
               the whole day he sees the matter being adjourned. There
               is no proper place for him to sit and drink a glass of water.
               When he appears, he is subjected to prolong stretched
               examinations and cross examinations. For these reasons
               persons avoid becoming a witness and because of this
               administration of justice are hampered. The witnesses are
               not paid money within time. The High Courts must be
               vigilant in these matters and should avoid harassment in
               these matters by subordinate staff. The witnesses should
               be paid immediately irrespective of the fact whether he
               examines or the matter is adjourned. The time has come
               now that all courts should be linked with each other
               through computer. The Bar Council of India has to play
               important role in this process to put the criminal justice
               system on track. Though the trial judge is aware that
               witness is telling lie still he is not ready to file complaint
               against such witness because he is required to sign the
               same. There is need to amend section 340(3)(b) of
               Cr.P.C.”


5)      It hardly needs to be emphasised that one of the main reasons

        for witnesses to turn hostile is that they are not accorded

        appropriate protection by the State. It is a harsh reality,

        particularly, in those cases where the accused persons/criminals

        are tried for heinous offences, or where the accused persons are

        influential persons or in a dominating position that they make

        attempts to terrorize or intimidate the witnesses because of which

        these witnesses either avoid coming to courts or refrain from

        deposing truthfully. This unfortunate situation prevails because of

        the reason that the State has not undertaken any protective


Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                    Page 5 of 41
        measure to ensure the safety of these witnesses, commonly

        known as ‘witness protection’.

6)      Over the last many years criminal justice system in this country

        has been witness to traumatic experience where witnesses turn

        hostile. This has been happening very frequently. There may be

        many causes for this sordid phenomena.

7)      In Ramesh and Others vs. State of Haryana4, this Court had

        indicated some of the reasons which make witnesses turn hostile,

        as can be discerned from the following discussion.

               "40. In some of the judgments in past few years, this Court
               has commented upon such peculiar behaviour of
               witnesses turning hostile and we would like to quote from
               few such judgments. In Krishna Mochi v. State of
               Bihar [Krishna Mochi v. State of Bihar, (2002) 6 SCC 81 :
               2002 SCC (Cri) 1220] , this Court observed as under:
               (SCC p. 104, para 31)


                   “31. It is a matter of common experience that in
                   recent times there has been a sharp decline of
                   ethical values in public life even in developed
                   countries much less developing one, like ours,
                   where the ratio of decline is higher. Even in
                   ordinary cases, witnesses are not inclined to
                   depose or their evidence is not found to be
                   credible by courts for manifold reasons. One of the
                   reasons may be that they do not have courage to
                   depose against an accused because of threats to
                   their life, more so when the offenders are habitual
                   criminals or high-ups in the Government or close
                   to powers, which may be political, economic or
                   other powers including muscle power.”


4 (2017) 1 SCC 529
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                 Page 6 of 41
               "41. Likewise, in Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (5) v. State of
               Gujarat [Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (5) v. State of Gujarat,
               (2006) 3 SCC 374 : (2006) 2 SCC (Cri) 8] , this Court
               highlighted the problem with the following observations:
               (SCC pp. 396-98, paras 40-41)

                   “40. “Witnesses” as Bentham said: “are the eyes
                   and ears of justice”. Hence, the importance and
                   primacy of the quality of trial process. If the
                   witness himself is incapacitated from acting as
                   eyes and ears of justice, the trial gets putrefied
                   and paralysed, and it no longer can constitute a
                   fair trial. The incapacitation may be due to several
                   factors, like the witness being not in a position for
                   reasons beyond control to speak the truth in the
                   court or due to negligence or ignorance or some
                   corrupt collusion. Time has become ripe to act on
                   account of numerous experiences faced by the
                   court on account of frequent turning of witnesses
                   as hostile, either due to threats, coercion, lures
                   and monetary considerations at the instance of
                   those in power, their henchmen and hirelings,
                   political clouts and patronage and innumerable
                   other corrupt practices ingeniously adopted to
                   smother and stifle truth and realities coming out
                   to surface.… Broader public and societal interests
                   require that the victims of the crime who are not
                   ordinarily parties to prosecution and the interests
                   of the State represented by their prosecuting
                   agencies do not suffer.… There comes the need for
                   protecting the witness. Time has come when
                   serious and undiluted thoughts are to be bestowed
                   for protecting witnesses so that the ultimate truth
                   presented before the court and justice triumphs
                   and that the trial is not reduced to a mockery. …

                   41. The State has a definite role to play in
                   protecting the witnesses, to start with at least in
                   sensitive cases involving those in power, who have
                   political patronage and could wield muscle and
                   money power, to avert trial getting tainted and
                   derailed and truth becoming a casualty. As a
                   protector of its citizens it has to ensure that during
                   a trial in court the witness could safely depose the
                   truth without any fear of being haunted by those
                   against whom he had deposed. Every State has a
                   constitutional obligation and duty to protect the
                   life and liberty of its citizens. That is the
                   fundamental requirement for observance of the
                   rule of law. There cannot be any deviation from
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                   Page 7 of 41
                   this requirement because of any extraneous
                   factors like caste, creed, religion, political belief or
                   ideology. Every State is supposed to know these
                   fundamental requirements and this needs no
                   retaliation (sic repetition). We can only say this
                   with regard to the criticism levelled against the
                   State of Gujarat. Some legislative enactments like
                   the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
                   Act, 1987 (in short “the TADA Act”) have taken
                   note of the reluctance shown by witnesses to
                   depose against people with muscle power, money
                   power or political power which has become the
                   order of the day. If ultimately truth is to be arrived
                   at, the eyes and ears of justice have to be
                   protected so that the interests of justice do not get
                   incapacitated in the sense of making the
                   proceedings before the courts mere mock trials as
                   are usually seen in movies.”

               "42. Likewise, in Sakshi v. Union of India [Sakshi v. Union
               of India, (2004) 5 SCC 518 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 1645] , the
               menace of witnesses turning hostile was again described
               in the following words: (SCC pp. 544-45, para 32)

               “32. The mere sight of the accused may induce an
               element of extreme fear in the mind of the victim or the
               witnesses or can put them in a state of shock. In such a
               situation he or she may not be able to give full details
               of the incident which may result in miscarriage of
               justice. Therefore, a screen or some such arrangement
               can be made where the victim or witnesses do not have
               to undergo the trauma of seeing the body or the face of
               the accused. Often the questions put in cross-
               examination are purposely designed to embarrass or
               confuse the victims of rape and child abuse. The object
               is that out of the feeling of shame or embarrassment,
               the victim may not speak out or give details of certain
               acts committed by the accused. It will, therefore, be
               better if the questions to be put by the accused in
               cross-examination are given in writing to the presiding
               officer of the court, who may put the same to the victim
               or witnesses in a language which is not embarrassing.
               There can hardly be any objection to the other
               suggestion given by the petitioner that whenever a
               child or victim of rape is required to give testimony,
               sufficient breaks should be given as and when required.
               The provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 327 CrPC
               should also apply in inquiry or trial of offences under
               Sections 354 and 377 IPC.”

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                     Page 8 of 41
               43. In State v. Sanjeev Nanda [State v. Sanjeev Nanda,
               (2012) 8 SCC 450 : (2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 487 : (2012) 3
               SCC (Civ) 899] , the Court felt constrained in reiterating
               the growing disturbing trend: (SCC pp. 486-87, paras 99-
               101)
               “99. Witness turning hostile is a major disturbing factor
               faced by the criminal courts in India. Reasons are many
               for the witnesses turning hostile, but of late, we see,
               especially in high profile cases, there is a regularity in
               the witnesses turning hostile, either due to monetary
               consideration or by other tempting offers which
               undermine the entire criminal justice system and
               people carry the impression that the mighty and
               powerful can always get away from the clutches of law,
               thereby eroding people's faith in the system.

               100. This Court in State of U.P. v. Ramesh Prasad
               Misra [State of U.P. v. Ramesh Prasad Misra, (1996) 10
               SCC 360 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 1278] held that it is equally
               settled law that the evidence of a hostile witness could
               not be totally rejected, if spoken in favour of the
               prosecution or the accused, but it can be subjected to
               closest scrutiny and that portion of the evidence which
               is consistent with the case of the prosecution or
               defence may be accepted. In K. Anbazhaganv. Supt. of
               Police [K. Anbazhagan v. Supt. of Police, (2004) 3 SCC
               767 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 882] , this Court held that if a
               court finds that in the process the credit of the witness
               has not been completely shaken, he may after reading
               and considering the evidence of the witness as a whole,
               with due caution, accept, in the light of the evidence on
               the record that part of his testimony which it finds to be
               creditworthy and act upon it. This is exactly what was
               done in the instant case by both the trial court and the
               High Court [Sanjeev Nanda v. State, 2009 SCC OnLine
               Del 2039 : (2009) 160 DLT 775] and they found the
               accused guilty.

               101. We cannot, however, close our eyes to the
               disturbing fact in the instant case where even the
               injured witness, who was present on the spot, turned
               hostile. This Court in Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of
               Delhi) [Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010) 6
               SCC 1 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 1385] and in Zahira
               Habibullah Sheikh (5) v. State of Gujarat [Zahira
               Habibullah Sheikh (5) v. State of Gujarat, (2006) 3 SCC
               374 : (2006) 2 SCC (Cri) 8] had highlighted the glaring
               defects in the system like non-recording of the
               statements correctly by the police and the retraction of
               the statements by the prosecution witness due to
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                Page 9 of 41
               intimidation, inducement and other methods of
               manipulation. Courts, however, cannot shut their eyes
               to the reality. If a witness becomes hostile to subvert
               the judicial process, the court shall not stand as a mute
               spectator and every effort should be made to bring
               home the truth. Criminal judicial system cannot be
               overturned by those gullible witnesses who act under
               pressure, inducement or intimidation. Further, Section
               193 IPC imposes punishment for giving false evidence
               but is seldom invoked.”

               44. On the analysis of various cases, the following reasons
               can be discerned which make witnesses retracting their
               statements before the court and turning hostile:
               (i) Threat/Intimidation.
               (ii) Inducement by various means.
               (iii) Use of muscle and money power by the accused.
               (iv) Use of stock witnesses.
               (v) Protracted trials.
               (vi) Hassles faced by the witnesses during investigation
               and trial.
               (vii) Non-existence of any clear-cut legislation to check
               hostility of witness.

               45. Threat and intimidation has been one of the major
               causes for the hostility of witnesses. Bentham said:
               “witnesses are the eyes and ears of justice”. When the
               witnesses are not able to depose correctly in the court of
               law, it results in low rate of conviction and many times
               even hardened criminals escape the conviction. It shakes
               public confidence in the criminal justice delivery system. It
               is for this reason there has been a lot of discussion on
               witness protection and from various quarters demand is
               made for the State to play a definite role in coming out with
               witness protection programme, at least in sensitive cases
               involving those in power, who have political patronage and
               could wield muscle and money power, to avert trial getting
               tainted and derailed and truth becoming a casualty. A stern
               and emphatic message to this effect was given in Zahira
               Habibullah case [Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (5) v. State of
               Gujarat, (2006) 3 SCC 374 : (2006) 2 SCC (Cri) 8] as well.

               46. Justifying the measures to be taken for witness
               protection to enable the witnesses to depose truthfully and
               without fear, Justice Malimath Committee Report on
               Reforms of Criminal Justice System, 2003 has remarked
               as under:

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 10 of 41
                   “11.3. Another major problem is about safety of
                   witnesses and their family members who face
                   danger at different stages. They are often
                   threatened and the seriousness of the threat
                   depends upon the type of the case and the
                   background of the accused and his family. Many
                   times crucial witnesses are threatened or injured
                   prior to their testifying in the court. If the witness
                   is still not amenable he may even be murdered. In
                   such situations the witness will not come forward
                   to give evidence unless he is assured of protection
                   or is guaranteed anonymity of some form of
                   physical disguise. … Time has come for a
                   comprehensive law being enacted for protection of
                   the witness and members of his family.”

                   47. Almost to similar effect are the observations of
                   the Law Commission of India in its 198th Report
                   [ Report on “witness identity protection and
                   witness protection programmes”.] , as can be seen
                   from the following discussion therein:

                   “The reason is not far to seek. In the case of
                   victims of terrorism and sexual offences against
                   women and juveniles, we are dealing with a
                   section of society consisting of very vulnerable
                   people, be they victims or witnesses. The victims
                   and witnesses are under fear of or danger to their
                   lives or lives of their relations or to their property.
                   It is obvious that in the case of serious offences
                   under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and other
                   special enactments, some of which we have
                   referred to above, there are bound to be
                   absolutely similar situations for victims and
                   witnesses. While in the case of certain offences
                   under special statutes such fear or danger to
                   victims and witnesses may be more common and
                   pronounced, in the case of victims and witnesses
                   involved or concerned with some serious offences,
                   fear may be no less important. Obviously, if the
                   trial in the case of special offences is to be fair
                   both to the accused as well as to the
                   victims/witnesses, then there is no reason as to
                   why it should not be equally fair in the case of
                   other general offences of serious nature falling
                   under the Indian Penal Code, 1860. It is the fear or
                   danger or rather the likelihood thereof that is
                   common to both cases. That is why several


Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                   Page 11 of 41
                   general statutes in other countries provide for
                   victim and witness protection.”




8)      All this has created problems of low convictions in India. This has

        serious repercussions on the criminal justice system itself.

        Criminal justice is closely associated with human rights.

        Whereas, on the one hand, it is to be ensured that no innocent

        person is convicted and thereby deprived of his liberty, it is of

        equal importance to ensure, on the other hand, that victims of

        crime get justice by punishing the offender.           In this whole

        process, protection of witnesses assumes significance to enable

        them to depose fearlessly and truthfully. That would also ensure

        fair trial as well, which is another concomitant of the rule of law.

9)      Since this case relates to the issue of protection of witnesses, we

        are eschewing any further discussion on other miseries faced by

        the witnesses, though we emphasise the need for addressing

        other problems as well, at appropriate level, if the criminal justice

        system in this country is to succeed. Adverting to the importance

        of witness protection, we may mention that it has been

        highlighted and emphasised by the courts in India, including this

        Court, time and again. Issues of identity protection of identity of

        witnesses and witness protection programme have been raised in

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                               Page 12 of 41
        number of judgments like NHRC vs. State of Gujarat5, People’s

        Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) vs. Union of India 6, Zahira

        vs. State of Gujarat7, Sakshi vs. Union of India 8 and Zahira

        Habibulla Sheikh vs. Gujarat9.

10)     In People’s Union for Civil Liberties, wherein constitutionality

        some of the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA),

        2002, were challenged, the Court carefully analyzed Section 30

        of the Act, which had mentioned about the protection of

        witnesses. This provision provides for the proceedings to be held

        in camera in order to keep the identity of witness confidential. The

        Court felt the reality that very often witnesses do not come

        forward to testify before court in serious crimes. Witnesses are

        not ready to give evidence mainly because their lives might be in

        danger. In the court’s view, Section 30 of the Act maintains a

        balance between the rights of a witness, the rights of an accused

        and the interest of the public. However, secrecy of the witness is

        an exception and not a rule under this section.

11)     The protection of a child witness, who may also be a victim,



5   2003 (9) SCALE 329
6   2003 (10( SCALE 967
7   (2004) 4 SCC 158
8   (2004) 5 SCC 518
9   2006 (3) SCALE 967

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                             Page 13 of 41
        becomes all the more important. In Sakshi vs. Union of India10,

        the Court stressed that there is a dire need to come up with a

        legislation for the protection of witnesses. The Court also had

        issued certain guidelines on the procedure of taking of evidence

        from a child witness. The Court also pointed out the need for

        special protection to a victim of sexual abuse at the time of

        recording her statement in court. The petitioner in that case had

        given certain suggestions for effectively dealing with the special

        provisions for testimony in child sexual abuse cases, which were

        as follows:

a)      The judges shall allow the use of a videotaped interview of the

        testimony of the child in the presence of a child-support person.

b)      A child could be permitted to testify through closed circuit

        television or from behind a screen to acquire an honest and frank

        account of the acts complained of without any fear.

c)      Only the judge should be allowed to cross-examine a minor on

        the basis of the questions given by the defence in writing after the

        examination of the minor.

d)      During the testimony of the child, sufficient interval should be

        provided as and when she requires it.
10 (2004) 5 SCC 518
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                             Page 14 of 41
12)     In some other judgments, this Court gave some more guidelines,

        in the following manner:

a)      Sections 354 and 377 of the Indian Penal Code should be tried

        and inquired on the same principles mentioned under sub-

        section (2) of Section 327 Cr.P.C.

b)      While holding the trial of rape or child sex abuse, some sort of

        arrangements like a screen or something like it may be used so

        as to make sure that victim or witnesses (who are equally

        vulnerable and need protection like the victim) do not confront the

        accused;

c)      Questions raised during the cross-examination by the counsel of

        the accused that are directly related to and be reminiscent to the

        victim or the witnesses of the incident should be written down and

        given to the presiding officer of the court in advance.         The

        presiding officer must put forth those questions to the victim or

        witness in simple and clear language and as far as possible

        without making her uncomfortable;

13)     It hardly needs to be emphasised that failure to hear material

        witness is denial of fair trial.   The practice, however, to give

        protection to the witnesses is based on ad hocism, i.e., on case
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                            Page 15 of 41
        to case basis. The Courts have also, in the process, adopted

        different means to ensure witness protection, which can be stated

        in brief detail:

        (a)    Publication of evidence of the witness only during the

        course of trial and not after [Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and

        Others vs. State of Maharashtra and Another; [1966 (3) SCR

        744]

        (b)    Re-trial allowed due to apprehension and threat to the life of

        witness [Sunil Kumar Pal vs. Phota Sheikh and Other; AIR

        1984 SC 1591]

        (c)    Necessity of anonymity for victims in cases of rape [Delhi

        Domestic Working Women’s Forum vs. Union of India; (1995)

        1 SCC 14)]

        (d)    Discouraging the practice of obtaining adjournments in

        cases when witness is present and accused is absent. [State of

        U.P. vs. Shambhu Nath Singh; (2001) 4 SCC 667]

        (e)    Making        threatening   of   witnesses   as   a   ground    for

        cancellation of bail [Ram Govind Upadhyay v. Sudarshan

        Singh; II (2002) SLT 587]

        (f)    Cross-examination by video conferencing — This is one

        of the innovative methods devised, which is specifically helpful to

        the victims of sexual crimes, particularly, child witnesses who are

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 16 of 41
        victims of crime as well.

14)     In the instant case itself the petitioners have approached this

        Court with the allegations that in the trials that are going on

        against Asaram, who is charged with the offence of committing

        rapes in numerous cases, the witnesses have been frightened

        with serious consequences in case they depose against Asaram.

        It is alleged that as many as 10 witnesses have already been

        attacked and three witnesses have been killed.

15)     There are four petitioners in this petition.     These petitioners

        include a witness, father of a murdered witness, father of the child

        rape victim and a journalist who escaped a murder attempt by

        goons of godman Asaram and his son Naryana Sai and still faces

        death threats by a jailed sharpshooter of Asaram and Narayan

        Sai.      It is stated that Petitioner No. 1 Mahender Chawla

        miraculously survived a murder attempt on his life for daring to

        testify against so called godman, Asaram Bapu and his son

        Narayan Sai in horrifying cases of rape of a child and two sisters.

        Petitioner no. 1 also witnessed Narayan Sai doing Tantrik

        Practice on a dead body of a child in an Asaram in Madhya

        Pradesh, in which till date there has not been any investigation

        due to the influence of Asaram. Petitioner no. 2 Naresh Gupta is

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                             Page 17 of 41
        the father of a murdered witness, named, Akhil Gupta. Akhil was

        killed for daring to be a witness against Asaram. Petitioner no. 3

        Karamvir Singh is the father of a child, who was raped by

        Asaram.        Petitioner no. 3’s son Somvir was threatened by 2

        attackers despite having State police security.      The attackers

        were apprehended and released on bail. Shockingly the same

        attacker, named Narayan Pandey, later killed a rape-case

        prosecution witness Kripal Singh. The child rape victim’s family

        has been attacked, threatened and lives in constant fear. It is

        also alleged that despite being threatened, the Uttar Pradesh

        Police shockingly withdrew half of their security. Petitioner no. 4,

        Narendra Yadav is a journalist who survived a murder attempt on

        his life because he dared to write articles to the dislike of Asaram

        Bapu and Narayan Sai. He now lives in constant fear of being

        killed as the Uttar Pradesh Police has given him a solitary

        security guard for just eight hours a day, leaving him to fend for

        himself through the remaining 16 hours. It is also averred that the

        sharp shooter of Asaram, Narayan Pandey, who is in           jail for

        murdering a witness Kripal Singh, writes threatening letters to him

        from inside the jail.

16)     The petitioners have prayed for a court monitored SIT or a CBI


Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                             Page 18 of 41
        probe. It is stated by the petitioners that the prevailing feeling of

        fear amongst witnesses in the country seriously impairs the right

        of the people of this country to live in a free society governed by

        rule of law. The right to testify in courts in a free and fair manner

        without any pressure and threat whatsoever is under serious

        attack today. If one is unable to testify in courts due to threats or

        other pressures, then it is a clear violation of Article 21 of the

        Constitution. The right to life guaranteed to the people of this

        country also includes in its fold the right to live in a society, which

        is free from crime and fear and right of witnesses to testify in

        courts without fear or pressure.

17)     The petitioners had initially impleaded Union of India as

        Respondent No. 1 and States of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,

        Rajasthan, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh as Respondent Nos. 2

        to 6.

18)     Appreciating the importance and seriousness of the matter, this

        Court issued show cause notices in the petition on November 18,

        2016. After the service of the notice when the matter came up for

        hearing on March 24, 2017, this Court also directed the States of

        Uttar Pradesh and Haryana to ensure full and proper protection to

        the petitioners by providing adequate security.

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                               Page 19 of 41
19)     When the matter was again listed on August 28, 2017, Mr. K.K.

        Venugopal, learned Attorney General appeared on behalf of the

        Union of India, along with Ms. Pinky Anand, Additional Solicitor

        General. It was pointed out that since this Court was primarily

        dealing      with     the      issue   pertaining   to   witness   protection

        programme, it would be appropriate that other States are also

        impleaded inasmuch as the issue had PAN India significant and

        witness protection programme should be available in all the

        States. The petitioners were, accordingly, directed to implead

        other States as well and they be served with the notice of this

        petition.     This is how the coverage of the petition has been

        extended to the entire country, encompassing all the States and

        Union Territories.

20)     The petition was amended and all the States and Union

        Territories have been served and are represented through their

        respective counsel. When the matter was thereafter taken up for

        hearing on November 17, 2017 all the respondents were called

        upon to file their responses indicating as to what steps could be

        taken to have the witness protection programme in place.

21)     Mr. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India was also


Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                       Page 20 of 41
        requested to give suggestions in the form of a draft scheme. It is

        heartening to note that Union of India did not take this petition as

        adversarial and understood the necessity of having such a

        scheme in the larger public interest. With this sensitivity in mind,

        Ministry of Home Affairs have prepared a draft witness protection

        scheme, 2018 and placed the same on record of this case. This

        was noted in the orders dated April 13, 2018 and the State

        Governments as well as Union Territories, who had already been

        supplied with the copy of the draft scheme by the Ministry itself,

        were asked to furnish their comments by May 31, 2018 to the

        Ministry of Home Affairs. The Union Government was impressed

        upon        to     finalise    the   scheme   after    receiving     the

        comments/suggestions from the various Governments.                 Order

        dated April 13, 2018, incorporating the aforesaid aspects, is

        reproduced below:

               "We are informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs has
               prepared a draft Witness Protection Scheme 2018. A copy
               of the said draft scheme is handed over to us in the court
               today. Vide letter dated 22nd March, 2018, a copy of the
               said scheme is also provided to all the State Governments
               and the Union Territories Administration requesting them to
               furnish their comments by 9th April, 2018. Thereafter,
               again by reminder dated 11th April, 2018 all the State
               Governments and Union Territories were asked to furnish
               their comments by 31st May, 2018.
               We expect all the State Governments as well as the Union
               Territories to furnish their comments by the aforesaid
               stipulated date of 31st May, 2018 to the Ministry of Home
               Affairs. After receiving the comments/suggestions the draft

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                Page 21 of 41
               Witness Protection Scheme 2018 shall be finalized by the
               Government, Ministry of Home Affairs before the next date.

               List the matter in the second week of August, 2018.

               Learned amicus curiae is also at liberty to furnish his
               suggestions.”


22)     When the matter was taken up on November 19, 2018, the

        learned Attorney General informed that after taking the inputs

        from various States and Union Territories, Central Government

        had finalized the scheme and filed it in this Court on November

        06, 2018 supported by its affidavit. He was also candid in his

        submission that this Court can pass appropriate orders directing

        all the States to adopt that scheme and provide a witness

        protection in accordance therewith till the time appropriate

        legislation in this behalf is passed.

23)     We may place on record that as per the affidavit of the Central

        Government, the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 is based on

        the inputs received from 18 States/Union Territories, 5 States

        Legal Services Authorities and open sources including civil

        society, three High Courts as well as from Police personnel. It is

        also stated that the scheme has been finalised in consultation

        with National Legal Services Authority (NALSA). It is mentioned

        that the aim and objective of the scheme is to ensure that the


Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                 Page 22 of 41
        investigation, prosecution and trial of criminal offences is not

        prejudiced because witnesses are intimidated or frightened to

        give evidence without protection from violent or other criminal

        recrimination. It aims to promote law enforcement by facilitating

        the protection of persons who are involved directly or indirectly in

        providing assistance to criminal law enforcement agencies and

        overall administration of justice.

24)     The affidavit further emphasises that the witnesses need to be

        given the confidence to come forward to assist law enforcement

        and judicial authorities with full assurance of safety and the

        present Scheme is aimed to identify the series of measures that

        may be adopted to safeguard witnesses and their family

        members from intimidate and threats against their lives,

        reputation and property.

25)     At this stage, we reproduce Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 as

        filed, in its entirety:

               "Witness Protection Scheme, 2018

                                       PREFACE
               Aims & Objective:
               The ability of a witness to give testimony in a judicial
               setting or to cooperate with law enforcement and
               investigations without fear of intimidation or reprisal is

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                               Page 23 of 41
               essential in maintaining the rule of law. The objective of
               this Scheme is to ensure that the investigation,
               prosecution and trial of criminal offences is not prejudiced
               because witnesses are intimidated or frightened to give
               evidence without protection from violent or other criminal
               recrimination. It aims to promote law enforcement by
               facilitating the protection of persons who are involved
               directly or indirectly in providing assistance to criminal law
               enforcement agencies and overall administration of
               Justice. Witnesses need to be given the confidence to
               come forward to assist law enforcement and Judicial
               Authorities with full assurance of safety. It is aimed to
               identify series of measures that may be adopted to
               safeguard witnesses and their family members from
               intimidation and threats against their lives, reputation and
               property.

               Need and justification for the scheme:

               Jeremy Bentham has said that “Witnesses are the eyes
               and ears of justice.” In cases involving influential people,
               witnesses turn hostile because of threat to life and
               property. Witnesses find that there is no legal obligation by
               the state for extending any security.

               Hon’ble Supreme Court of India also held in State of Gujrat
               v. Anirudh Singh (1997) 6 SCC 514 that: “It is the salutary
               duty of every witness who has the knowledge of the
               commission of the crime, to assist the State in giving
               evidence.” Malimath Committee on Reforms of Criminal
               Justice System, 2003 said in its report that “By giving
               evidence relating to the commission of an offence, he
               performs a sacred duty of assisting the court to discover
               the truth”. Zahira Habibulla H. Shiekh and Another v. State
               of Gujarat 2004 (4) SCC 158 SC while defining Fair Trial
               said “If the witnesses get threatened or are forced to give
               false evidence that also would not result in a fair trial’’.

               First ever reference to Witness Protection in India came in
               14th Report of the Law Commission of India in 1958.
               Further reference on the subject are found in 154th and
               178th report of the Law Commission in India. 198 th Report
               of the Law Commission of India titled as “Witness Identity
               Protection and Witness Protection Programmes, 2006” is
               dedicated to the subject.

               Hon’ble Supreme Court observed in Zahira case supra,
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                   Page 24 of 41
               “country can afford to expose its morally correct citizens to
               the peril of being harassed by anti-social elements like
               rapists and murderers”.         The 4th National Police
               Commission Report, 1980 noted ‘prosecution witnesses
               are turning hostile because of pressure of accused and
               there is need of regulation to check manipulation of
               witnesses.”

               Legislature has introduced Section 195A IPC in 2006
               making Criminal Intimidation of Witnesses a criminal
               offence punishable with seven years of imprisonment.
               Likewise, in statues namely Juvenile Justice (Acre and
               Protection of Children) Act, 2015, Whistle Blowers
               Protection Act, 2011, Protection of Children from Sexual
               Castes and Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 also
               provides for safeguarding witnesses again the threats.
               However no formal structured programme has been
               introduced as on date for addressing the issue of witness
               protection in a holistic manner.

               In recent year’s extremism, terrorism and organized
               crimes have grown and are becoming stronger and more
               diverse. In the investigation becoming and prosecution of
               such crimes, it is essential that witnesses, have trust in
               criminal justice system. Witnesses need to have the
               confidence to come forward to assist law enforcement and
               prosecuting agencies. They need to be assured that they
               will receive support and protection from intimidation and
               the harm that criminal groups might seek to inflict upon
               them in order to discourage them from co-operating with
               the law enforcement agencies and deposing before the
               court of law. Hence, it is high time that a scheme is put in
               place for addressing the issues of witness protection
               uniformly in the country.

               Scope of the Scheme:

               Witness Protection may be as simple as providing a police
               escort to the witness up to the Courtroom or using modern
               communication technology (such as audio video means)
               for recording of testimony. In other more complex cases,
               involving organised criminal group, extraordinary
               measures are required to ensure the witness’s safety viz.
               anonymity, offering temporary residence in a safe house,
               giving a new identity, and relocation of the witness at an
               undisclosed place. However, Witness protection needs of
               a witness may have to be viewed on case to case basis
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 25 of 41
               depending upon their vulnerability and threat perception.

               1. SHORT TITLE AND COMMENCEMENT:

               (a) The Scheme shall be called “Witness Protection
               Scheme, 2018”
               (b) It shall come into force from the date of Notification.

                                          Part I

               2. DEFINITIONS:

               (a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
               (2 of 1974);

               (b) “Concealment of Identity of Witness” means and
               includes any condition prohibiting publication or revealing,
               in any manner, directly or indirectly, of the name, address
               and other particulars which may lead to the identification of
               the witness during investigation, trial and post-trial stage;

               (c) “Competent Authority” means a Standing Committee
               in each District chaired by District and Sessions Judge
               with Head of the Police in the District as Member and
               Head of the Prosecution in the District as its Member
               Secretary.

               (d) “Family Member” includes parents/guardian, spouse,
               live-in partner, siblings, children,grandchildren of the
               witness;

               (e) "Form" means “Witness Protection Application Form”
               appended to this Scheme;

               (f) “In Camera Proceedings” means proceedings
               wherein the Competent Authority/Court allows only those
               persons who are necessary to be present while hearing
               and deciding the witness protection application or
               deposing in the court;

               (g) “Live Link” means and include a live video link or
               other such arrangement whereby a witness, while not
               being physically present in the courtroom for deposing in
               the matter or interacting with the Competent Authority;

               (h) “Witness Protection Measures” means measures
               spelt out in Clause 7, Part-III, Part-IV and Part V of the
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 26 of 41
               Scheme.

               (i) "Offence" means those offences which are punishable
               with death or life imprisonment or an imprisonment up to
               seven years and above and also offences punishable
               punishable under Section 354, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D
               and 509 of IPC.

               (j) "Threat Analysis Report" means a detailed report
               prepared and submitted by the Head of the Police in the
               District Investigating the case with regard to the
               seriousness and credibility of the threat perception to the
               witness or his family members. It shall contain specific
               details about the nature of threats by the witness or his
               family to their life, reputation or property apart from
               analyzing the extent, the or persons making the threat,
               have the intent, motive and resources to implement the
               theats.

               It shall also categorize the threat perception apart from
               suggesting the specific witness protection measures which
               deserves to be taken in the matter;

               (k) “Witness” means any person, who posses information
               or document about any offence;

               (l) “Witness Protection Application” means an application
               moved by the witness in the prescribed form before a
               Competent Authority for seeking Witness Protection Order.
               It can be moved by the witness, his family member, his
               duly engaged counsel or IO/SHO/SDPO/Prison SP
               concerned and the same shall preferably be got forwarded
               through the Prosecutor concerned;

               (m) “Witness Protection Fund” means the fund created for
               bearing the expenses incurred during the implementation
               of Witness Protection Order passed by the Competent
               Authority under this scheme;

               (n) “Witness Protection Order” means an order passed by
               the Competent Authority detailing the witness protection
               measures to be taken

               (o) “Witness Protection Cell” means a dedicated Cell of
               State/UT Police or Central Police Agencies assigned the
               duty to implement the witness protection order.

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                Page 27 of 41
                                          Part II

               3. CATEGORIES OF WITNESS AS PER THREAT
               PERCEPTION:

               Category ‘A’ : Where the threat extends to life of witness or
               his family members, during investigation/trial or thereafter.

               Category ‘B’ : Where the threat extends to safety,
               reputation or property of the witness or his family
               members, during the investigation/trial or thereafter.

               Category ‘C’ : Where the threat is moderate and extends
               to harassment or intimidation of the witness or his family
               member's,      reputation      or  property, during    the
               investigation/trial or thereafter.

               4. STATE WITNESS PROTECTION FUND:

               (a) There shall be a Fund, namely, the Witness Protection
               Fund from which the expenses incurred during the
               implementation of Witness Protection Order passed by the
               Competent Authority and other related expenditure, shall
               be met.

               (b) The Witness Protection Fund shall comprise the
               following:-
                  i. Budgetary allocation made in the Annual Budget by
                  the State Government;
                  ii. Receipt of amount of costs imposed/ordered to be
                  deposited by the courts/tribunals in the Witness
                  Protection Fund;
                  iii. Donations/contributions from Charitable Institutions/
                  Organizations and individuals permitted by Central/State
                  Governments.
                  iv. Funds contributed under Corporate Social
                  Responsibility.

               (c) The said Fund shall be              operated by the
               Department/Ministry of Home              under   State/UT
               Government.

               5. FILING OF APPLICATION BEFORE COMPETENT
               AUTHORITY:

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 28 of 41
               The application for seeking protection order under this
               scheme can be filed in the prescribed form before the
               Competent Authority of the concerned District where the
               offence is committed, through its Member Secretary along
               with supporting documents, if any.

               6.   PROCEDURE           FOR       PROCESSING          THE
               APPLICATION:

               (a) As and when an application is received by the Member
               Secretary of the Competent Authority, in the prescribed
               form, it shall forthwith pass an order for calling for the
               Threat Analysis Report from the ACP/DSP in charge of the
               concerned Police Sub-Division.

               (b) Depending upon the urgency in the matter owing to
               imminent threat, the Competent Authority can pass orders
               for interim protection of the witness or his family members
               during the pendency of the application.

               (c) The Threat Analysis Report shall be prepared
               expeditiously while maintaining full confidentiality and it
               shall reach the Competent Authority within five working
               days of receipt of the order.

               (d) The Threat Analysis Report shall categorize the threat
               perception and also include suggestive protection
               measures for providing adequate protection to the witness
               or his family.

               (e) While processing the application for witness protection,
               the Competent Authority shall also interact preferably in
               person and if not possible through electronic means with
               the witness and/or his family members/employers or any
               other person deemed fit so as to ascertain the witness
               protection needs of the witness.

               (f) All the hearings on Witness Protection Application shall
               be held in-camera by the Competent Authority while
               maintaining full confidentiality.

               (g) An application shall be disposed of within five working
               days of receipt of Threat Analysis Report from the Police
               authorities.

               (h) The Witness Protection Order passed by the
               Competent Authority shall be implemented by the Witness
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                 Page 29 of 41
               Protection Cell of the State/UT or the Trial Court, as the
               case may be. Overall responsibility of implementation of
               all witness protection orders passed by the Competent
               Authority shall lie on the Head of the Police in the
               State/UT.

               However the Witness Protection Order passed by the
               Competent Authority for change of identity and/or
               relocation shall be implemented by the Department of
               Home of the concerned State/UT.

               (i) Upon passing of a Witness Protection Order, the
               Witness Protection Cell shall file a monthly follow-up report
               before the Competent Authority.

               (j) In case, the Competent Authority finds that there is a
               need to revise the Witness Protection Order or an
               application is moved in this regard, and upon completion of
               trial, a fresh Threat Analysis Report shall be called from
               the ACP/DSP in charge of the concerned Police Sub-
               Division.

               7. TYPES OF PROTECTION MEASURES:

               The witness protection measures ordered shall be
               proportionate to the threat and shall be for a specific
               duration not exceeding three months at a time. They may
               include:

               (a) Ensuring that witness and accused do not come face to
               face during investigation or trial;

               (b) Monitoring of mail and telephone calls;

               (c) Arrangement with the telephone company to change
               the witness’s telephone number or assign him or her an
               unlisted telephone number;

               (d) Installation of security devices in the witness’s home
               such as security doors, CCTV, alarms, fencing etc;

               (e) Concealment of identity of the witness by referring to
               him/her with the changed name or alphabet;

               (f) Emergency contact persons for the witness;

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 30 of 41
               (g) Close protection, regular patrolling around the
               witness’s house;

               (h) Temporary change of residence to a relative’s house or
               a nearby town;

               (i) Escort to and from the court and provision of
               Government vehicle or a State funded conveyance for the
               date of hearing;

               (j) Holding of in-camera trials;

               (k) Allowing a support person to remain present during
               recording of statement and deposition;

               (l) Usage of specially designed vulnerable witness court
               rooms which have special arrangements like live video
               links, one way mirrors and screens apart from separate
               passages for witnesses and accused, with option to modify
               the image of face of the witness and to modify the audio
               feed of the witness’ voice, so that he/she is not identifiable;

               (m) Ensuring expeditious recording of deposition during
               trial on day to day basis without adjournments;

               (n) Awarding time to time periodical financial aids/grants to
               the witness from Witness Protection Fund for the purpose
               of re-location, sustenance or starting a new
               vocation/profession, if desired;

               (o) Any other form of protection measures considered
               necessary.

               8. MONITORING AND REVIEW:

               Once the protection order is passed, the Competent
               Authority would monitor its implementation and can review
               the same in terms of follow-up reports received in the
               matter. However, the Competent Authority shall review the
               Witness Protection Order on a quarterly basis based on
               the monthly follow-up report submitted by the Witness
               Protection Cell.

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                    Page 31 of 41
                                          Part III

               9. PROTECTION OF IDENTITY :-

               During the course of investigation or trial of any offence,
               an application for seeking identity protection can be filed in
               the prescribed form before the Competent Authority
               through its Member Secretary.

               Upon receipt of the application, the Member Secretary of
               the Competent Authority shall call for the Threat Analysis
               Report. The Competent Authority shall examine the
               witness or his family members or any other person it deem
               fit to ascertain whether there is necessity to pass an
               identity protection order.

               During the course of hearing of the application, the identity
               of the witness shall not be revealed to any other person,
               which is likely to lead to the witness identification. The
               Competent Authority can thereafter, dispose of the
               application as per material available on record.

               Once, an order for protection of identity of witness is
               passed by the Competent Authority, it shall be the
               responsibility of Witness Protection Cell to ensure that
               identity of such witness/his or her family members
               including        name/parentage/occupation/address/digital
               footprints are fully protected.

               As long as identity of any witness is protected under an
               order of the Competent Authority, the Witness Protection
               Cell shall provide details of persons who can be contacted
               by the witness in case of emergency.

                                          Part IV

               10. CHANGE OF IDENTITY:-

               In appropriate cases, where there is a request from the
               witness for change of identity and based on the Threat
               Analysis Report, a decision can be taken for conferring a
               new identity to the witness by the Competent Authority.

               Conferring     new      identities includes      new
               name/profession/parentage and providing supporting
               documents acceptable by the Government Agencies. The

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                   Page 32 of 41
               new identities should not deprive the witness from existing
               educational/ professional/property rights.

                                          Part V

               11. RELOCATION OF WITNESS:

               In appropriate cases, where there is a request from the
               witness for relocation and based on the Threat Analysis
               Report, a decision can be taken for relocation of the
               witness by the Competent Authority.

               The Competent Authority may pass an order for witness
               relocation to a safer place within the State/UT or territory
               of the Indian Union keeping in view the safety, welfare and
               wellbeing of the witness. The expenses shall be borne by
               the Witness Protection Fund.

                                          Part VI

               12. WITNESSES TO BE APPRISED OF THE SCHEME:

               Every state shall give wide publicity to this Scheme. The
               IO and the Court shall inform witnesses about the
               existence of "Witness Protection Scheme" and its salient
               features.

               13. CONFIDENTIALITY          AND     PRESERVATION        OF
               RECORDS:

               All stakeholders including the Police, the Prosecution
               Department, Court Staff, Lawyers from both sides shall
               maintain full confidentiality and shall ensure that under no
               circumstance, any record, document or information in
               relation to the proceedings under this scheme shall be
               shared with any person in any manner except with the
               Trial Court/Appellate Court and that too, on a written
               order.

               All the records pertaining to proceedings under this
               scheme shall be preserved till such time the related trial or
               appeal thereof is pending before a Court of Law. After one
               year of disposal of the last Court proceedings, the hard
               copy of the records can be weeded out by the Competent
               Authority after preserving the scanned soft copies of the
               same.

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 33 of 41
               14. RECOVERY OF EXPENSES:

               In case the witness has lodged a false complaint, the
               Home Department of the concerned Government can
               initiate proceedings for recovery of the expenditure
               incurred from the Witness Protection Fund.

               15. REVIEW:

               In case the witness or the police authorities are aggrieved
               by the decisions of the Competent Authority, a review
               application may be filed within 15 days of passing of the
               orders by the Competent Authority.
                               Witness Protection Scheme, 2018
                                Witness Protection Application
                                            under
                               Witness Protection Scheme, 2018

               Before,                                             (To be filed in duplicate)
               The Competent Authority,
               District................................................................

               Application for:

               1. Witness Protection
               2. Witness Identity Protection
               3. New Identity
               4. Witness Relocation

          1.        Particulars of the Witness (Fill in             ---------------------------
                    Capital):                                       ---------------------------
                    1) Name                                         ---------------------------
                    2) Age                                          ---------------------------
                    3) Gender (Male/Female/Other)                   ---------------------------
                    4) Father's/Mother’s Name                       ---------------------------
                    5) Residential Address                          ---------------------------
                    6) Name and other details of family             ---------------------------
                        members of the witness who are              ---------------------------
                        receiving or perceiving threats             ---------------------------
                    7) Contact details (Mobile/e-mail)

          2.        Particulars of Criminal matter:                 ---------------------------
                    1) FIR No.                                      ---------------------------
                    2) Under Section                                ---------------------------
                    3) Police Station                               ---------------------------

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                                    Page 34 of 41
                    4) District                        ---------------------------
                    5) D.D. No. (in case FIR not yet ---------------------------
                    registered)                        ---------------------------
                    6) Cr.Case No. (in case of private
                    complaint)
          3.        Particulars of the                Accused   (if ---------------------------
                    available/known):                               ---------------------------
                    1) Name                                         ---------------------------
                    2) Address                                      ---------------------------
                    3) Phone No.
                    4) Email id
          4.        Name & other particulars of the ---------------------------
                    person giving/suspected of giving ---------------------------
                    threats                           ---------------------------
                                                      ---------------------------
          5.        Nature of threat perception. Please            ---------------------------
                    give brief details of threat received in       ---------------------------
                    the matter with specific date, place,          ---------------------------
                    mode and words used                            ---------------------------
          6.        Type of witness protection measures ---------------------------
                    prayed by/for the witness           ---------------------------
                                                        ---------------------------
                                                        ---------------------------
          7.        Details of Interim / urgent Witness ---------------------------
                    Protection needs, if required       ---------------------------
                                                        ---------------------------
                                                        ---------------------------

               • Applicant/witness can use extra sheets for giving
               additional information.

                                                           _____________________
                                                           (Full Name with signature)
               Date: ..............................

               Place:...........................…

                                             UNDERTAKING

               1.      I undertake that I shall fully cooperate with the
               competent authority and the Department of Home of the
               State and Witness Protection Cell.
               2.      I certify that the information provided by me in this
               application is true and correct to my best knowledge and
               belief.
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                                    Page 35 of 41
               3.     I understand that in case, information given by me
               in this application is found to be false, competent authority
               under the scheme reserves the right to recover the
               expenses incurred on me from out of the Witness
               Protection Fund.

                                                      _____________________
                                                      (Full Name with signature)
               Date: ..............................
               Place:...........................…”


26)     As is clear from its reading, the essential features of the Witness

        Protection Scheme, 2018 include identifying categories of threat

        perceptions, preparation of a “Threat Analysis Report” by the

        Head of the Police, types of protection measures like ensuring

        that the witness and accused do not come face to face during

        investigation etc. protection of identity, change of identity,

        relocation of witness, witnesses to be apprised of the scheme,

        confidentiality and preservation of records, recovery of expenses

        etc.

27)     Since it is beneficial and benevolent scheme which is aimed at

        strengthening the criminal justice system in this country, which

        shall in turn ensure not only access to justice but also advance

        the cause the justice itself, all the States and Union Territories

        also accepted that suitable directions can be passed by the court

        to enforce the said Scheme as a mandate of the court till the


Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                       Page 36 of 41
        enactment of a statute by the Legislatures.

28)     It is clear from the aforesaid events that the Scheme is the

        outcome of the efforts put in by the Central Government with due

        assistance not only from the State Governments as well as Union

        Territories but other stakeholders including Police personnel,

        NALSA and State Legal Services Authorities, High Courts and

        even civil society.            There is no reason not to accede to the

        aforesaid submission of the learned Attorney General and other

        respondents.

29)     As pointed out above, in Sakshi’s case, the Court had insisted

        about the need to come up with a legislation for the protection of

        witnesses.         It had even requested the Law Commission to

        examine certain aspects, which resulted to 172nd review of rape

        laws by the Law Commission. However, the Court specifically

        rejected the suggestion of the Law Commission regarding

        examination of vulnerable witnesses in the absence of accused.

        Having regard to the provisions of Section 273 of the Code of

        Criminal Procedure, which is based on the tenets of principle of

        natural justice, that the witness must be examined in the

        presence of the accused, such a principle cannot be sacrificed in

        trials and in inquiries regarding sexual offences. In such a

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                Page 37 of 41
        scenario         examination    of   these   witnesses   through    video

        conferencing provides the solution which balances the interest of

        the accused as well as vulnerable witnesses.

30)     Part II(7)(L) of the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 provides for

        usage       of    specially    designed   court   room   having    special

        arrangements like live links, one way mirrors, and screens apart

        from separate passages for witnesses and accused with the

        option to modify the image of the face of the witness and to

        modify the audio feed of the witness’s voice, so that he/she is not

        identified.

31)     In consonance with the same, the Delhi Judiciary has already

        established four Vulnerable Witness Deposition Complexes in the

        National Capital Territory, the latest one being at the Dwarka

        District Court, which was established in February, 2017. This

        complex provides facilities like separate witness room, separate

        accused room, play area for the child witnesses, pantry, separate

        toilet and an exclusive & comfortable waiting area and is

        equipped with all facilities of audio-visual exchange for a free

        interface between the presiding Judge, the witness and the

        accused without witness facing the accused. The complex has a

        separate entry for vulnerable witnesses, so that they do not come

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 38 of 41
        in direct contact with accused at any point of time. There are

        provisions for support persons, pre-trial court visit and facilities for

        pick and drop of the witnesses from their residence. In this way,

        all possible efforts have been made for providing comfortable

        environment to vulnerable witnesses at this complex in order to

        enable them to give their best evidence in criminal proceedings.

32)     One of the main reasons behind establishing these Vulnerable

        Witness Deposition Complexes was that a large percentage of

        acquittals in criminal cases is due to witnesses turning hostile and

        giving false testimonies, mostly due to lack of protection for them

        and their families, especially in case of women and children.

33)     In fact, the Supreme Court too, in The State of Maharashtra v.

        Bandu @ Daulat (Order dt. 24.20.2017 in Crl. Appeal No.

        1820/2017) has directed as follows:

               "10. … there should be special centres for examination of
               vulnerable witnesses in criminal cases in the interest of
               conducive environment in Court so as to encourage a
               vulnerable victim to make a statement. Such centres ought
               to be set up with all necessary safeguards. Our attention
               has been drawn to guidelines issued by the Delhi High
               Court for recording evidence of vulnerable witnesses in
               criminal matters and also the fact that four special centres
               have been set up at Delhi for the purpose.
               *****

               12. The directions of Delhi High Court and setting up of
               special centres for vulnerable witnesses as noted above
Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                 Page 39 of 41
               are consistent with the decision of this Court and
               supplement the same. We are of the view that all High
               Courts can adopt such guidelines if the same have not yet
               been adopted with such modifications as may be deemed
               necessary. Setting up of one center for vulnerable
               witnesses may be perhaps required almost in every district
               in the country. All the High Courts may take appropriate
               steps in this direction in due course in phases. At least two
               such centres in the jurisdiction of each High Court may be
               set up within three months from today. Thereafter, more
               such centres may be set up as per decision of the High
               Courts.”


34)     One thing which emerges from the aforesaid discussion is that

        there is a paramount need to have witness protection regime, in a

        statutory form, which all the stakeholders and all the players in

        the criminal justice system concede. At the same time no such

        legislation has been brought about. These are the considerations

        which had influenced this Court to have a holistic regime of

        witness protection which should be considered as law under

        Article 141 of the Constitution till a suitable law is framed.

35)     We, accordingly, direct that :


        (i)    This Court has given its imprimatur to the Scheme prepared

        by respondent No.1 which is approved hereby.              It comes into

        effect forthwith.


        (ii)   The Union of India as well as States and Union Territories

        shall enforce the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 in letter and

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                  Page 40 of 41
        spirit.

        (iii)     It shall be the ‘law’ under Article 141/142 of the Constitution,

        till the enactment of suitable Parliamentary and/or State

        Legislations on the subject.

        (iv)      In line with the aforesaid provisions contained in the

        Scheme, in all the district courts in India, vulnerable witness

        deposition complexes shall be set up by the States and Union

        Territories. This should be achieved within a period of one year,

        i.e., by the end of the year 2019. The Central Government should

        also support this endeavour of the States/Union Territories by

        helping them financially and otherwise.

36)     Writ petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms.

                                                  .............................................J.
                                                                              (A.K. SIKRI)



                                                  .............................................J.
                                                               (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 05, 2018.

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 156 of 2016                                            Page 41 of 41
