
Supreme Court of India
Yogendra Yadav & Ors vs State Of Jharkhand & Anr on 21 July, 2014Author: ……………………………..J.
Bench: Ranjana Prakash Desai, N.V. Ramana
                                                                         NON-REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1205 OF 2014


Yogendra Yadav & Ors.                   …    Appellants

Vs.

The State of Jharkhand & Anr.                …     Respondents


                           J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T


(SMT.) RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI, J.


1.    The appellants are original Accused Nos.1 to 3  respectively  in  P.S.
Meharma Case No.155 of 2004 registered under Sections  341,  323,  324,  504
and 307 read with Section 34 of the  Indian  Penal  Code  (for  short,  ‘the
IPC’).  The  FIR  was  lodged  on  23/09/1994  by  complainant  Anil  Mandal
alleging that the appellants assaulted him and his men  on  22/09/2004.   On
the same day the appellants also filed FIR in respect of the  same  incident
dated 22/09/2004 alleging that complainant Anil Mandal,  Baldev  Mandal  and
others assaulted them.  This FIR was registered at P.S. Meharma  being  Case
No.156 of 2004 under Sections 147, 148, 149, 448, 341, 323 and  380  of  the
IPC.

2.    In both the cases, after investigation,  charge-sheet  was  submitted.
While the cases were going on before  the  2nd  Additional  Sessions  Judge,
Godda, both the parties agreed to compromise the  cases.   A  Panchayat  was
held where with the  intervention  of  the  well-wishers  a  compromise  was
arrived at.  A compromise petition dated 16/11/2011 was signed by  both  the
parties and it was filed in the Court  of  2nd  Additional  Sessions  Judge,
Godda.  An application was filed under Section 231(2) read with Section  311
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘the Code’)  being  S.C.
No. 9/05 for recalling PWs 1 to  6  for  further  cross-examination  on  the
point of compromise.

3.    Learned Additional  Sessions  Judge  by  his  order  dated  16/11/2011
disposed  of  the  said  application.   Learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge
observed that compromise petition  was  signed  by  the  informant  and  the
injured, their signatures were identified by  the  lawyers  and,  therefore,
the compromise was genuine.   He,  however,  observed  that  offences  under
Sections 324, 341, 323 of the IPC are compoundable with  the  permission  of
the court and offences under Sections 326, 307 read with Section 34  of  the
IPC are  non-compoundable.   He,  therefore,  accepted  the  application  in
respect of offences under Sections 323, 324 and 341 of the IPC.    The  said
offences were compounded  and  the  accused  were  acquitted  of  the  same.
Prayer for compounding  of  offences  under  Sections  326,  307  read  with
Section 34 of the IPC  was  rejected.   Learned  Additional  Sessions  Judge
rejected the application for recalling of witnesses.  He directed  that  the
case should proceed against the accused for  offences  under  Sections  326,
307 read with Section 34 of the IPC.   This  order  was  challenged  by  the
appellants in the High Court of Jharkhand.  By the impugned order  the  High
Court dismissed the challenge, hence, this appeal.

4.    Now, the  question  before  this  Court  is  whether  this  Court  can
compound the offences under Sections 326 and 307 of the IPC which  are  non-
compoundable.   Needless to say that  offences  which  are  non-compoundable
cannot be compounded by the court.   Courts draw the  power  of  compounding
offences from Section 320 of  the  Code.   The  said  provision  has  to  be
strictly followed (Gian Singh   v.   State of  Punjab[1]).   However,  in  a
given case, the High Court can quash a criminal proceeding  in  exercise  of
its power under Section 482 of the Code having regard to the fact  that  the
parties  have  amicably  settled  their  disputes  and  the  victim  has  no
objection, even though the offences are non-compoundable.   In  which  cases
the High Court can exercise its discretion to  quash  the  proceedings  will
depend on facts and circumstances of  each  case.   Offences  which  involve
moral turpitude, grave offences like rape, murder etc. cannot be effaced  by
quashing the proceedings because  that  will  have  harmful  effect  on  the
society.   Such offences cannot be said to be restricted to two  individuals
or two groups.  If such offences are quashed, it may send  wrong  signal  to
the society.  However, when the High Court is convinced  that  the  offences
are entirely personal in nature and, therefore, do not affect  public  peace
or tranquility and where it feels  that  quashing  of  such  proceedings  on
account of compromise would bring about  peace  and  would  secure  ends  of
justice, it  should  not  hesitate  to  quash  them.   In  such  cases,  the
prosecution becomes a lame prosecution.   Pursuing such a  lame  prosecution
would be waste of time and energy.  That will also unsettle  the  compromise
and obstruct restoration of peace.

5.    In Gian Singh  this Court has  observed  that  where  the  High  Court
quashes a criminal proceeding having regard to the  fact  that  the  dispute
between the offender and the victim has been settled although  the  offences
are not compoundable,  it  does  so  as  in  its  opinion,  continuation  of
criminal proceedings will be an exercise in  futility  and  justice  in  the
case demands that the dispute between the parties  is  put  to  an  end  and
peace is restored; securing the ends of justice being the  ultimate  guiding
factor.  Needless to say that the above observations are applicable to  this
Court also.

6.    Learned counsel for the parties have requested  this  Court  that  the
impugned order be set aside as the High Court has not  noticed  the  correct
position in law in regard to quashing of criminal proceedings when there  is
a compromise.  Affidavit has been filed in this  Court  by  complainant-Anil
Mandal, who is respondent No. 2 herein.  In  the  affidavit  he  has  stated
that a compromise petition has  been  filed  in  the  lower  court.   It  is
further stated that he and the appellants  are  neighbours,  that  there  is
harmonious relationship between the two  sides  and  that  they  are  living
peacefully.  He has further stated that he does  not  want  to  contest  the
present appeal and he has no  grievance  against  the  appellants.   Learned
counsel for the  parties  have  confirmed  that  the  disputes  between  the
parties are settled; that parties are abiding by  the  compromise  deed  and
living peacefully.  They  have  urged  that  in  the  circumstances  pending
proceedings be quashed.  State of Jharkhand has further filed  an  affidavit
opposing the compromise.  The affidavit does not persuade us to  reject  the
prayer made by the appellant and the second respondent for quashing  of  the
proceedings.

7.    In view of the compromise and in view of the legal position  which  we
have discussed hereinabove, we set aside the impugned order  dated  4/7/2012
and quash the  proceedings  in  S.C.No.9/05  pending  on  the  file  of  2nd
Additional Sessions Judge, Godda.  The appeal is disposed of.

                                                            …………………………………..J
                                                     (Ranjana Prakash Desai)


                                                            …………………………………..J
                                                               (N.V. Ramana)
New Delhi;
July 21, 2014.

                                                              NON-REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1498 OF 2014
       [Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.8795 of 2012]


Manohar Singh                                …     Appellant

Vs.

State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.          …    Respondents



                               J U D G M E N T

(SMT.) RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI, J.

1.    Leave granted.

2.    The appellant is original Accused No. 3.  He was tried along with  his
father Hukum Singh – original Accused No.  1  and  his  mother  Prem  Bai  –
original Accused No. 2 by the Judicial Magistrate,  Dewas  (Madhya  Pradesh)
in Crime Case No. 1680/2009 for offences punishable under  Section  498A  of
the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘the IPC’) and  Section  4  of  the  Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961 (for short, ‘the Dowry Act’).  By judgment  and  order
dated 29/9/2010 learned Magistrate acquitted the  appellant  and  the  other
two accused.  Being aggrieved by this order  the  State  of  Madhya  Pradesh
preferred  appeal  in  the  Sessions  Court,  Dewas  being  Criminal  Appeal
No.12/2011.  The Sessions  Court  set  aside  the  order  of  acquittal  and
convicted the appellant and two others under Section 498-A of  the  IPC  and
sentenced them to undergo two years rigorous imprisonment each and to pay  a
fine of Rs.500/- each.  For offence under Section 4 of the  Dowry  Act  each
of them was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for two years and  to  pay  a
fine of Rs.500/- each, in default, to undergo simple  imprisonment  for  two
months each.

3.    Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order,  the  accused  carried
criminal revision to the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.  The  High  Court  by
the impugned order  set  aside  the  conviction  and  sentence  of  original
Accused Nos. 1 and 2 i.e. the father  and  mother  of  the  appellant.   The
conviction of the appellant  was,  however,  confirmed.   His  sentence  was
reduced to six months  and  fine  of  Rs.500/-  on  each  count.   Both  the
substantive sentences were to run concurrently.   Being  aggrieved  by  this
judgment the appellant filed the present appeal.

4.     On  21/1/2013  the  appellant  sought  permission  to   implead   the
complainant i.e. his wife Reena as respondent No. 2.   A statement was  made
that the appellant was willing to pay monetary compensation to his  wife  in
lieu of substantive sentence of imprisonment.   Permission  to  implead  the
complainant-wife Reena was granted.  The appellant was directed  to  deposit
Rs.25,000/- as litigation expenses.   Respondent  No.  2  was  permitted  to
withdraw the said amount unconditionally.  Subject to  deposit,  notice  was
issued to respondent No. 2 to consider whether the appellant  can  be  asked
to pay some suitable monetary compensation to respondent No. 2  in  lieu  of
substantive  sentence  of  imprisonment.   On  24/3/2014  counsel  for   the
appellant made a statement that the matter is  likely  to  be  settled.   We
directed respondent No.  2  –  wife  to  remain  present  in  the  Court  on
28/3/2014.  Accordingly on 28/03/2014 she remained  present  in  the  Court.
She stated that if the appellant pays her  Rs.2,50,000/-  (Rupees  two  lacs
fifty thousand only) as compensation, she is ready  to  settle  the  matter.
This Court, therefore, directed the appellant to bring  a  demand  draft  of
Rs.2,50,000/- in the name of Reena (respondent No.  2).   This  Court  noted
that the said demand draft can be given to her in  case  after  hearing  the
parties and considering the legal position, this  Court  permits  settlement
at this stage.

5.    We have heard learned counsel for the appellant, learned  counsel  for
the State of Madhya Pradesh  and  learned  counsel  for  respondent  No.  2.
Learned counsel for the appellant and learned counsel for respondent  No.  2
have requested the Court  to  show  leniency  in  view  of  the  settlement.
Counsel for the State of Madhya Pradesh has opposed this prayer.

6.    Section 498-A of the IPC is non-compoundable.  Section 4 of the  Dowry
Act is also non-compoundable.  It  is  not  necessary  to  state  that  non-
compoundable offences cannot be compounded by a  Court.   While  considering
the request for compounding of offences the Court  has  to  strictly  follow
the mandate of Section 320 of the Code.  It is, therefore, not  possible  to
permit compounding of offences under Section 498-A of the IPC and Section  4
of the Dowry Act.   However,  if  there  is  a  genuine  compromise  between
husband and wife, criminal complaints arising  out  of  matrimonial  discord
can be quashed, even if the offences alleged therein  are  non-compoundable,
because such offences are personal in nature and do not  have  repercussions
on the society unlike heinous offences like  murder,  rape  etc.  (See  Gian
Singh   v.   State of Punjab[2]).  If the High Court forms an  opinion  that
it is necessary to quash the proceedings to prevent abuse of the process  of
any court or to secure ends of justice, the  High  Court  can  do  so.   The
inherent power of the High Court under  Section  482  of  the  Code  is  not
inhibited by Section 320 of the Code.  Needless to say that this  Court  can
also follow such a course.

7.    In Narinder Singh  v.  State of  Punjab[3],  this  Court  was  dealing
with a situation where the accused was charged for offence punishable  under
Section 307 of the IPC, which is a  non-compoundable  offence.  The  parties
arrived at a compromise at the stage of recording of evidence.   A  petition
was filed under Section 482 of the Code for quashing of the  proceedings  in
view of the compromise.  The High Court refused to  quash  the  proceedings.
This Court set aside the High Court’s order and quashed the  proceedings  in
view of the compromise.  While  doing  so,  this  Court  laid  down  certain
guidelines.  In Guideline No.(VII), this Court considered a situation  where
a conviction is recorded by the trial court  for  offence  punishable  under
Section 307 of the IPC and the matter is at  appellate  stage.   This  Court
observed that in such cases, a mere compromise  between  the  parties  would
not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal  of  the  offender
who has already been convicted by the  trial  court.   This  Court  observed
that in such cases where charge is proved under Section 307 of the  IPC  and
conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime, there was no question  of
sparing a convict found guilty of such a  crime.  The  observation  of  this
Court must be read obviously in the context of  a  non-compoundable  offence
under Section 307 of the IPC.  It is trite that a  non-compoundable  offence
cannot be compounded at any stage (See Gyan Singh  v.  State of  Punjab[4]).
 However, a compoundable offence can be compounded in view of a  compromise,
if the Court finds it proper to do so even after conviction  if  the  appeal
is pending.

8.    In this case, the appellant is convicted under Section  498-A  of  the
IPC and sentenced to undergo  six  months  imprisonment.   He  is  convicted
under Section 4 of the  Dowry  Act  and  sentenced  to  undergo  six  months
imprisonment.  Substantive sentences are to run concurrently.   Even  though
the appellant and respondent No. 2-wife have arrived at  a  compromise,  the
order of conviction cannot be quashed on that ground  because  the  offences
involved are non-compoundable.  However, in such a situation  if  the  court
feels that the parties have a  real  desire  to  bury  the  hatchet  in  the
interest of peace, it  can  reduce  the  sentence  of  the  accused  to  the
sentence already undergone.  Section 498-A of the  IPC  does  not  prescribe
any minimum punishment.  Section 4  of  the  Dowry  Act  prescribes  minimum
punishment of six months but proviso thereto states that the Court may,  for
adequate or special reasons to  be  mentioned  in  the  judgment,  impose  a
sentence of imprisonment for a term which  may  be  less  than  six  months.
Therefore, sentence of the appellant can  be  reduced  to  sentence  already
undergone by him.

9.    Now the question is whether a case for reduction of sentence  is  made
out particularly when the appellant has undergone only seven  days  sentence
out of six months sentence imposed on him.  We see no  reason  why  in  this
case we should not reduce  the  appellant’s  sentence  to  sentence  already
undergone by him.  There can  be  no  doubt  about  the  genuine  nature  of
compromise between the appellant and respondent  No.2-wife.   The  appellant
has offered to pay  a  sum  of  Rs.2,50,000/-  to  respondent  No.2-wife  as
compensation.  A demand draft drawn  in  the  name  of  respondent  No.2  is
brought  to  the  Court.   As  directed  by  us  even  litigation  costs  of
Rs.25,000/- has been deposited by the appellant in the  Court.    Respondent
No.2-wife has  appeared  in  this  Court  on  more  than  one  occasion  and
requested  this  Court  to  take  compromise  into  consideration  and  pass
appropriate orders.  Learned counsel for the parties have  requested  us  to
take a kindly view of the matter.  The  affidavit  filed  by  the  State  of
Madhya Pradesh opposing the prayer of the parties does not impress us.

10.   We must also note that the trial court had  acquitted  the  appellant.
Though the Sessions Court reversed the order  and  convicted  the  appellant
for two years, the High Court reduced  the  sentence  to  six  months.   The
appellant and respondent No.2 were married in 2007.  About seven years  have
gone by.  Considering all these circumstances, in the interest of peace  and
amity, we are of the opinion that the appellant’s sentence must  be  reduced
to sentence already undergone by him.

11.   In the circumstances, the appeal is partly  allowed.   The  conviction
of the appellant under Section 498-A of the IPC and under Section 4  of  the
Dowry Act is maintained  but  the  sentence  awarded  to  the  appellant  is
reduced to sentence already undergone by him, subject to the condition  that
the appellant pays a sum of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees two  lacs  fifty  thousand
only) to respondent No.2-wife  as  compensation.     Impugned  order  stands
modified to the above extent.

12.   We must note that a Demand Draft in the sum of Rs.2,50,000/- drawn  in
the name of respondent No.2 Reena has been handed over  to  her  counsel  by
learned counsel for the appellant on 18/7/2014.

13.   In  view  of  this,  bail  bond  of  the  appellant,  if  any,  stands
discharged.
                                                             ……………………………..J.
                                                     (Ranjana Prakash Desai)


                                                              ………………………………J.
                                                               (N.V. Ramana)
New Delhi;
July 21, 2014.

                                                              NON-REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1169 OF 2014


SATHIYAMOORTHY AND ORS.                      …Appellants

                                   Versus

STATE REPRESENTED BY THE
INSPECTOR OF POLICE, MADURAI            …Respondent



                           J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T


(SMT.) RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI, J.


1.    The appellants who are original Accused Nos. 1 to 6 respectively  were
tried in the court of Additional District and  Sessions  Judge,  Madurai  in
Sessions Case No.444 of 2005 for various offences  under  the  Indian  Penal
Code (for short, ‘the IPC’) on the allegation that on  11/11/2004  at  about
8.00 p.m. when complainant Ayyanar and his son Murugesan were standing at  a
common place all the accused came there  and  formed  an  unlawful  assembly
with  deadly  weapons.   Accused  No.  2  unlawfully  restrained  Murugesan.
Accused No. 1 attacked  complainant-Ayyanar  with  an  iron  rod.   He  also
attacked Murugesan with an aruval.  Complainant Ayyanar lodged the FIR.

2.    After completion of  investigation,  the  accused  were  sent  up  for
trial.  At the trial the prosecution examined  16  witnesses.   The  accused
denied the prosecution  case.   Learned  Additional  District  and  Sessions
Judge found Accused Nos. 1 to 6 guilty under Section 148  of  the  IPC.   He
sentenced each of them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and  to
pay a fine of Rs.500/- each, in default,  to  undergo  two  months  rigorous
imprisonment.  Accused No. 1 was found guilty under Section 325 of  the  IPC
and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three  years  and  to
pay a fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default, to undergo rigorous  imprisonment  for
three months.  Accused No. 2 was found guilty under Section 341 of  the  IPC
and was sentenced to undergo three months rigorous imprisonment and  to  pay
a  fine  of  Rs.200/-,  in  default,  to   undergo   four   weeks   rigorous
imprisonment.  Accused No. 2 was also found guilty under  Section  325  read
with  Section  149  of  the  IPC  and  was  sentenced  to  undergo  rigorous
imprisonment for three years and to pay a fine of  Rs.1,000/-,  in  default,
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months.  Accused Nos. 3 to  6  were
found guilty under Section 325 read with Section 149 of the  IPC.   Each  of
them was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for three years  and  to  pay  a
fine of Rs.1,000/- each, in default, to undergo  rigorous  imprisonment  for
six months.  Substantive sentences were to run concurrently.

3.    Being aggrieved by the said conviction and  sentence  the  appellants-
accused preferred an appeal to the High Court.  By the  impugned  order  the
High Court partly allowed the appeal.  The order  of  conviction  passed  by
the trial court was confirmed.  However, the sentence imposed under  Section
325 of the IPC on Accused No. 1, sentence imposed  under  Section  325  read
with Section 149 of the IPC on Accused No.  2  and  sentence  imposed  under
Section 325 read with Section 149 of the IPC on Accused  Nos.  3  to  6  was
reduced to two years rigorous imprisonment instead of three  years  rigorous
imprisonment.  Rest of the order of the trial court  was  confirmed.   Being
aggrieved by the judgment and order, the appellants-accused have  filed  the
present appeal.

4.    During the pendency  of  the  appeal  on  25/04/2014  victim-Murugesan
remained  present  in  this  Court.   He  had  filed  an   application   for
impleadment which was granted.  He stated that he  would  like  to  compound
the offences.  That statement was recorded and the matter was  adjourned  to
consider the prayer.  An  application  has  been  filed  by  the  appellants
praying that offences may be permitted to be compounded.  It  is  stated  in
the application that victim Murugesan and the accused are cousins  and  they
have decided to settle the disputes amicably.  It  is  further  stated  that
pursuant to this decision the accused  have  paid  a  reasonable  amount  to
victim Murugesan as per the decision of family elders and they have  entered
into an amicable  settlement  in  their  village  much  before  the  accused
surrendered as per the orders of this Court.  A copy  of  the  statement  of
victim Murugesan  dated  30/9/2012  stating  that  he  has  entered  into  a
compromise with the accused is annexed to the application.

5.    We have heard learned counsel for the appellants-accused, Mr.  Luthra,
learned Additional Solicitor General (AC) and learned counsel for the  State
of Tamil Nadu.  They confirmed that parties have entered into a  compromise.
 They submitted that in view of the settlement, this Court may compound  the
offences as that will accord a quietus to all disputes between the  parties.
 Counsel submitted that the accused and the complainant are cousins.   After
the compromise they have been staying peacefully in the village.  It  is  in
the interest of both sides to bury the hatchet and lead a peaceful life.

6.    Offences under Sections 341 and 325 are compoundable.  In view of  the
settlement they can be permitted to be compounded.  However, offences  under
Sections 148 and 149 of the IPC are not compoundable.  Hence, permission  to
compound them cannot be granted.  However, since the accused and the  victim
have entered into a compromise, we feel that it would be in the interest  of
both sides to reduce the sentence awarded to the accused under Sections  325
and 341 of the IPC to the sentence already undergone.

7.    In Ram Lal and anr.   v.    State  of  J  &  K[5]   the  accused  were
convicted  for  offence  under  Section  326  of  the  IPC,  which  is  non-
compoundable.  Looking to the  fact  that  the  parties  had  arrived  at  a
settlement and victim had no grievance, this Court reduced the sentence  for
the  offence  under  Section  326  to  sentence  already  undergone  by  the
appellants-accused.  We are inclined to follow similar course.

8.    In the result, the appeal  is  partly  allowed.   The  offences  under
Sections 341 and 325 of the IPC, for which  the  appellants  are  convicted,
are  permitted  to  be  compounded  because  they  are  compoundable.    The
appellants are acquitted of the said offences.   The appellants  are  stated
to have undergone more than six months  imprisonment.  So  far  as  offences
under Sections 148 and 149 of the IPC are concerned, the conviction  of  the
appellants for  the  said  offences  is  reduced  to  the  sentence  already
undergone  by  them  subject  to  the  appellants  paying   Rs.30,000/-   as
compensation to victim-Murugesan.  Compensation be paid within three  months
from the date of this judgment.

9.    This Court has already released the appellants on bail.   In  view  of
this order the bail bonds  of  the  appellants  are  discharged  subject  to
payment of compensation of Rs.30,000/- as directed by us.   If  compensation
is not paid consequences will follow.

                                                              ………………………………J.
                                                     (Ranjana Prakash Desai)


                                                              ………………………………J.
                                                               (N.V. Ramana)
New Delhi;
July 21, 2014.

                           -----------------------
[1]    (2012) 10 SCC 303
[2]    (2012) 10 SCC 303
[3]    JT 2014 (4) SC 573
[4]    (2012) 10 SCC 303
[5]    (1999) 2 SCC 213

-----------------------
24



