
Supreme Court of India
Pallavi vs State Of U.T. Chandigarh on 29 January, 2019Author: Banumathi
Bench: R S Reddy, R Banumathi
                                                          1

                                                                                  NON-REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL No(s). 176 OF 2019
                                 (Arising out of SLP (CRL.) No.8851 of 2018)

     PALLAVI                                                                    Appellant(s)

                                                         VERSUS

     STATE OF U.T. CHANDIGARH & ORS.                                            Respondent(s)




                                                   J U D G M E N T

     BANUMATHI, J.:

     (1)                 Leave granted.

     (2)                 This appeal arises out of judgment and order dated 12th

     September, 2018 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana

     at Chandigarh in CRM-M No.23774 of 2018 in and by which the

     High Court affirmed the order of the Sessions Judge setting

     aside the order of framing of charge against respondents no.2

     and 3 under Sections 406 and 498-A I.P.C.
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2019.02.05
11:08:19 IST
Reason:

     (3)                 The   case   of    the   appellant   is   that   her   marriage   was

     solemnized with Rajesh Kumar, son of the second respondent-
                                            2

Kamla Devi on 27th February, 2009 and it was a love marriage.

According to the appellant, after her marriage she was living

with her parents and thereafter with the consent of the family

members     of   her    husband-Rajesh           Kumar       their     marriage      was

solemnized on 22nd September, 2010 in Hotel Residency.                           Out of

their    wedlock   a   boy   child    was       born   on     5 th   December,    2010.

According to the appellant, at the time of her marriage on 22 nd

September, 2010 she and her husband-Rajesh Kumar were given

gold ornaments and other household articles.                           The appellant

alleged that when she was staying with her husband along with

her     mother-in-law    (second      respondent)            and      Jethani    (third

respondent) they were harassing her, demanding for more dowry

and gold ornaments.           The appellant has alleged that private

respondents have induced them to transfer a booth shop held by

the appellant’s father as a power of attorney holder of one

Suresh Singh.      After the death of her father, the appellant

requested    her   brother-Devansh          Sobti      and     accordingly       Suresh

Singh    transferred    the    said    booth       shop      to      sisters    of   her

husband-Rajesh Kumar, namely, Bharti and Meena.                         The appellant

filed a complainant before SSP, Chandigarh, based on which FIR

NO.91 dated 15th March, 2014 was registered.                         After completion

of investigation, chargesheet was filed against Rajesh Kumar,

husband of the appellant, and respondents no.2 and 3.                            On 11 th

May, 2015 charges were framed against the respondents for the

offence    under   Sections     406    and       498-A      and      the   respondents

pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
                                         3

(4)   Respondents no.2 and 3 challenged the order of framing of

charge before the Session Court.         The Sessions Court vide order

dated 15th October, 2015 allowed the revision on the ground that

there was not even a single word mentioned by the appellant

against respondents no.2 and 3 regarding harassment of the

complainant for dowry articles or any misappropriation of dowry

articles    by    them.     The    Sessions           Court   referring      to     a

publication dated 25th February, 2009 in the newspaper, “Punjab

Kesri”, pointed out that the second respondent, mother-in-law

of the appellant, had disowned her son Rajesh Kumar-husband of

the appellant way back on 25th February, 2009.                       The Sessions

Court also pointed out that as the marriage of the complainant

and Rajesh Kumar-husband on 27th February, 2009 was a love

marriage,   there    is   unlikelihood       of   any    demand      of   dowry    by

respondents no.2 and 3 and also by the appellant’s husband-

Rajesh Kumar.       In revision, the High Court has affirmed the

order of the Sessions Court by the impugned order.



(5)   We have heard Mr. Akshay Verma, learned counsel appearing

for the appellant and Mr. Sushil K. Tekriwal, learned counsel

appearing   for   respondents     no.2   and      3    and    also   perused      the

impugned judgment and other materials on record.



(6)   Upon perusal of the chargesheet and the materials filed

thereon, the Trial Court on being satisfied that there are

prima facie materials to proceed against respondents no.2 and

3, framed the charge against respondents no.2 and 3 who pleaded
                                                    4

not guilty.



(7)   When the Judicial Magistrate has, based on the chargesheet

and     on        the     materials     filed      along     with     the   chargesheet,

satisfied           himself,       order      of    framing     of     charge    against

respondents no.2 and 3.                At the stage of framing of charge, the

court is concerned only with the aspect that there is prima

facie materials presuming that the accused has committed the

offence.          At the initial stage the court is not called upon to

examine the sufficiency or otherwise of the materials produced

by the prosecution and also to examine whether the same are

sufficient to sustain the conviction of the accused thereon.

The learned Sessions Judge, in our view ought not to have gone

into the merits of the materials and erred in setting aside the

order        of     the     Judicial        Magistrate      framing     charge   against

accused.



(8)   At this stage, Mr. Sushil K. Tekriwal, learned counsel

appearing for respondents no.2 and 3, submitted that both the

Sessions Court and the High Court have recorded the concurrent

findings          that     there      are     no    specific    allegations      against

respondents no.2 and 3 to proceed under Section 406 I.P.C. and,

therefore, rightly set aside the order of framing of charge and

such concurrent findings recorded by both the courts, cannot be

interfered with.



(9)   On      the       other   hand,       Mr.    Akshay   Verma,     learned   counsel
                                           5

appearing    for    the      appellant-complainant,               has   drawn        our

attention    to    certain      materials       like    photographs         and      the

document transferring booth shop in favour of sisters of Rajesh

Kumar, namely, Bharti and Meena to contend that based on those

materials the Trial Court rightly proceeded to frame the charge

and   therefore    it   cannot    be     said   that    it   is    a    case    of   no

material.



(10) Though it was submitted that the courts have recorded the

concurrent findings that there are no sufficient materials to

proceed against respondents no.2 and 3, such contention in our

opinion does not merit any acceptance.                 We are not inclined to

go into the merits or demerits of the contentions raised by

learned counsel for the parties at this stage.                      Suffice it to

note that the satisfaction of the Judicial Magistrate was based

on the materials placed before it and the Sessions Court in

exercise of its revisional jurisdiction ought not to have set

aside the order of framing of charge.



(11) When the order of the Trial Court does not suffer from any

perversity, the High Court, in our considered view, fell in

error   in   quashing     the    order    of    framing      of    charge      against

respondents no.2 and 3 thereby affirming the view taken by the

Sessions Court.



(12) In view of above, the impugned order is set aside and the

appeal is allowed.
                                 6



(13) We make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on

the merits of the matter.     The concerned Trial Court shall

proceed with the trial and decide the matter on its own merits.



                                      ..........................J.
                                       (R. BANUMATHI)



                                      ..........................J.
                                       (R. SUBHASH REDDY)
NEW DELHI,
JANUARY 29, 2019.

