
Supreme Court of India
Velu @ Velmurugan & Ors vs State Tr.Insp.Ofpolice on 27 April, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                     1





                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1047 OF 2009




          VELU @ VELMURUGAN & ORS.                                   ... APPELLANTS


                                                 VERSUS




          STATE THROUGH INSPECTOR 

          OF POLICE                                                   ...RESPONDENT





                                                O R D E R 

          1.          This appeal, by special leave has been preferred by the 


          appellants against their conviction and sentence.




          2.          Altogether   six   persons   were   put   on   trial   and   in   the 


          present appeal we are concerned with the four appellants who 


          were   Accused   Nos.   1,   2,   4   and   5.     Appellant   No.   1,   Velu   @ 


          Velmurugan   has   been   found   guilty   under   Sections   302   and 


          324   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   and   sentenced   to   undergo 


          imprisonment   for   life   and   two   years   respectively,   while   other 


          appellants   have   been   held   guilty   under   Section   324   of   the 


          Indian   Penal   Code   and   sentenced   to   undergo   rigorous 


Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                  2





          imprisonment for two years.


          3.          Prosecution   commenced   on   the   basis   of   the   report 


          given by PW-1, Subramani before the Sub-Inspector of Police 


          on   6th  of   March,   2002   at   1.00   A.M.   at   JIPMER   Hospital, 


          Pondicherry.   According to the informant, three acres of land 


          situated in his village was leased out to his family by its owner 


          Ranga Iyer 40 years ago and since then they were cultivating 


          the   same.     In   the   year   1985,   according   to   the   prosecution, 


          Balasundaram (since acquitted) who happens to be the father 


          of   Appellant   No.   1,   Velu   purchased   the   aforesaid   land   from 


          Ranga Iyer and asked the informant and his family members 


          to   vacate   the   same   but   they   did   not   accede   to   his   request. 


          Instead they filed civil suit claiming right over the land which 


          is   pending   adjudication   before   the   court.     Prosecution   case 


          further   is   that   informant's   elder   brother   Narayanswami   was 


          done to death by men of Balasundaram in the year 1993 due 


          to the aforesaid dispute.  It is the case of the prosecution that 


          on   5th  of   March,   2002,   the   informant   came   from   Chennai 


          where   he   was   working   as   a   Junior   Assistant   in   Survey 


          Department   to   his   village.     There   Appellant   No.   1,   Velu   met 


          him   and   asked   him   to   see   that   his   brother   Ramachandran 


Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                  3





          vacate   the   land   failing   which   he   will   meet   the   same   fate   as 


          that   of   his   brother   Narayanswami.     Thereafter,   according   to 


          the   prosecution,   the   informant   returned   to   his   home,   took 


          food   and   left   for   Chennai   along   with   his   bother 


          Ramachandran   and   when   reached   village   Kandamanadi, 


          opposite   Sudhakar   Engineering   Workshop,   Appellants   Velu, 


          Magesh,   Ramakrishnan   and   Subramani   along   with   another 


          accused (since acquitted) came in a group armed with knives 


          and casurina sticks.  It has been alleged that Appellant No. 1, 


          Velu  gave knife blow  on the head of Ramachandran  whereas 


          Appellant No. 4, Subramani caused injury on his left hand.  It 


          was  protested   by  the   informant,   whereupon   Appellant   No.   1, 


          Velu   caused   injury   on   his   ankle   and   knee   and   appellant 


          Ramakrishnan   beat   him   with   the   stick   on   his   left   shoulder 


          and right knee.  Appellant Subramani is alleged to have given 


          a   stick   blow   on   the   informant's   right   arm.     After   assaulting 


          Ramachandran   and   the   informant   the   accused   persons   fled 


          away from the place of occurrence.  Injured were taken to the 


          Villupuram   Government   Hospital   where   after   initial 


          treatment,   they   were   referred   to   JIPMER   Hospital, 


          Pondicherry for further treatment but Ramachandran died on 


          way to the hospital and was pronounced dead by the doctors 


Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                    4





          at the JIPMER Hospital.


          4.          On   the   basis   of   the   aforesaid   information,   case   under 


          Sections   147,   148,   323,   324   and   302   was  registered  against 


          the   appellants   and   other   two   accused   persons   (since 


          acquitted).  After usual investigation police submitted charge-


          sheet   and   ultimately   the   appellants   along   with   two   other 


          accused   persons  were committed   to  the   Court   of  Sessions  to 


          face   trial.     Appellants   denied   to   have   committed   any   offence 


          and claimed to be tried.  In order to bring home the charge the 


          prosecution examined altogether 21 witnesses besides a large 


          number of documents were exhibited.  


          5.          The   trial   court   relying   on   the   evidence   of   PW-1, 


          Subramani,   and   the   dying   declaration   of   the   deceased 


          Ramachandran   recorded   by   PW-19,   Dr.   Balasubramaniyan 


          held   that   the   prosecution   has   been   able   to   prove   its   case 


          beyond   all   reasonable   doubt   against   the   appellants   and   the 


          accused   Mahalingam   but   acquitted   Balasundram   of   all   the 


          charges   leveled   against   him.     On   appeal   the   High   Court   set 


          aside   the   conviction   of   Mahalingam   and   maintained   the 


          conviction   of   Appellant   No.   1,   Velu   under   Sections   302   and 


          324   of  the   Indian   Penal   Code   but  set  aside   the   conviction  of 


Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                   5





          Appellant Nos. 3 and 4 under Section 302 of the Indian Penal 


          Code   and   that   of   Appellant   No.   4   under   Section   302/149   of 


          the Indian Penal Code but convicted them under Section 324 


          of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   and   sentenced   them   to   undergo 


          rigorous   imprisonment   for   two   years.     That   is   how   the 


          appellants are before us.


          6.          Mr.   R.   Balasubramanian,   Senior   Advocate   appearing 


          on   behalf   of   the   appellants   submits   that   there   is   inordinate 


          delay in lodging the first information report and in view of the 


          admitted   animosity   between   the   parties,   false   implication   of 


          the   appellants   cannot   be   ruled   out.     He   points   out   that 


          according to  the prosecution  the occurrence had taken place 


          at 5.30 P.M. on 5th  of March, 2002 whereas the report which 


          led to the registration of the first information report was given 


          between 1200 hrs. to 1300 hrs in the night of 5th/6th of March, 


          2002.     This   delay,   according   to   the   Senior   Counsel,   itself   is 


          sufficient   to   reject   the   case   of   the   prosecution.     It   has   been 


          pointed   out   that   PW-1,   Subramani   and   the   deceased 


          Ramachandran while being taken to the hospital had crossed 


          various police stations but they did not give any report of the 


          incident.  


Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                  6





          We   do   not   find   any   substance   in   the   submission   of   the 


          learned   Senior   Counsel.     The   occurrence   has   taken   place   at 


          about   5.30   P.M.   on   5th  of   March,   2002   in   which   PW-1, 


          Subramani   and   the   deceased   Ramachandran   sustained 


          serious injuries.  They were taken to the Government Hospital 


          at   Villupuram   where   they   were   examined   by   PW-19,   Dr. 


          Balasubramanian at 5.50 P.M. and 5.55 P.M. and after giving 


          initial   treatment   they   were   referred   to   JIPMER   Hospital   at 


          Pondicherry.     In   a   situation   like   this   when   PW-1   had 


          sustained nine injuries and the deceased Ramachandran had 


          sustained   multiple   injuries,   the   normal   conduct   of   human 


          being   would   be   to   save   their   lives   and   rush   them   to   the 


          hospital and in that state of mind it is not expected that they 


          would first make an effort to lodge report to the police.   It is 


          worth   mentioning   here   that   when   Sub-Inspector   of   Police 


          came   to   know   about   the   incident,   he   first   went   to   the 


          Villupuram   Government   Hospital   and   thereafter   to   JIPMER 


          Hospital   at   Pondicherry   and   it   is   in   the   hospital   that   PW-1, 


          Subramani   given   report   to   the   police.     Therefore,   in   our 


          opinion,   the   delay   in   lodging   the   first   information   in   no   way 


          affects the credibility of the case of the prosecution.  


Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                   7





          Mr.   Balasubramanian,   then   contends   that   in   view   of   the 


          admitted animosity between the parties, the conviction of the 


          appellants   on   the   basis   of   the   solitary   eye-witness   PW-1, 


          Subramani   is   not   fit   to   be   sustained.     He   submits   that   the 


          evidence   of   PW-1,   Subramani   is   not   in   conformity   with   the 


          dying declaration of the deceased Ramachandran recorded by 


          PW-19,   Dr.   Balasubramanian.     According   to   him,   to   sustain 


          conviction on the basis of a solitary eye-witness, said witness 


          has   to   be   wholly   reliable.     We   do   not   find   any   substance   in 


          this   submission   of   Mr.   Balasubramanian   also.     PW-1, 


          Subramani   is   an   eye-witness   to   the   occurrence   and   he   has 


          given in detail the role played by each of the appellants.  PW-


          19, Dr. Balasubramanian who had examined him immediately 


          after   the   occurrence   at   5.55   P.M.   at   Government   Hospital, 


          Villupuram had found nine injuries on his person.  Therefore, 


          his   presence   at   the   time   of   occurrence   cannot   be   ruled   out. 


          He  has   supported  the   case   of  the   prosecution  in  all  material 


          particulars.     PW-19,   Dr.  Balasubramanian   has  clearly  stated 


          in   his   evidence   that   while   he   examined   the   deceased 


          Ramachandran   at   5.55   P.M.   in   the   hospital,   he   disclosed   to 


          him that five known persons which included Appellant Nos. 1 


Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                       8





          to 3, took part in the occurrence and caused injury.  We are of 


          the   opinion   that   the   evidence   of   PW-1,   Subramani   is   wholly 


          reliable.     Further   evidence   of   PW-19,   Dr.   Subramanian,   who 


          recorded the dying declaration of the deceased Ramachandran 


          also lends support to the case of the prosecution.   We are of 


          the opinion that the High Court committed no error in relying 


          on   the   evidence   of   PW-1,   Subramani   and   PW-19,   Dr. 


          Subramanian to sustain the conviction of the appellants.  




          It is worth mentioning here that after we had pronounced the 


          judgment   Ms.   Swarupa   Reddy,   Advocate   informed   us   that 


          acquitted accused in this case Balasundram who happens to 


          be   the   father   of   Appellant   No.   1,   Velu,   wants   to   address   us. 


          We  permitted him  to do  so and  while  making  submission   he 


          handed   over   written   submission   making   request   for   a   CBI 


          inquiry to bring out the truth.   The submission made has no 


          bearing in the facts of the present case.


          7.          In   the   result,   we   do   not   find   any   merit   in   the   appeal 


          and it is dismissed accordingly.


                                                   ...............................................J.

                                                       (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)


Crl.A. No. 1047 of 2009

                                                       9





                                                

                                                     ................................................J.

                                                      (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)

          NEW DELHI,

          APRIL 27, 2011.



