
Supreme Court of India
Mannu Lal Mahto & Anr vs State Of Bihar on 24 November, 2010Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 644  of 2004                                                                                                                                           

                                                                                                      1





                                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                         CRIMINAL APEPAL NO. 644  OF 2004




                  MANNU LAL MAHTO & ANR.                                                                                                             APPELLANT

                                                                                               VERSUS

                  STATE OF BIHAR                                                                                                                     RESPONDENT




                                                                                          O R D E R

              1.                We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.

              2.                The   two   appellants,   a   husband   and   wife,   were 

              convicted under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code and 

              sentenced   to   undergo   rigorous   imprisonment   for   seven 

              years and to a fine of Rs. 2,500/- each and in default of 

              payment of fine to further rigorous imprisonment of one 

              year   by   the   Sessions   Judge,   Champaran,   by   judgment   and 

              order dated 24th March, 1997 in Sessions Trial No. 515 of 

              1987.     Several   co-accused   of   the   appellants   were, 

              however,  acquitted.    The  appellants  thereafter  filed  an 

              appeal before the Patna High Court and the High Court has 

              confirmed the judgment of the Sessions Judge.   It is in 

              this   background   that   the   matter   is   before   us   after   the 

              grant of special leave.

              3.                Ms.   Shweta   Garg,   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

              appellants has raised pleas similar to the ones that had 


Crl.A. No. 644  of 2004                                                                                                                                           

                                                                                                      2





              been raised earlier before the trial court and the High 

              Court.     She   has   first   and   foremost   emphasised   that   the 

              appellants had fired on the opposite party in the right 

              of   their   private   defence   and   in   that   eventuality   they 

              were entitled to complete exoneration of any wrong doing 

              by virtue of Section 96 of the Indian Penal Code.   She 

              has   further   highlighted   that   the   appellants   had   been 

              chased by a mob of 300 or 400 persons and it was at that 

              stage   that   they   had   fired   into   the   crowd   to   save 

              themselves from harm.  

              4.                We   find   that   this   plea   has   not   been   accepted   by 

              the   courts   below   on   the   evidence   of   five   injured 

              witnesses.     On   the   contrary,   it   transpires   that     the 

              appellant  Mannu Lal Mahto was constructing his house on 

              public property and when he was called upon to stop the 

              construction he got annoyed and fired into the crowd and 

              caused   the   injuries.     Likewise,   appellant   No.   2   Panna 

              Devi, his wife, had also fired into the crowd.   We also 

              see   from   the   evidence   that   nine   persons   were   injured 

              during the course of the firing.  

              5.                The   learned   counsel   for   the   appellants   has   also 

              argued   that   the   injuries   on   the   persons   of   Mannu   Lal 

              Mahto had not been explained.   We, however, notice that 

              except   for   one   injury   on   the   metacarpal,   all   the   other 

              injuries   on   his   person   were   simple   in   nature.     In   the 


Crl.A. No. 644  of 2004                                                                                                                                           

                                                                                                      3





              light   of   the   categoric   finding,   however,   that   the 

              incident happened when the appellants were constructing a 

              house   on   public   property   and   that   they   had   been 

              apprehended by the police immediately after the incident, 

              no fault can be found with the observations of the courts 

              below.

              6.                The   incident   happened   in   the   year   1987.   Twenty 

              three long years have Elapsed since then.  The appellant 

              Mannu Lal Mahto was an Army Personnel.  He has apparently 

              lost his job on account of his conviction in the present 

              matter  and   is  presently   employed  as   a  Bank   Guard.    The 

              injuries   caused   to   the   opposite   party   were   simple   in 

              nature which indicate that the shots had been fired from 

              some distance.  In these circumstances, we feel that the 

              ends of justice would be met if the sentence awarded to 

              Mannu Lal Mahto is reduced from seven to four years, and 

              that of his wife Panna Devi, from seven to two years.

              7.                We,   accordingly,   dismiss   the   appeal   with   this 

              modification in the sentence.


                                                                                                                .......................J
                                                                                                                [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                                                                                .......................J
                                                                                                                [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]


Crl.A. No. 644  of 2004                                                                                                                                           

                                                                                                      4





                  NEW DELHI,
                  NOVEMBER 24, 2010.



