
Supreme Court of India
Bhanwaroo Khan vs Razak Khan @ Raju & Ors on 20 August, 2009Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, B.S. Chauhan
                                                      1




                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1024 OF 2003




          BHANWAROO KHAN                               .....             APPELLANT

                                       VERSUS

                                                                                   RAZAK
                                                                                 KHAN @
                                                                                 RAJU &
                                                                               ORS.
                                                                                  .....

                                                                               RESPONDENT




                                                                               O R D E R

         Heard the learned counsel for the parties.

         The     respondents      herein       were   summoned      by   the

Additional District and Sessions Judge, Deedwana (Rajasthan)

by an order dated 31.05.2002 made on an application under

Section    319    of   the    Code    of   Criminal    Procedure.        The

application      was   a     sequel   to   the    statement    of   certain

prosecution witnesses that had been recorded by the trial

court.    By the impugned order, the application was allowed
                                         2


and the four respondents were duly sent up for trial for an

offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 498-A

of the Indian Penal Code.            Three of the aggrieved parties

i.e. Razak Khan, Mena         and Umaid Khan, respondents herein,

thereafter    moved    the    High   Court   by   way   of    a   Criminal

Revision Petition.       The High Court, has, vide its judgment

dated 15th January, 2003, set aside the judgment and order of

the Additional District and Sessions Judge, dated                 31st May,




2002   and   quashed    the   proceedings    not   only      against   the

private respondents before us but also qua Ayub Khan, the

husband of the deceased who was not even a petitioner before

the High Court.        The present appeal has been filed at the

instance of Bhanwaroo Khan, the father of the victim.



        We have gone through the order of the High Court and

find that after perusing the evidence and the statements of
                                       3


P.W. 5 - Ibrahim Khan, P.W. 9 - Bhanwaroo Khan             and P.W. 10

- Shahzadi Bano, a finding has been recorded that there was

no evidence whatsoever against any of the three revision

petitioners    before   the   High   Court.    We   have    also    gone

through the statements ourselves and notice that except for

vague allegations and those relatable to Section 498-A of

the IPC, no specific charges have been levelled.




      We, accordingly, dismiss the appeal qua respondent

nos. 1 to 3.


      As      already   mentioned    above,   the   husband    of   the

deceased respondent No. 4 herein had not moved the High

Court for seeking the quashing of the order under Section

319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.              The High Court,

nevertheless, quashed the proceedings against him as well.
                                       4


In   the   light   of   the   fact   that   he   was   apparently   not

aggrieved by the order, it was not proper for the High Court

to have quashed the proceedings against him.
                                  5
       We,   accordingly,   dismiss    this   appeal   qua   the

respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and allow the same qua Ayub Khan,

respondent No. 4.


       The parties are directed to appear before the trial

Court on 9th November, 2009.


       Interim order stands vacated.


                                          ..................J
                                          [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                          ..................J
                                          [DR. B.S. CHAUHAN]

NEW DELHI
AUGUST 20, 2009.

