
Supreme Court of India
State Of Orissa vs Damburu Naiko And Anr on 31 March, 1992Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 1161, 1992 SCR  (2) 393
Author: K Ramaswamy
Bench: Ramaswamy, K.
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF ORISSA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DAMBURU NAIKO AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT31/03/1992

BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
KULDIP SINGH (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR 1161		  1992 SCR  (2) 393
 1992 SCC  (2) 522	  JT 1992 (2)	517
 1992 SCALE  (1)752


ACT:
     Indian Penal Code, 1860 :
     Sections  34,  366 and 376-Kidnapping  and	 gang  rape-
Corroboration  of victim's evidence-Whether necessary,	when
her  evidence  inspires confidence  to	be  truthful-Offence
committed  in broad day light-Victim identifying accused  in
Identification	 Parade	 and  medical  evidence	 and   First
Information  Report  corroborating injuries on	her  private
parts-Whether  High  Court justified in	 rejecting  victim's
evidence.



HEADNOTE:
     The  two respondents and two others were charged  under
Sections  366/34 and 376 read with 34 I.P.C. for  kidnapping
and committing rape on P.W.1.  In the Identification Parade,
conducted  by P.W.13, the Executive Magistrate,	 P.W.1,	 the
victim,	 identified  the  two  respondents  and	 one   other
accused.    The	 trial	court  accepted	 her  evidence	 and
convicted the two respondents and sentenced them to  undergo
three years' rigorous imprisonment on each count.
     The  trial	 court acquitted the other two	accused	 and
this became final since there was no appeal against it.	 The
Sessions   Court   confirmed  the  sentences  of   the	 two
respondent.
     On appeal, the High Court acquitted the two respondents
on the grounds that P.W.1 identifying the respondents  could
not  be relied upon, that there was no corroboration to	 her
evidence,  and that when there was gang rape there would  be
several	 injuries  on the person of the victim,	 which	were
absent, and therefore, she was a consenting party.
     Allowing the appeal of the State, this Court,
     HELD:  1.1	 It is not necessary that  there  should  be
corroboration to the evidence of the victim of rape.  If the
evidence  inspires  confidence to be truthful,	that  itself
would be sufficient to convict the accused. [396D]
						 394
     1.2 In the instant case, there is no necessity for	 any
corroboration of P.W.1's evidence.  She was a simple village
girl  and  she would not leave out her own  assaillants	 and
implicate   falsely   other  innocent  persons	 with	 the
allegation  that  she was raped by them.  Though she  was  a
stranger  to  the  accused she is the  victim  of  dastardly
offences  of  kidnapping and gang rape and it  was  done  in
broad  day  time.  Therefore, when she	was  kidnapped	into
forest	by  the accused, she had opportunity  to  see  them,
though	later  her eyes were closed with a piece  of  cloth.
When she was made to lie down on the ground at the threat of
her  life  and gang rape was committed, she  was  absolutely
helpless.  The medical evidence amply corroborates that	 she
had injuries on her private parts and so there is yet enough
resistence  put	 up by her to the gang	rage  committed	 one
after  the another.  When it was done at the threat  of	 her
life  she  cannot be expected to go on resisting  except  to
resisting  to her fate and succumb to their  assault.  P.W.1
also  identified  the  respondents  in	the   identification
parade.	 She had enough opportunity to identify the  persons
who  committed	rape  on  her.	 Even  if  corroboration  is
necessary,  the	 injuries  on  her  private  parts;  medical
evidence  of  the doctor and her  first	 information  report
provide such corroboration.  The evidence of P.W.1 has to be
accepted as truthful.  [396B-E]
     1.3  It  is,  therefore, not  possible  to	 accept	 the
reasoning  of the High Court in rejecting  P.W.1's  evidence
and acquitting the two respondents.  Besides, the High Court
also   did not	make any attempt to disbelieve her  evidence
on its own merits. [396A,F]
     1.4  In these circumstances, the casual and  mechanical
approach,  without  regard to human probabilities,  and	 the
consequent  acquittal  by the High Court resulted  in  grave
miscarriage of justice.	 The Judgment of the High Court	 and
order  of  acquittal  of  respondents  is  set	aside.	 The
judgments  and	convictions and sentences  recorded  by	 the
trial  court,  and  affirmed  by  the  Sessions	 Court,	 are
restored.   The respondents should surrender and  serve	 out
the sentences. [396F,G]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal	 No.
567 of 1983.
     From  the	Judgment  and Order  dated  19.4.82  of	 the
Orissa High Court in Crl. Revn. No. 152/81.
     C.S.Sromovasa Rao for the Appellant.
						  395
     A.P. Mohanty for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     K.	 RAMASWAMY, J. The two respondent Dambru Naiko	(A1)
and  B.	 Sankara  Rao (A2) and two others  were	 charged  in
Sessions Case No. 6/78 of Asst.	 Sessions Judge, Jeypore for
offences under section 366/34 and 376 read with s. 34 I.P.C.
kidnapping and committing rape of Manguri Bhotruni, PW.1  on
October	 21,  1978  at about 4.00  p.m.	 By  judgment  dated
November 26, 1978 the trial court convicted the	 respondents
and  sentenced	them to undergo rigorous  imprisonment for a
period	of three years on each count and the sentences	were
directed  to run concurrently.	He acquitted the  other	 two
which  became  final.	On appeal it was  confirmed  by	 the
Sessions  Court.   In  Crl.  Revision No.  152	of  1981  by
judgment dated April 19, 1982, the High Court acquitted them
of th charges.	Thus this appeal by special leave.
     The case of prosecution is that on the fateful day	 the
victim	Bhotruni alongwith other girls, PWs. 2 to 4 went  to
Papadahandi  to	 witness Dasahara festival.  At	 about	4.00
p.m.,  while they were returning home, PW.1, the victim	 was
ahead  of them and when they reached inside the forest,	 the
appellants  and	 two  others gagged the mouth  of  PW.1	 and
kidnapped into the forest, covered her eyes with a piece  of
cloth  and threatened to kill her if she would raise  cries.
They  made her to lie down on the ground and raped  her	 one
after  another.	  PWs.	2  to 4	 ran  back  Papadahandi	 and
reported,  to  the police on duty in the  festival,  of	 the
incidence and PW.5, the constable came alongwith them.	They
found  the victim's eyes covered  with a piece of cloth	 and
that  she  was crying.	She was taken to  Papadahandi.	 She
laid the complaint (Ext. P.1).	The accused were arrested on
October 31, 1977 and in the identification parade  conducted
by  the Executive Magistrate, PW. 13, PW.1 to  4  identified
the  accused,  PW.1  identified	 the  respondents  and	 one
another,  PW.2 to 4 identified some as per Ex.	P.10  report
the details of which are not necessary as it is admitted  by
them  that  before the identification parade  was  conducted
PWs.2 to 4 had opportunity to see the accused.	So the trial
count did not rely upon the evidence of PWs. 2 to 4.  But it
accepted the evidence of PW.1, the victim and convicted	 the
respondents.   The High Court acquitted the  respondents  on
the grounds, namely, that PW.1 identifying these respondents
would not be relied on and that there is no corroboration to
her  evidence.	 When there is a gang rape  there  could  be
several	   injuries   on   the	 person	  of   the    victim
						  396
which  are absent.  Therefore she was consenting  party.  We
are at a loss to understand the reasoning of the High Court.
The  vehement  contention  of the learned  counsel  for	 the
respondents  that the reasoning given by the High  Court  is
cogent and needs no interference absolutely lacks substance.
Though	PW.1 was a stranger to the accused is the victim  of
dastardly  offences of kidnapping and gang rape and  it	 was
done  in broad day time.  Therefore, when she was  kidnapped
into  forest by the accused she had opportunity to see	them
though	later her  eyes were closed with a piece  of  cloth.
When she was made to lie down on the ground at the threat of
her  life  and gang rape was committed, she  was  absolutely
helpless.  The medical evidence amply corroborates that	 she
had injuries on her private parts and so there is yet enough
resistence  put	 up by her to the gang	rape  committed	 one
after  the another.  When it was done at the threat  of	 her
life,  she cannot be expected to go on resisting  except  to
resign to her fate and succumb to their assault.  PW.1	also
identified  the	 respondents in the  identification  parade.
Since there is no appeal against the others, we need not  go
into  their  acquittal.	 But suffice to state that  she	 had
enough	opportunity  to identify the persons  who  committed
rape  on  her.	 It is not necessary  that  there  would  be
corroboration to the evidence of the victim of rape.  If her
evidence  inspires  confidence to be  truthful	that  itself
would be sufficient to convict the accused. We need not	 see
corroboration  to  the evidence of PW.1.  She was  a  simple
village girl and she will not leave out her own	 assaillants
and  implicate	falsely	 other	innocent  persons  with	 the
allegation that she was raped by them.	Even if we seek	 for
corroboration  the  injuries on her private  parts;  medical
evidence  of  the doctor and her  first	 information  report
provide	 such corroboration.  We have carefully scanned	 her
evidence.   We wholly accept her evidence as  truthful.	 The
High  Court also did not make any attempt to disbelieve	 her
evidence  on  its own merits.  In  these  circumstances	 the
casual	and  mechanical approach, without  regard  to  human
probabilities,	and  the consequent acquittal  by  the	High
Court  resulted	 in  grave  miscarriage	 of  justice.	 The
approach  adopted by the High Court shall not be allowed  to
stand for a moment.  The appeal is accordingly allowed.	 The
judgment  of  High  Court and the  order  of  acquittal	 the
respondents is set aside.  The judgments and convictions and
sentences  recorded by the trial court and affirmed  by	 the
Sessions  Courts  are restored and  the	 respondents  should
surrender and serve out the sentences.
N.P.V.					     Appeal allowed.
						  397




