
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Anand Chintaman Dighe on 16 January, 1990Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR  625, 1990 SCR  (1)	 73
Author: M Fathima Beevi
Bench: Fathima Beevi, M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ANAND CHINTAMAN DIGHE

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/01/1990

BENCH:
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)
BENCH:
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)
AHMADI, A.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR  625		  1990 SCR  (1)	 73
 1990 SCC  (1) 397	  JT 1990 (1)	 28
 1990 SCALE  (1)25


ACT:
    Code  of  Criminal	Procedure, 1973:  Sections  437	 and
438--Bail-Grant of--Factors to be considered.
    Terrorist  and Disruptive Activities  (Prevention)	Act,
1987:  Section 20(8)--Offences under the  Act--Accused--When
could be granted bail.



HEADNOTE:
    The respondent was a member of a political party. Conse-
quent upon the defeat of the party in Mayoral elections held
in  March, 1989, the party felt that there was	cross-voting
and there were traitors among them and the respondent made a
declaration that such traitors would not be spared. Thereaf-
ter  the  respondent  was arrested in  connection  with	 the
murder	of one of the Corporators. He was accused of  having
committed  offence under Section 3(1) of the  Terrorist	 and
Disruptive  Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987,	besides	 of-
fences punishable under Sections 148, 149, 120-B and 302  of
the  Indian  Penal Code. The designated court  released	 the
respondent on bail while the investigation was pending.
    This  appeal  by the State is against the order  of	 the
designated court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD: 1. Sub-Section (8) of SeCtion 20 of the Act clear-
ly  provides  that  unless the court is	 satisfied  for	 the
reasons to be recorded that there are reasonable grounds  to
believe	 that the respondent is not involved  in  disruptive
activities bail shall ordinarily be refused. Even under	 the
provisions of Section 437 and 438 of the Code of '  Criminal
Procedure,  the powers of the Sessions Judge are not  unfet-
tered. [75F]
    2. Where the offence is of serious nature the Court	 has
to decide the question of grant of bail in the light of such
considerations	as  the nature and seriousness	of  offence,
character of the evidence, circums-
74
tances	which  are  peculiar to the  accused,  a  reasonable
possibility of presence of the accused not being secured  at
the  trial and the reasonable apprehension of witness  being
tampered  with,	 the larger interest of the public  or	such
similar other consideration. [76B-C]
    3. In the instant case, the salient principles in grant-
ing  bail in grave crimes have not been taken note  of.	 The
Court  was  obsessed  by the fact that	the  respondent	 was
associated  with a political party and was oblivious of	 the
nature of the allegations made against him and the  relevant
materials  indicating  that the respondent had	been  making
utterances inciting violence. [76D]
    4.	This court would not ordinarily interfere  with	 the
discretion  of the lower court in granting or refusing	bail
but  in	 cases	where bail has been  granted  on  irrelevant
considerations,	 such  as  the status or  influence  of	 the
person	accused and regardless of the nature of the  accusa-
tion and relevancy of materials on record, this Court  would
not  hesitate to interfere for the ends of justice.  [75G-H;
76A]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 669
of 1989.
    From  the  Judgment and Order dated	  18.5.1989  of	 the
Designated  Court, Poona in Crl. Bail Application No. 11  of
1989.
    G.	Ramaswamy, Additional Solicitor General,  S.V.	Tar-
kunde and A.M. Khanwilkar for the Appellant.
U.R. Lalit and V.N. Ganpule for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    FATHIMA  BEEVI, J. By the impugned order dated the	18th
May, 1989 the Designated Court, Pune directed the respondent
to be released on bail. The respondent was accused of having
committed  offence under Section 3(1) of the  Terrorist	 and
Disruptive  Activities (Prevention) Act,  1987	(hereinafter
referred  to as 'the Act') besides the	offences  punishable
under  Sections 148, 149, 120-B and 302 of the Indian  Penal
Code.
    The respondent was the member of the Shiv Sena Party and
the Chief of the Thane District Unit. In consequence of	 the
defeat of the party in Mayoral election held on 20th  March,
1989 the party felt that
75
there  was cross-voting and there were traitors among  them.
There  had  been a declaration by the respondent  that	such
traitors would not be spared. The respondent was arrested in
connection with the murder of one of the Corporators  Shrid-
har Khopkar on 21.4. 1989 on registering Crime No. 1348/89.
    In releasing the respondent on bail while  investigation
was  pending,  the  Designated Court appears  to  have	been
influenced  by	the fact that respondent was the  leader  of
Political  Party.  The court assumed that as  a	 leader,  he
would  not  be involved in such crimes and  that  there	 are
reasonable grounds for believing that the respondent is	 not
guilty of any offence under the Act.
    Having  heard  both the sides, we feel  that  the  whole
approach by the learned Judge was misconceived and the order
is  unsustainable.  We have been taken	through	 the  entire
proceedings. We find that the learned Judge has not  noticed
the relevant provisions of the Act which restrict the powers
of  the Court in granting bail. The learned Judge  had	also
refused	 to consider the materials placed before it for	 the
purpose of satisfying himself whether there are no  reasona-
ble grounds to believe that the respondent has committed the
offence.  In the course of the investigation witnesses	have
been  questioned and their statements have been	 reduced  to
writing.  The learned Judge refused to consider	 the  state-
ments  recorded in the course of the investigation  for	 the
simple reason that such statements had not been read out  in
open Court though the Court was empowered to peruse the case
diary  for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the  stage
of  investigation  and the nature of the evidence  that	 had
been collected.
    Sub-Section	 (8) of Section 20 of the Act  clearly	pro-
vides that unless the Court is satisfied for the reasons  to
be  recorded  that there are reasonable grounds	 to  believe
that  the respondent is not involved in	 disruptive  activi-
ties,  bail  shall  ordinarily be refused.  Even  under	 the
provisions  of Sections 437 and 438 of the Code of  Criminal
Procedure,  the powers of the Sessions Judge are not  unfet-
tered.	The  salient principles in granting  bail  in  grave
crimes have not been taken note of.
    This  Court	 would	not ordinarily	interfere  with	 the
discretion  of the lower court in granting or refusing	bail
but  in	 cases	where bail has been  granted  on  irrelevant
considerations,	 such  as  the status or  influence  of	 the
person	accused and regardless of the nature of the  accusa-
tion and relevancy of materials on record, this Court  would
not
76
hesitate to interfere for the ends of justice.
    There  are	no hard and fast rules	regarding  grant  or
refusal	 of bail, each case has to be considered on its	 own
merits.	 The matter always calls for judicious	exercise  of
discretion  by	the Court. Where the offence is	 of  serious
nature the Court has to decide the question of grant of bail
in the light of such considerations as the nature and  seri-
ousness of offence, character of the evidence, circumstances
which are peculiar to the accused, a reasonable	 possibility
of  presence of the accused not being secured at  the  trial
and  the reasonable apprehension of witness  being  tampered
with,  the  larger interest of the public  or  such  similar
other considerations.
    In	the present case the learned Judge observed that  it
is a case of respectable person of a big political organisa-
tion,  his freedom cannot be curtailed if he is entitled  to
bail. His liberty cannot be curbed if enlarged on bail	and,
therefore,  no kind of condition is required to be  imposed.
The  Court  also  observed that being a leader	of  the	 big
political organisation one cannot expect that the respondent
will commit any offence if enlarged on bail and he cannot be
called	to be a criminal. The learned Judge was obsessed  by
the fact that the respondent was associated with a political
party  and  was oblivious of the nature of  the	 allegations
made against him and the relevant materials indicating	that
the respondent had been making utterances inciting violence.
The respondent gave repeated statements to the Press  saying
that the traitors' life will be made difficult and  probably
they  will  be killed. This was published in  Marathi  Daily
'Navakal'  on 22.3.89. He repeated his threat and  this	 ap-
peared	in an interview given to the reporter of the  Weekly
Magazine 'Lokprabha' in its issue of 9.4.1989. In an  inter-
view  in daily 'Urdu Times' dated 16.4.1989  the  respondent
asserted  that he knew the names of the traitors  but  could
not disclose the same. He also asserted that the  punishment
for  traitors  is death and they would be  killed  and	this
decision has not been taken by him in anger.
     In	 the backdrop of such assertions, it  was  necessary
for the Court to consider the further materials collected by
the investigating agency by recording statements of witness-
es.  The court below misdirected itself in refusing to	look
into  such statements and concluding that it is a  case	 for
granting bail taking into account only the position held  by
the  respondent	 in the party. The court  clearly  erred  in
disposing of the application for bail.
77
    In view of what has been stated above, we set aside	 the
order  of  the	Designated Court and allow  the	 appeal	 and
cancel the bail granted to the respondent, without prejudice
to his right to move the Designated Court at any  subsequent
stage.
G.N.					    Appeal allowed.
78




