
Supreme Court of India
Punjab State Warehousing ... vs M/S Sh.Durga Ji Traders & Ors on 28 November, 2011Bench: D.K. Jain, Anil R. Dave
                                                                                  REPORTABLE


                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        2226                        OF 2011

           (Arising out of S.L.P. (Criminal) No. 5305 of 2008)




PUNJAB STATE WAREHOUSING                                 --       APPELLANT

CORPORATION FARIDKOT


                                     VERSUS


M/S SH. DURGA JI TRADERS & ORS.                          --       RESPONDENT


                                                                 S




                                    O R D E R

1. Leave granted.

2. This   appeal,   by   special   leave,   arises   from   judgment   dated   18th 


   February, 2008 rendered by a learned Single Judge of the High Court 


   of Judicature for the States of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. By 


   the   impugned   judgment,  the   learned   Single   Judge   has   dismissed   the 


   petition preferred by the appellant under Section 482 of the Code of 


   Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short "the Code"), seeking quashing of 


   orders   dated   18th  February   2003,   by   which   the   Criminal   Complaint 


   filed   against   the   respondents   in   this   appeal,   for   having   committed 


   offences under Sections 406 and 409 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 


   (for short "IPC")  had been dismissed in default by the Chief Judicial 



                                                                                     1


   Magistrate, Muktsar; and 9th November 2005 by which the application 


   for restoration of the said complaint was dismissed.

3. Succinctly put, the material facts giving rise to the present appeal are 


   as follows:

       The appellant, a statutory body, constituted under the Warehousing 


Corporation Act, 1962, filed a private criminal complaint under Sections 


406 and 409 of the IPC against the respondents, alleging shortage of huge 


quantity   of   rice   in   respect   of   paddy   entrusted   to   them   as   miller. 

Simultaneously,  an application for exemption from personal appearance 


of the complainant  therein, was also filed, whereon the following order 


was passed by the Trial Court on 16th April 1999.

       "In   view   of   the   application   made   by   the   complainant 

       presence of complainant is exempted till further orders."

The trial proceeded in the normal course for six years.  However, on 18th 


February 2003 the Chief Judicial Magistrate dismissed the case for non 


appearance of the complainant even though the pleader for the appellant 


was present in court.  The order reads thus:

       "None   is   present   on   behalf   of   the   complainant   nor   any 

       request has been received on behalf of the complainant. 

       Both   the   accused   are   present   on   bail.   In   view   of   the 

       absence  of the complainant, complaint stands dismissed 

       in default. Be consigned to Record Room.


       Pronounced.                                     Sd/- 

                                               Chief Judicial Magistrate


                                                                                     2


                                                                         Muktsar


          At   this   stage   an   application   for   restoration   of   the 

          complaint   has   been   filed   on   the   ground   that   personal 

          appearance   of   the   complainant   was   already   exempted 

          vide   order   dated   16.4.99.   Copy   supplied   to   the   counsel 

          for   accused.   However,   let   the   notice   to   the   accused 

          regarding the application be given present in the court for 

          24.3.03.

          File be also produced on the date fixed.

                                                                              Sd/-

                                                                  CJM 18.2.03"


The application for restoration of the complaint was ultimately dismissed 


on 9th November 2005, by the following order:

          "After considering the arguments of the parties at length, 

          I am considered of the view that complaint was dismissed 

          in default. Complainant  was already  exempted from the 

          personal   appearance   on   16.4.99   and   thereafter   he 

          appeared in the court in person. The orders have become 

          redundant   and   the   complainant   had   to   seek   afresh 

          exemption   from   appearance.   From   the   perusal   of   the 

          record, it appears that complainant has never moved any 

          fresh   application   for   exemption   nor   the   same   was   ever 

          allowed and as such the order of dismissal dated 19.2.03 

          has become final and counsel for the accused has referred 

          the Apex Court judgments and I have gone through the 

          same   and   find   a   force   in   the   contention   of   the   learned 

          counsel   for   accused.   There   is   no   provision   in   Criminal 

          Procedure   Code   to   review   the   order   and   recall   the 

          summons. Hence, application moved by the applicant is 

          hereby declined and accused are also discharged. File be 

          consigned to the record room."


4.  Aggrieved thereby the appellant moved the High Court with a petition 


       under Section 482 of the Code for setting aside of the said orders and 


       restoration of the complaint.  As aforesaid, by the impugned judgment, 




                                                                                         3


    the High Court has dismissed the petition, holding that the dismissal in 


    default of a private complaint amounts to acquittal of the accused, and 


    since  against   such  an   order   a  specific  statutory  remedy exists  in  the 


    Code, a petition under Section 482 of the Code cannot be entertained. 

    Hence the present appeal by the complainant. 

5. As   per   the   office   report,   the   respondents   had   refused   to   accept 


    summons when the same were tendered to them by the process server. 

    Consequently, vide order dated 18th  September, 2009 the respondents 


    were deemed to have been served. We have heard the learned counsel 


    for the appellant.

6. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant has assailed the impugned 


    judgment mainly on the ground that the discretion vested in the High 


    Court under Section 482 of the Code being very wide, in the instant 


    case   the   High   Court   grossly   erred   in   declining   to   exercise   its 


    jurisdiction on the ground that an alternative remedy was available to 


    the appellant against an order of acquittal of the accused.  Relying on 


    the   decision   of   this   Court   in  Aseem   Shabanli   Merchant  Vs.  Brij  


    Mehra & Anr.1, learned counsel has urged that having regard to the 


    serious   nature   of   the   charges   against   the   respondents,   the   complaint 


    should   not   have   been   dismissed   in   default   on   account   of   non 


    appearance   of   the   complainant,   who   had   been   otherwise   exempted 



1 (2005) 11 SCC 412



                                                                                        4


    from personal   appearance,  and  the   case   ought  to  have   been  tried   on 


    merits.   In   support   of   his   contention   that   dismissal   of   the   complaint 


    because   of   a   singular   default   in   appearance   on   the   part   of   the 


    complainant, was improper, learned counsel relied upon the decision 


    of this Court in  Mohd. Azeem  Vs.    A. Venkatesh & Anr.2.   It is also 


    argued   that   having   regard   to   the   nature   of   the   case,   the   High   Court 


    committed a patent error in dismissing the petition under Section 482 


    of the Code on the ground of availability of an alternative remedy.  In 


    support   of   the   proposition   that   availability   of   an   alternative   remedy 


    per se  is no ground for dismissal of an application under Section 482 


    of   the   Code,   learned   counsel   commends   us   to   the   decision   of   this 


    Court   in  Dhariwal   Tobacco   Products   Ltd   &   Ors..  Vs.  State   of  


    Maharashtra & Anr.3.

7. The short question that falls for consideration is whether in the fact-

    situation   the   High   Court   was   justified   in   declining   to   exercise   its 


    jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code?

8. It is trite law that the inherent power of the High Court ought to be 


    exercised to prevent miscarriage of justice or to prevent the abuse of 


    the process of the Court or to otherwise secure the ends of justice. The 


    Court possesses wide discretionary powers under the Section to secure 


    these ends.  In this behalf it would be profitable to refer to the decision 


2 (2002) 7 SCC 726

3 (2009) 2 SCC 370



                                                                                             5


    of this Court in Jeffrey J. Diermeier & Anr. Vs. State of West Bengal  


    &   Anr.4,  wherein   one   of   us   (D.K.Jain,   J.),   speaking   for   the   bench, 


    explained the scope and ambit of inherent powers of the High Court 


    under Section 482 of the Code as follows: 

          "20................................................................. 

        The   Section   itself   envisages   three   circumstances   under 

        which the inherent jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, 

        (i)   to   give   effect   to   an   order   under   the   Code;   (ii)   to 

        prevent   abuse   of   the   process   of   Court;   and   (iii)   to 

        otherwise   secure   the   ends   of   justice.   Nevertheless,   it   is 

        neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible 

        rule   which   would   govern   the   exercise   of   inherent 

        jurisdiction   of   the   Court.   Undoubtedly,   the   power 

        possessed by the High Court under the said provision is 

        very wide but it is not unlimited. It has to be exercised 

        sparingly,  carefully   and  cautiously, ex  debito justitiae to 

        do real and substantial justice for which alone the court 

        exists.   It   needs   little   emphasis   that   the   inherent 

        jurisdiction   does   not   confer   an   arbitrary   power   on   the 

        High   Court   to   act   according   to   whim   or   caprice.   The 

        power   exists   to   prevent   abuse   of   authority   and   not   to 

        produce injustice.


        .....................................................................


        22. In Dinesh Dutt Joshi   v.   State of Rajasthan [(2001) 

        8   SCC   570],  while   dealing  with   the  inherent   powers   of 

        the   High   Court,   this   Court   has   observed   thus   (SCC   p. 

        573, para 6):

                "6. ...The principle embodied in the section 

                is   based   upon   the   maxim: quando   lex  

                aliquid alicui concedit, concedere videtur et  

                id   sine   quo   res   ipsae   esse   non   potest i.e. 

                when   the   law   gives   anything   to   anyone,   it 

                gives also all those things without which the 

                thing   itself   would   be   unavailable.   The 

                section does not confer any new power, but 

                only declares that the High Court possesses 

                inherent powers for the purposes specified in 



4 (2010) 6 SCC 243



                                                                                         6


               the section. As lacunae are sometimes found 

               in   procedural   law,   the   section   has   been 

               embodied   to   cover   such   lacunae   wherever 

               they   are   discovered.   The   use   of 

               extraordinary   powers   conferred   upon   the 

               High   Court   under   this   section   are   however 

               required   to   be   reserved,   as   far   as   possible, 

               for extraordinary cases."


9. Bearing in mind the afore-stated legal position in regard to the scope 


   and width of the power of the  High Court under Section  482 of the 


   Code,   we   are   of   the   opinion   that   the   impugned   decision   is   clearly 


   indefensible. As noted above, the High Court has rejected the petition 


   under   Section   482   of   the   Code   on   the   ground   of   availability   of   an 


   alternative remedy without considering the seriousness of the nature of 


   the   offences   and   the   fact   that   the   Trial   Court   had   dismissed   the 


   complaint on a hyper technical ground viz. since the complainant had 


   been   appearing   in   person,   despite   order   dated   16th  April   1999, 


   exempting   him   from   personal   appearance,   the   said   exemption   order 


   became   redundant   and   the   complainant   should   have   sought   a   fresh 


   exemption from personal appearance.  We feel that such a view defies 


   any logic.  An order of exemption from personal appearance continues 


   to be in force till it is revoked or recalled. We are convinced that in the 


   instant case, rejection of appellant's petition under Section 482 of the 


   Code   has   resulted   in   miscarriage   of   justice.     Availability   of   an 


   alternative   remedy   of   filing   an   appeal   is   not   an   absolute   bar   in 





                                                                                          7


     entertaining a petition under Section 482 of the Code.   As aforesaid, 


     one of the circumstances envisaged in the said Section, for exercise of 


     jurisdiction   by   the   High   Court   is   to   secure   the   ends   of   justice. 


     Undoubtedly,   the   Trial   Court   had   dismissed   the   complaint   on   a 


     technical  ground and therefore, interests of justice required the High 


     Court to exercise its jurisdiction to set aside such an order so that the 


     Trial Court could proceed with the trial on merits.

10.Resultantly, the appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment as also the 


     orders of the Chief Judicial Magistrate dated 18th  February 2003 and 


     9th  November   2005   are   set   aside   and   the   complaint   filed   by   the 


     appellant is restored to the file of the Chief Judicial Magistrate.   The 


     Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   shall   now   proceed   with   the   trial   after 


     securing the presence of the accused.

                                                  ..................................................

                                               (D.K. JAIN, J.) 





                                             .................................................

                                             (ANIL R. DAVE, J.)

                                         

                                              

NEW DELHI;

NOVEMBER 28, 2011.

                                                                                         8
