
Supreme Court of India
Mohan Lal & Anr vs State Of Punjab on 11 April, 2013Bench: B.S. Chauhan, Fakkir Mohamed Kalifulla
                                                                             REPORTABLE


                        ?IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 878-879 OF 2011


      MOHAN LAL & ANR                   Appellants


                                   VERSUS


      STATE OF PUNJAB                   Respondent


                                    WITH


                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 884 of 2011




                                  O R D E R

      1.  These appeals have been preferred against  the  impugned  judgment
      and order dated 3.12.2010 passed by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana
      at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal Nos. 1009-SB of 2000, 1031-SB of 2000
      and 1080-SB of 2010, by way of which the High Court has  affirmed  the
      judgment and order dated 25.09.2000 passed by the Additional  Sessions
      Judge, Fatehgarh Sahib, Punjab in Sessions Case  No.  15T/98/22.12.95,
      by way of which the learned trial court has convicted  the  appellants
      along with others, namely, Ranjit Singh and Smt. Jasbir Kaur  for  the
      offences punishable under Section(s) 376(2)(g) and 366 of Indian Penal
      Code, 1860  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  ‘IPC’),  and  awarded
      sentence of 10 years to each of them and fine  of  Rs.2000/-  and  Rs.
      3,000/- respectively, and in default of payment of  fine,  to  undergo
      further RI for one year and six months ?respectively.

      2.  The facts and circumstances leading to filing of these appeals are
      that, one Manjit Kaur (PW-1), who was a student of class  X  had  gone
      along with 15-16 other girls from her school to attend sport  meet  at
      Fatehgarh Sahib. All those 15-16  girls  had  been  walking  to  reach
      Fatehgarh Sahib. In the  meanwhile,  Balbir  Singh,  the  Director  of
      Physical  Education,  asked  Manjit  Kaur,  prosecutrix   (hereinafter
      referred to as ‘Prosecutrix’) that she should sit on  the  scooter  of
      Mohan Lal Verma, one of the appellants herein. She was  not  initially
      willing to go along with Mohan Lal Verma on his scooter, but  she  was
      threatened by Balbir Singh-appellant, and thus under the pressure  and
      force, she sat on the scooter of Mohan Lal Verma. When Mohan Lal Verma
      reached near petrol pump of  Machlian,  he  stopped  the  scooter  and
      pretended to repair it. Ranjit Singh,  also  a  teacher  in  the  same
      school and who had also been convicted by the Trial Court and the High
      Court, and whose SLP has been dismissed vide  order  dated  18.3.2011,
      arrived there on cycle and Mohan  Lal  Verma-appellant  forced  Manjit
      Kaur to sit on his cycle. As she had no other option, she sat  on  the
      cycle of Ranjit Singh who, after reaching Gurdwara Jyoti  Sarup   told
      her that he had to give some message  to  his  sister,  and  that  she
      should accompany him. Manjit Kaur was not willing and  resisted  to  a
      certain extent but she was persuaded/forced to accompany Ranjit Singh.
      Both went to the house of Jasbir Kaur. By this time, Mohan Lal  Verma,
      Amarjit Singh and Balbir Singh had already reached the  place.  Manjit
      Kaur was offered tea by Jasbir Kaur and  thereafter,  she  pushed  her
      into the room where Ranjit  Singh  committed  rape  upon  her  in  the
      presence of other persons as a result of which she became unconscious.

      3.  Darbara Singh (PW-3), father of the prosecutrix  lodged  the  FIR,
      though at a later stage, i.e. after one week, in the  police  station.
      The matter was investigated, charge sheet was filed against all  these
      persons and after conclusion of the trial, the trial  court  convicted
      all the aforesaid appellants as well as Ranjit Singh and Jasbir  Kaur,
      and awarded sentence referred to hereinabove. The  High  Court,  while
      hearing their appeals, acquitted only Jasbir Kaur and  maintained  the
      conviction and sentence of other persons, hence these appeals.

      4.  Shri V.K. Jhanji, learned senior counsel and  Shri  Manoj  Swarup,
      advocate appearing for the appellants had raised  a  large  number  of
      issues pointing out various discrepancies in the case of  prosecution.
      The prosecutrix (PW-l), her mother, Smt. Jaswant ?Kaur (PW-2)  and  her
      father, Darbara Singh (PW-3) were examined, but since PW-3 died during
      the trial, he could not be cross-examined by the defence, and as  such
      his evidence could not be relied  upon.  Undoubtedly,  PW-1  and  PW-2
      supported the case of the prosecution but in the last resiled from the
      same.

      5.  We have gone through their depositions and it is clear that in the
      earlier part  of  their  evidence,  both  the  witnesses  had  clearly
      implicated all these accused. The FIR could not be lodged  immediately
      after the incident, as there was no one in the family to support their
      cause. Smt. Jaswant Kaur (PW-2) had to send a telegram to her  husband
      and it is only after he reached their place, that FIR was lodged.  The
      victim was examined on several dates within the period  of  two  years
      and she had been consistent throughout, that rape had  been  committed
      upon her.  However, her father died during the trial  and  it  may  be
      because of his death that both the  prosecutrix  and  her  mother  had
      resiled to a certain extent from  the  prosecution  case.   Naturally,
      when the protective shield of their  family  had  withered  away,  the
      victim and her mother could have come under immense pressure from  the
      appellants.  The trial Court itself has expressed its  anguish  as  to
      how the accused had purposely delayed and dragged the  examination  of
      the prosecutrix and finally succeeded  in  their  nefarious  objective
      when the father of the prosecutrix died and the prosecutrix resiled on
      the last date of her cross-examination.  The appellants belonged to  a
      well-to-do family, while the prosecutrix came from  poorest  state  of
      the  society.   Thus,  a  sudden   change   in   their   attitude   is
      understandable


      6. Legally, a witness has no obligation whatsoever unless  they  agree
      to testify. The only real moral (and legal) obligation is that if they
      agree to testify to what they witnessed, it must be the truth as  they
      saw it.
                 But the community has a legal and moral  responsibility  to
      respond to criminal victimization  in  order  to  preserve  order  and
      protect the community. Victims and witnesses of  crime  are  essential
      partners in this community effort.  Without  their  participation  and
      cooperation as a citizen, the criminal justice  systems  cannot  serve
      the community.
      7. A witness is a responsible citizen. It is his duty to  support  the
      case of the prosecution and should depose  what  he  knows  about  the
      case. In the instant case, it is  shocking  that  the  mother  of  the
      prosecutrix had turned hostile and she repeatedly told the court  that
      there had been some talks of compromise. In a case where an offence of
      this nature had been committed, we fail to understand as to how  there
      can be a compromise between the parties.  The conduct  of  the  mother
      herself is reprehensible.

      8. It is a settled legal  proposition  that  statement  of  a  hostile
      witness can also be examined to the extent that it supports  the  case
      of the prosecution.  The trial court record reveals a very sorry state
      of affairs, inasmuch as no step had ever been taken by the prosecution
      or the Investigating Officer, to prevent the  witnesses  from  turning
      hostile, as it is their solemn duty to ensure that the  witnesses  are
      examined in such a manner that their statement must  be  recorded,  at
      the earliest, and they should be assured full protection.

      9. There is nothing on record, not even a suggestion by the appellants
      to the effect that the victim had any motive or previous  enmity  with
      the appellants, to involve them in this case. Unfortunately, the trial
      court went against the spirit  of  law,  while  dealing  with  such  a
      sensitive case of rape of a student by her teachers, by recording  the
      statement of prosecutrix on five different dates. Thus,  a  reasonable
      inference can be drawn that defence had  an  opportunity  to  win  her
      mother.

      10 Also, the manner in which the trial court conducted  the  trial  is
      shocking, especially in view of the provisions of  Section  309(1)  of
      the Code of Criminal Procedure, ?1973 (hereinafter referred to  as  the
      ‘Cr.PC’), which reads as under:-
           "309 (1) - In every inquiry or trial the  proceedings  shall  be
           held as expeditiously as possible, and in particular,  when  the
           examination of witnesses has  once  begun,  the  same  shall  be
           continued from day to day until all the witnesses in  attendance
           have been examined, unless the Court finds  the  adjournment  of
           the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to
           be recorded:

           Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates  to  an  offence
           under sections 376 to 376D of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  (45  of
           1860), the inquiry or  trial  shall,  as  far  as  possible,  be
           completed within a  period  of  two  months  from  the  date  of
           commencement of the examination of witnesses”.

      11.         The said proviso has been added by amendment vide Act 5 of
      2009 w.e.f. 31.12.2009, but even otherwise, it was  the  duty  of  the
      trial court not to adjourn the proceedings  for  such  a  long  period
      giving an opportunity to the accused to  persuade  or  force,  by  any
      means, the prosecutrix and her mother to turn hostile.

      12.        Giving recognition to the principle of speedy  trial,  sub-
      sec (1) of section 309 Cr.P.C., envisages that when the examination of
      witnesses has once begun, the same shall be continued from day to day,
      until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined.  Speedy  and
      expeditious trial and enquiry were envisaged under section 309 Cr.P.C.

      13.        In Lt. Col. S.J. Chaudhary v. State (Delhi  Administration)
      AIR 1984 SC 618, it was held that it is most expedient that the  trial
      before  the  Court  of  Session  should  proceed  and  be  dealt  with
      continuously from its inception to its finish. Not only will it result
      in expedition, it will also result in the elimination of manoeuvre and
      mischief. It will be in the interest of both the prosecution  and  the
      defence that the trial proceeds from day-to-day. It  is  necessary  to
      realise that Sessions cases must not be  tried  piece-meal.  Once  the
      trial commences, except for a very  pressing  reason  which  makes  an
      adjournment inevitable, it must proceed de die in diem until the trial
      is concluded. (See also: Akil @ Javed v. State of NCT of  Delhi,  2012
      (11) SCALE 709).

      14.        In Mohd. Khalid v. State of West Bengal, (2002) 7 SCC  334,
      this court held that when a witness is available and his  examination-
      in-chief is over, unless compelling reasons are there, the trial court
      should not adjourn the matter on the mere asking. While  deciding  the
      said case, the court  placed  great  emphasis  on  the  provisions  of
      Section 309 Cr.P.C. and placed reliance on  the  earlier  judgment  in
      State of U.P. v. Shambhu Nath  Singh,  (2001)  4  SCC  667;  and  N.G.
      Dastane v. Shrikant S. Shivde, (2001) 6 SCC 135.  In  the  said  case,
      this court has deprecated the practice of the  courts  adjourning  the
      cases without examination of witnesses when they  are  in  attendance.
      The trial court should realize that witness is a  responsible  citizen
      who has some other work to attend for eking out a  livelihood,  and  a
      witness cannot be told to come  again  and  again  just  to  suit  the
      convenience  of  the  advocate  concerned.  Seeking  adjournments  for
      postponing the examination of witnesses without any reason, amounts to
      dereliction of duty on the part of the advocate as it  tantamounts  to
      harassment and hardship to the witnesses. Tactics  of  filibuster,  if
      adopted by an advocate is also a professional misconduct.
      15.        No procedure which does not ensure a reasonably quick trial
      can be regarded as 'reasonable, fair or just' and it would  fall  foul
      of Article 21. (Vide: Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India & Anr., AIR 1978
      SC 597; Abdul Rehman Antulay & Ors. v. R.S. Nayak & Anr., AIR 1992  SC
      1701; Vakil Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar, AIR 2009 SC 1822; and Shri
      Sudarshanacharaya v. Shri Purushottamacharya & Anr. (2012) 9 SCC 241).

      16.        The appellants before  us  and  Ranjit  Singh  were  public
      servants being teachers in a government school, prosecutrix had been a
      student in their custody, therefore, provisions of  Section  376(2)(b)
      IPC are applicable, and as it was a case of gang rape,  provisions  of
      Section 376(2) (g)  IPC are attracted.

      17.        The requirement of education for girls and the functions of
      a teacher have been dealt with and explained at some  length  by  this
      Court in Avinash Nagra v. Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti & Ors.,  (1997)  2
      SCC 534, which read as follows:

           “11.         It is in this backdrop, therefore, that the  Indian
           society has elevated the teacher as “Guru Brahma,  Guru  Vishnu,
           Guru  Devo  Maheswaraha”.  As  Brahma,   the   teacher   creates
           knowledge,  learning,  wisdom  and  also  creates  out  of   his
           students, men and women, equipped  with  ability  and  knowledge
           discipline and  intellectualism  to  enable  them  to  face  the
           challenges of their lives. As Vishnu, the teacher  is  preserver
           of learning. As Maheswara,  he  destroys  ignorance.  Obviously,
           therefore, the teacher was placed  on  the  pedestal  below  the
           parents. The State has taken care of service conditions  of  the
           teacher and he owes dual fundamental duties to  himself  and  to
           the society. As a member of the noble teaching profession and  a
           citizen of India he should always be willing,  self-disciplined,
           dedicated with integrity to remain ever a learner of  knowledge,
           intelligently to articulate and communicate and  imbibe  in  his
           students, as society duty, to impart education, to bring them up
           with discipline, inculcate to abjure  violence  and  to  develop
           scientific temper with a spirit of enquiry and reform constantly
           to  rise  to  higher  levels  in  any  walk  of  life  nurturing
           constitutional ideals enshrined in Article 51-A so  as  to  make
           the students responsible  citizens  of  the  country.  Thus  the
           teacher either individually or collectively as  a  community  of
           teachers, should regenerate  this  dedication  with  a  bent  of
           spiritualism in broader  perspective  of  the  constitutionalism
           with secular ideologies enshrined in the Constitution as an  arm
           of the State to establish egalitarian  social  order  under  the
           rule of law. Therefore,  when  the  society  has  given  such  a
           pedestal, the conduct, character, ability and disposition  of  a
           teacher should be to transform the student  into  a  disciplined
           citizen, inquisitive to learn, intellectual  to  pursue  in  any
           walk of life with dedication, discipline and  devotion  with  an
           enquiring  mind  but  not  with  blind  customary  beliefs.  The
           education that is imparted by the teacher determines  the  level
           of the student for the development, prosperity  and  welfare  of
           the society.  The  quality,  competence  and  character  of  the
           teacher are, therefore, most significant to mould  the  calibre,
           character and capacity of the student for successful working  of
           democratic institutions and to sustain them in their later years
           of life as a responsible citizen in different  responsibilities.
           Without a dedicated  and  disciplined  teacher,  even  the  best
           education system is bound to fail. It is, therefore, the duty of
           the teacher to take such care of the pupils as a careful  parent
           would take  of  its  children  and  the  ordinary  principle  of
           vicarious liability would apply where negligence is  that  of  a
           teacher. The age of the pupil and the nature of the activity  in
           which he takes part are material factors determining the  degree
           and supervision demanded by a teacher.

           12.    It is axiomatic that percentage of education among girls,
           even after independence, is fathom deep due to independence , is
           fathom deep due to indifference on the  part  of  all  in  rural
           India  except  some  educated  people,  Education  to  the  girl
           children is nations  asset  and  foundation  for  fertile  human
           resources and disciplined family management,  apart  from  their
           equal participation in socio-economic and  political  democracy.
           Only of late, some middle-class  people  are  sending  the  girl
           children to co-educational institutions under the care of proper
           management and to look after the welfare and safety of the girl.
           Therefore, greater responsibility is thrust on the management of
           the schools and colleges  to  protect  the  young  children,  in
           particular,  the  growing  up  girls,  to  bring  them   up   in
           disciplined and dedicated pursuit of  excellence.  The  teacher,
           who  has  been  kept  in  charge,  bears   more   added   higher
           responsibility and should be more exemplary.  His/her  character
           and conduct should be more like Rishi and as loco  parentis  and
           such is the  duty,  responsibility  and  charge  expected  of  a
           teacher .  The  question  arises  whether  the  conduct  of  the
           appellant is befitting with such higher responsibilities and  as
           he by his conduct betrayed the trust  and  forfeited  the  faith
           whether he would be entitled  to  the  full-fledged  enquiry  as
           demanded by him? The fallen standard of the appellant is the tip
           of the iceberg in  the  discipline  of  teaching,  a  noble  and
           learned profession; it is  for  each  teacher  and  collectively
           their body to stem the rot to sustain the faith of  the  society
           reposed in them. Enquiry is not a panacea  but  a  nail  in  the
           coffin….”.(Emphasis added)


      18.         As there was a fiduciary relationship between the  accused
      and the prosecutrix being in their custody and they were  trustee,  it
      became a case where fence itself eats the crop and in such a case  the
      provisions  of  Section  114-A  of  the  Indian  Evidence  Act,   1872
      (hereinafter referred to as  the  ‘Evidence  Act’)  (which  came  into
      effect from 25.12.1983) are attracted. Undoubtedly it is a case  which
      provides for a presumption against any consent in a case of rape  even
      if the prosecutrix  girl  is  major,  however,  every  presumption  is
      rebuttable, and no attempt had ever been made by any of the appellants
      or other accused to rebut the said presumption.

      19.         In Vijay @ Chinee v. State of Madhya Pradesh (2010) 8  SCC
      191, this Court has placed very heavy reliance on  the  provisions  of
      Section 114-A of the Evidence Act, making a reference that it came  by
      an amendment in the year 1988 and further made an observation that the
      accused-appellants in that case did not make any attempt to rebut  the
      said presumption. One of us (Justice B.S. Chauhan) has been the author
      of the said judgment. In fact, the provisions of Section 114A  of  the
      Evidence Act were not attracted in the facts  of  that  case  for  the
      reason that  the  condition  provided  for  its  attraction  were  not
      available/attracted in that case.

       20. The issue in respect of applicability of Section  114-A  of  the
           Evidence Act has been considered by this Court in Raju &  Others
           v. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in (2008) 15  SCC  133,  and
           while deciding the said case, reliance has been  placed  on  the
           judgment in Ranjit Hazarika v. State of Assam, (1998) 8 SCC 635,
           wherein this Court has held as under:-

           “……Seeking corroboration of her statement  before  relying  upon
           the same, as a rule, in such cases amounts to adding  insult  to
           injury. Why should the  evidence  of  a  girl  or  a  woman  who
           complains of rape or sexual molestation, be viewed  with  doubt,
           disbelief  or  suspicion?  The  court  while  appreciating   the
           evidence of a prosecutrix may look for  some  assurance  of  her
           statement to satisfy its judicial conscience,  since  she  is  a
           witness who is interested in the outcome of the charge  levelled
           by her, but there is  no  requirement  of  law  to  insist  upon
           corroboration of her statement to base conviction of an accused.
           The evidence of a victim of sexual assault stands  almost  on  a
           part with the evidence of an injured witness and to an extent is
           ever more reliable. Just as a witness  who  has  sustained  some
           injury in the  occurrence,  which  is  not  found  to  be  self-
           inflicted, is considered to be a good witness in the sense  that
           he is least likely to shield the real culprit, the evidence of a
           victim of a sexual offence is entitled to great weight,  absence
           of corroboration notwithstanding….”


      21.         In view of the above, we are  of  the  considered  opinion
      that it was a fit case where the provisions of Section  114-A  of  the
      Evidence Act are attracted and no attempt had ever been made by any of
      the appellants or other accused to rebut the presumption.  In  such  a
      case, we do not see any reason to interfere with the finding  of  fact
      recorded by the courts below.

      22.         So far as the conviction is concerned, as it was  case  of
      gang rape by teachers of their student, the  punishment  of  10  years
      rigorous  imprisonment  imposed  by  the  trial  court  is   shocking,
      considering the relationship between the parties. It was  a  fit  case
      where life imprisonment could have been awarded  to  all  the  accused
      persons. Unfortunately, Smt. Jasbir Kaur had  been  acquitted  by  the
      High Court, and State of Punjab did not prefer any appeal against  the
      same. One of the accused, Ranjit Singh, had approached this court  and
      his  special  leave  petition  has  been  dismissed.  Thus,  in   such
      circumstances, we are not in a  position  even  to  issue  notice  for
      enhancement of the punishment to the accused.

      23.         In view of the above, appeals do not have  any  merit  and
      accordingly are dismissed .

                                          ................................J.
                                   (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)






                                          ................................J.
                                          (FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA)


      NEW DELHI;
      April 11, 2013.
ITEM NO.103               COURT NO.7             SECTION IIB


            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 878-879 OF 2011

MOHAN LAL & ANR                                   Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

STATE OF PUNJAB                                   Respondent(s)

WITH APPEAL(CRL) NO. 884 of 2011

(With appln(s) for bail and office report)

Date: 11/04/2013  These Appeals were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
        HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE B.S. CHAUHAN
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA

For Appellant(s)        Mr. Manoj Swarup, Adv.
                        Mr. Anup Kumar, Adv.
                        Mr.Rutwik Panda,Adv.

                        Mr. V.K. Jhanji, Sr.Adv.
                        Ms. Jyoti Mendiratta, Adv.

                        Mr. Debasis Misra, Adv.

For Respondent(s)       Ms. Srajita Mathur, Adv.
                     Mr. Kuldip Singh,Adv. (Not present)

           UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

                Appeals are dismissed in terms of the signed order.

         (NAVEEN KUMAR)                      (MR. M.S. NEGI)
         COURT MASTER                         COURT MASTER
               (Signed reportable order is placed on the file)




