
Supreme Court of India
State Of Karnataka vs Lakshmanaiah on 21 July, 1992Equivalent citations: 1993 AIR  100, 1992 SCR  (3) 579
Author: K Singh
Bench: Kuldip Singh (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF KARNATAKA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
LAKSHMANAIAH

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/07/1992

BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH (J)
BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH (J)
RAMASWAMY, K.

CITATION:
 1993 AIR  100		  1992 SCR  (3) 579
 1992 SCC  Supl.  (2) 420 JT 1992 (4)	326
 1992 SCALE  (2)45


ACT:
     Indian Penal Code, 1860 :
     Section 300-Murder of wife-Acquittal of husband by High
Court-High Court not considering P.Ws. evidence of husband's
maltreatment  and  assault  of wise for	 money	-  regecting
evidence on flimsy ground of discrepancies-Factum of accused
absconding  not	 discussed-Acquittal set  aside-Trial  Court
order of conviction and sentence-Upheld.



HEADNOTE:
     The  respondent in the appeal was tried for the  murder
of  his	 wife  and also	 for  stealing	his  mother-in-law's
property.   The	 prosecution  alleged  that  the  respondent
accused used to demand money from his mother-in-law  through
his  wife and he had executed two promissory notes  for	 Rs.
2,000  and Rs.3,000 in favour of his  mother-in-law  towards
the  money he had borrowed from her.  He became	 disgruntled
when  his mother-in-law refused to comply with his  demands,
and his wife declined to help him in getting more money.  As
a   consequence	  he  started  abusing,	  ill-treating	 and
assaulting his wife.  A few months before the occurrence the
mother-in-law  brought her daughter and her children to	 her
house.	 After sometime the accused also came to  reside  at
the house of his mother-in-law.
     On January 12, 1979, a close relation of the mother-in-
law  came to their house at 4 p.m.  On that day	 apart	from
the  accused, his wife and two children,  the  mother-in-law
and  her  younger daughter were present in the	house.	 The
accused	 gave Rs. 30 to his wife which she further  gave  to
her mother for buying clothes for the children so that	they
could  wear  the same on the ensuing  `Sankranti'  festival.
The  mother-in-law  and	 her younger daughter  went  to	 the
market	to  buy clothes for the children.   Thereafter,	 the
accused	 gave  Rs.  2 to the relative and sent	him  to	 the
market	to  bring `heralikayi'-a vegetable.   Therefore	 the
accused	 was left alone in the house with his wife  and	 two
small  children.   When his mother-in-law  and	her  younger
daughter  came	back  from the market  they  found  the	 two
children  crying outside the house.  On entering  the  house
they did not find anybody
						       580
inside,	 and on further search they found the  dead-body  of
the wife in the bathroom, her head ducked in the bucket full
of water.
     A case was registered with the police.  The accused was
found absconding, and was arrested on January 16, 1979.	 The
accused was put up for trial.  There was no direct evidence.
The prosecution relied on the motive as disclosed by P.W.26,
the  mother-in-law, P.W.27 her younger daughter, and PWs  24
and 25.	 The presence of the deceased and the accused in the
house  of  P.W.	 26 on the evening of January  12,  1979  as
deposed by P.W.17 the relative and P.W. 26 and P.W.27.	 The
accused sending P.W.17, P.W.26 and P.W.27 to the market	 for
purchasing  of clothes and vegetable and the deceased  being
left  alone with the two small children.  The accused  going
towards	 the bus stop holding his suit-case in his  hand  on
the  evening  of  January 12, 1979 as  seen  by	 P.W.14	 and
corroborated  by P.W. 20 and P.W.22, and the conduct of	 the
accused	 in absconding from the evening of January 12,	1979
till he was apprehended on the night of January 16, 1979.
     The Trial Court relying on the evidence of P.W.25, P.W.
26  and P.W.27 came to the conclusion that the accused	used
to maltreat and assault his wife because she refused to	 get
money  for  him from her mother, and that  the	evidence  of
P.W.17,	 P.W.26 and P.W.27 proved the circumstance that	 the
accused	 manipulated to send the three witnesses out of	 the
house  on the pretext of buying clothes and  vegetable	from
the  market.   Accordingly, the Trial  Court  convicted	 the
accused	  under	 Section  302  IPC  and	 sentenced  him	  to
imprisonment for life, but acquitted him of the charge under
Section 380 IPC.
     The  accused appealed to the High Court and a  Division
Bench  set aside the order of conviction, and acquitted	 the
accused.  It held that there was variance in the evidence of
P.W.26 and P.W. 27, and found contradiction in the statement
of  P.W.  26 and the F.I.R. Ex. P1, and concluded  that	 the
prosecution  has  not succeeded beyond reasonable  doubt  to
establish  that the accused had managed to send	 P.W.26	 and
P.W.27 out of the house at that point of time.
     Allowing  the State's appeal, reversing the High  Court
judgment and restoring the Trial Court judgment, this Court,
     HELD  :  1. The High Court fell into  patent  error  in
rejecting the
						       581
testimony  of  P.W.26  and P.W.27.  Even  if  there  is	 any
contradiction  on a non-material point that is no ground  to
reject	the  whole of the testimony of the  witnesses.	 The
High Court did not make any effort to read the statements of
P.W.26 and P.W.27 and appreciate the same. [585E]
     2.	 According  to	the High Court	the  discrepancy  in
regard	to  the number of `Heralikayis'	 was  sufficient  to
reject	the testimony of P.W.17.  The material part  of	 the
testimony of P.W.17 is that he was sent to the market to buy
`Heralikayis'  whether they were two, three or six  was	 not
material.   In any case the discrepancy is so minor that  it
cannot	 render	  the  testimony  of  P.W.17   unworthy	  of
acceptance.   The High Court was therefore not justified  in
rejecting the evidence of P.W.17 on a flimsy ground. [585F]
     3.	 The  trial  court relying  upon  the  testimony  of
P.W.14,	 P.W.20 and P.W.22 came to the conclusion  that	 the
circumstance  relied upon by the prosecution to	 the  effect
that  the  respondent was going towards	 bus  stand  holding
suit-case in his hand at about 6.30 p.m. on January 12, 1979
was  proved.   There  is no discussion,	 not  even  mention.
[585H]
     4.	  The  High  Court  has	 also  not   discussed	 the
circumstance  that  the respondent was absconding  till	 the
night  of  January 16, 1979 when he was	 arrested  which  is
surely	a  link in the chain of circumstances  to  establish
that  the  respondent  alone had committed  the	 offence  of
murder of his wife.
						      [586B]
     5. The High Court judgment is patently perverse and  is
set  aside.   The judgment of the trial court  is  restored.
The  respondent	 is  convicted under  Section  302  IPC	 and
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life. [586C]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION	:  Criminal   Appeal
No.373 of 1981.
     From  the	Judgment  and Order  dated  12.6.80  of	 the
Karnataka High Court in Crl. Appeal No. 346 of 1979.
     M. Veerappa for the Appellant.
     Devendra Singh for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
						       582
     KULDIP SINGH, J. Lakshmanaiah was tried for the  murder
of his wife Nagarathnamma and also for stealing his  mother-
in-law's  property.   He was convicted by  the	trial  court
under  Section	302, India Penal Code and was  sentenced  to
imprisonment  for life.	 He was, however, acquitted  of	 the
charge	under  Section	380,  IPC.   The  appeal  filed	  by
Lakshmanaiah  against his conviction under Section 302,	 IPC
was  allowed  by the High Court and he	was  acquitted.	  No
appeal	against	 his acquittal under section  380,  IPC	 was
filed before the High Court.  This appeal is by the State of
Karnataka against the judgment of acquittal rendered by	 the
High court.
     Lakshmanaiah along with his wife and two children	aged
two  years  and eight months was residing  in  Mandya  City.
Gowramma, his mother-in-law, alongwith her younger  daughter
Leelavathi,  was also residing in the same city at  a  short
distance  from	his  house.  The prosecution  case  is	that
Lakshmanaiah  used  to demand money from  his  mother-in-law
through his wife.  He had executed two promissory notes	 for
Rs.  2,000  and	 Rs. 3,000 in favour  of  his  mother-in-law
towards	 the  money  he had borrowed from  her.	  He  became
disgruntled  when his mother-in-law refused to	comply	with
his  demands  and his wife declined to help him	 in  getting
more  money  from her mother.  As a consequence	 he  started
abusing, ill- treating and assaulting his wife.	 Few  months
before	 the  occurrence  Gowramma  brought   her   daughter
Nagarathnamma  and  her children to her house.	 After	some
time  Lakshmanaiah also came to reside at the house  of	 his
mother-in-law.	 It  is	 alleged that on  January  12,	1979
Mahadev, a close relation of Gowramma came to their house at
about 4 p.m.  On that day apart from Lakshmanaiah, his	wife
and  two  children,  there  were  Gowramma,  Leelavathi	 and
Mahadev present in the house of Gowramma.  According to	 the
prosecution story Lakshmanaiah gave Rs.30 to his wife  which
she  further gave to her mother for buying clothes  for	 the
children  so  that they could wear the same on	the  ensuing
"Sankranti"  festival.	Gowramma and Leelavathi went to	 the
market	 to  buy  clothes  for	the  children.	  Thereafter
Lakshmanaiah  gave  Rs.	 2 to Mahadev and sent	him  to	 the
market	 to   bring  "Heralikayi"  a  sort   of	  vegetable.
Thereafter Lakshmanaiah was left alone in the house with his
wife  and two small children.  When Gowramma and  Leelavathi
came backfrom the market they found the two children  crying
outside the house.  On entering the house they did not	find
anybody inside.	 On further search they found the  dead-body
of  Nagarathnamma  in the bathroom, her head ducked  in	 the
bucket	full  of water.	 After some time Mahadev  also	came
back   to   the	 house	and  learnt  about  the	  death	  of
Nagarathnamma.	Gowramma came
						       583
to know from the neighbours that her son-in-law went out  of
the  house  some time back.  Case was  registered  with	 the
police.	   Lakshmanaiah	 was  found  absconding.   He	was,
however, arrested on January 16, 1979.
     There  is	no direct evidence against  the	 respondent.
The prosecution relied on the following circumstances:
     1. Motive as disclosed by Kalaraju PW 24,	Puttamadappa
PW 25, Gowramma PW26 and Leelavathi PW 27.
     2. Presence of deceased and the respondent in the house
of  PW 26 on the evening of January 12, 1979 as	 deposed  by
Mahadev PW 17, PW 26 and PW 27.
     3. After sending PW17, PW26 and PW27 from the house for
purchasing  clothes  and "Heralikayi",	the  respondent	 was
alone with the deceased along with two small children.
     4.	 The respondent was going towards  bus-stop  holding
his suit-case in his hand on the evening of January 12, 1979
as  seen by Subbaiah PW 14 and corroborated by Chikkaiah  PW
20 and Boraiah PW 22.
     5.	 The conduct of the accused in absconding  from	 the
evening	 of January 12, 1979 till he was apprehended on	 the
night of January 16, 1979.
     On the question of motive PW  25, PW 26 and PW 27	have
deposed	 that the respondent was demanding money from PW  26
through his wife and in that connection he used to  maltreat
her.   PW  24 also corroborated their  version.	  The  trial
court  rightly	did  not  attach  much	importance  to	 the
testimony  of  PW 24 but relying on the	 evidence  of  other
three witnesses, came to the conclusion that the  respondent
used to maltreat and assault his wife because she refused to
get  money for him from her mother.  The High Court has	 not
adverted to this aspect of the prosecution case.
     The   circumstances  regarding  the  presence  of	 the
respondent in the house of PW 26 and the act of his  sending
PW  17, PW 26 and  PW 27 to the market for making  purchases
have been sought to be proved by the testimony of PW 17,  PW
26 and PW 27.  Gowramma PW 26 has consistently deposed	that
the  respondent	 was living in her house and on January	 12,
1979 he gave Rs. 30 to her and asked her to purchase clothes
for the
						       584
children  to be worn on the festival of	 "Sankranthi".	 She
further	 deposed  that	she left the house  along  with	 her
daughter  PW 27. PW 17 Mahadev has deposed that he  went  to
the  market  to	 buy  "Heralikayi"  at	the  asking  of	 the
respondent.   The statements of these three  witnesses	have
been  relied  upon  by	the  trial  court  in  proving	 the
circumstance that the respondent was alone in the house with
his  wife and two children.  The trial court further  relied
upon   the  evidence  of  these	 witnesses  to	 prove	 the
circumstance  that  the respondent manipulated to  send	 the
three  witnesses out of the house on the pretext  of  buying
clothes	 and  "Heralikayi"  from the  market.	A  Bench  of
Karnataka  High	 Court consisting of M.S. Nesargi  and	D.R.
Vithal	Rao, JJ. disbelieved the testimony of PWs 26 and  27
on the following reasoning:
	 "In  the first instance, it has to be seen  whether
	 the accused had managed to send away PWs 26 and  27
	 to  purchase clothes for the children.	 It  is	 the
	 say  of PWs 26 and 27 that the accused gave Rs.  30
	 in  the  hands	 of the deceased and  asked  her  to
	 request  PW  26 to go to the  market  and  purchase
	 clothes for the children.  What is stated in Ex.P.1
	 in  this  behalf  is that  the	 deceased  told	 her
	 children to observe Sankranti festival and that the
	 accused  had  given  money in her  hands  for	that
	 purpose and requested her that she and PW 27 should
	 go  and purchase clothes. PW 26 told  the  deceased
	 that  she should go and bring clothes but she	said
	 that she was unable to walk that much distance	 and
	 requested  PW 26 and PW 27 themselves to go.	This
	 variance leads to an inference that the version  of
	 PW  26	 and PW 27 that the accused  had  asked	 the
	 deceased  to spend PW 26 and PW 27  for  purchasing
	 clothes  is a latter improvement made by PW 26	 and
	 PW 27.	 Therefore, we hold that the prosecution has
	 not succeeded beyond reasonable doubt to  establish
	 that  the accused had managed to send PW 26 and  PW
	 27 out of the house at that point of time".
     Since  the	 High Court has found contradiction  in	 the
statement of PW 26 and the FIR Exhibit-P.1 (got recorded  by
Gowramma) it would be useful to reproduce the relevant	part
of the FIR:
	 "My daughter gave me 30 rupees and told me that the
	 son-in-law  had  asked to buy new clothes  for	 the
	 children  and requested me to go and buy  them.   I
	 asked her to go and buy the
						       585
	 clothes herself but she asked me to go.  I went  to
	 the cloth shop along with my younger daughter."
     The  relevant  part  of the statement of PW  26  is  as
under:
	 "Then my son-in-law gave Rs. 30 to my daughter	 and
	 asked her to get cloth for the children through me.
	 I told my daughter that I find it difficult to make
	 purchases  and	 it was better for them	 to  go	 and
	 purchase  the cloth.  In turn my daughter told	 me.
	 "I cannot go there please go." I agreed and took my
	 younger  daughter  Leelavathi along with me to	 the
	 cloth	shop.	We  returned home  at  6.30  in	 the
	 evening after buying the cloth."
     Reading  the  two	quotes	above we  do  not  find	 any
contradiction.	We are at a loss to understand how the	High
Court has found contradiction in the statement of PW 26	 and
the  FIR  when none exists.  There has been  total  lack  of
application of mind on the part of the learned Judges of the
High  Court.  Even if there is any contradiction  on  a	 non
material point that is no ground to reject the whole of	 the
testimony of the witnesses.  The High Court did not make any
effort	to  read  the statements of PW 26  and	 PW  27	 and
appreciate the same.  We are of the view that the High Court
fell  into patent error in rejecting the testimony of PW  26
and  PW 27.  The High Court rejected the testimony of PW  17
on  the ground that the Investigating  Officer PW 31  stated
that Mahadev PW 17 had six "Heralikayis" in his hand at	 the
time  of  recording of his statement, whereas PW  29  stated
that after the occurrence when he went to the house of PW 26
he saw two "Heralikayis" in the hands of PW 17.	  Ultimately
three "Heralikayis" were produced in the court.	 Accordingly
to the High Court the discrepancy in regard to the number of
"Heralikayis"  is sufficient to reject the testimony  of  PW
17.  We do not agree with the High Court.  The material part
of the testimony of PW 17 is that he was sent to the  market
to  buy "Heralikayis".	Whether the "Heralikayis" were	two,
three or six was not material.	In any case the	 discrepancy
is  so	minor that it cannot render the testimony of  PW  17
unworthy of acceptance.	 The High Court was not justified in
rejecting the evidence of PW 17 on a flimsy ground.
     The trial court relying upon the testimony of PW 14, PW
20  and PW 22 came to the conclusion that  the	circumstance
relied	upon  by  the prosecution to  the  effect  that	 the
respondent was going towards bus-stand holding suit-case  in
his hand at about 6.30 p.m. on January 12, 1979 was
						       586
proved.	  There is no discussion, not even mention, of	this
circumstance by the High Court,.  According to us, the trial
court  rightly relied upon this circumstance  in  connecting
the respondent with the crime.	The High Court has also	 not
discussed   the	  circumstance	that  the   respondent	 was
absconding  till the night of January 16, 1979 when  he	 was
arrested   which   is  surely  a  link	in  the	  chain	  of
circumstances  to  establish that the respondent  alone	 had
committed the offence of murder of his wife.  All the  above
discussed  circumstances  would prove  that  the  respondent
alone had killed his wife Nagarathnamma and the	 prosecution
brought	 home the offence against the respondent beyond	 any
shadow of doubt.
     We	 are  of the view that the High	 Court	judgment  is
patently  perverse and has to be set aside.  We,  therefore,
allow  the appeal, reverse the High Court judgment  and	 set
aside  the  acquittal of the respondent under  Section	302,
Indian	Penal  Code.  We restore the judgment of  the  trial
court,	convict him under section 302, IPC and sentence	 him
to  undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.  We direct	that
the respondent Lakshmanaiah be taken into custody  forthwith
to undergo the balance sentence of imprisonment for life.
N.V.K.					     Appeal allowed.
						       587




