
Supreme Court of India
Pannalal Radhakrishna Poddar vs Dinkar Rai & Ors on 5 November, 2012Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1778-1779 OF 2012
            (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(CRL.)NOS.1122-1123 OF 2012)


PANNALAL RADHAKRISHNA PODDAR             APPELLANT


                                   VERSUS

DINKAR RAI & ORS.                        RESPONDENTS

                                  O R D E R

1.          Leave granted.

2.          These appeals are directed against the interim order  passed  by
the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Criminal Writ Petition No. 681  of
2011, dated 16th August, 2011 and 9th September, 2011.

3.          Tenant’s Writ Petition before the High  Court:  The  High  Court
while entertaining the Writ  Petition,  by  way  of  an  interim  order  has
permitted  the  tenant  to  make  an  application   before   the   Municipal
Corporation of Greater Bombay (respondent  no.3-herein)  for  regularization
of the unauthorized construction alleged to have been  carried  out  by  the
respondent/  tenant  and  further  has   directed   that   the   prosecution
proceedings initiated by the landlord against  the  respondent/  tenant  for
having made the unauthorized construction, be stayed, till  further  orders.
Being aggrieved by this portion of the order passed by  the  learned  Judge,
the appellant is before us in these civil appeals.

4.          The instant  case  has  a  checkered  history.  Allegations  and
counter allegations are being made by the landlord and  the  tenant  towards
each other.  However, we are not inclined to go into all  those  aspects  of
the matter while deciding these appeals.

5.          The tenant has approached the High  Court,  being  aggrieved  by
the orders passed by the learned Magistrate in issuing summons to  face  the
trial on the complaint filed by the landlord, inter alia, alleging that  the
respondent/tenant has made the unauthorized  construction  on  the  tenanted
premises.   Being  aggrieved  by  the  order  so  passed,  the  tenant   has
approached the High Court for seeking certain reliefs.  The  learned  Single
Judge, while  granting  interim  relief,  has  stayed  all  the  prosecution
proceedings against the tenant.  In our  opinion,  such  relief  should  not
have been granted in  a  matter  of  this  nature  and  therefore,  we  take
exception to the order passed by the High Court.

6.          Accordingly, we set aside that portion of the order,  where  the
High Court has stayed the prosecution  proceedings  against  the  tenant  in
question.

7.          Since the Writ Petition is still pending before the High  Court,
we hope and trust that the High Court will make all efforts  to  decide  the
dispute  between  the  parties  as  expeditiously  as  possible.   All   the
contentions of both the parties are left open.

8.          The Criminal Appeals are disposed of accordingly.

            Ordered accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)



                                                   .......................J.
                                                   (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 05, 2012.
-----------------------
3
