
Supreme Court of India
Manju vs The State Of Delhi on 17 December, 2019Author: R. Subhash Reddy
Bench: Mohan M. Shantanagoudar, R. Subhash Reddy
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013



                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1268 OF 2013



                           Manju                                        ....Appellant

                                                      Versus


                           State of Delhi                           ....Respondent




                                                  J U D G M E N T

                           R. Subhash Reddy, J.


                           1.   This criminal appeal is filed by the sole accused,

                           aggrieved by the judgment dated 12th March 2010 passed

                           in Criminal Appeal No.168 of 2010 by the High Court of

                           Delhi at New Delhi, by which the appellant herein was

                           convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment for the

                           offence punishable under Section 302, IPC.

                           2.   The appellant herein was admitted in the maternity

     Signature Not Verifiedward of the Lady Hardinge Medical College Hospital and
     Digitally signed by
     GULSHAN KUMAR
     ARORA
     Date: 2019.12.17
     16:36:42 IST
     Reason:
                           delivered a baby girl around 12:30 in the afternoon on

                           24th August 2007. It is the case of the prosecution that

                                                         1
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013


               as the new born was a baby girl, as such the appellant-

               mother has caused her death by strangulation after baby

               was handed over to her at 04:30 p.m. on the said date.

               On 26th August 2007 post-mortem was conducted on the

               dead body and the doctor opined that cause of death was

               asphyxia due to ante mortem strangulation.                               On 31st

               August 2007 a case was registered against the appellant

               for the offence under Section 302 IPC, for causing

               death of her new born baby.                        She was tried for the

               charge under Section 302 IPC by the court of Additional

               Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court, New Delhi. In her

               statement,         she    has    not    pleaded          guilty    and   claimed

               trial, as such, she was tried in Sessions Case No.78 of

               2009 by the Additional Sessions Judge, New Delhi.                            To

               prove the charge against the appellant, prosecution in

               all, has examined 23 witnesses. The evidence against

               the      accused    was    put    to    her        and    her   statement    was

               recorded under Section 313, Cr.P.C. she has pleaded her

               innocence      and       deposed       that     she       has     been   falsely

               implicated         by    the     police       in     connivance       with   the

               hospital authorities, to shift the blame from doctors

               on duty.

               3.       The trial court, by judgment dated 19.12.2009, by

               recording a finding that prosecution has been able to

                                                       2
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013


               prove complete chain of circumstances and proved its

               case beyond reasonable doubt, has held the appellant-

               accused is guilty for the commission of offence under

               Section 302 IPC and by order dated 22.12.2009 imposed

               the sentence of imprisonment for life and to pay a fine

               of Rs.2000/-.

               4.       As against the conviction recorded and sentence

               imposed the appellant carried the matter in appeal to

               the      High    Court    and    the    High    Court       by   the    impugned

               judgment, confirmed the conviction and sentence imposed

               on the appellant.

               5.       We   have     heard     Ms.   Mahalakshmi          Pavani,     learned

               senior        counsel      appearing        for       the    appellant        and

               Mr. Anmol Chandan, learned counsel appearing for the

               State of Delhi.

               6.       It     is     contended       by   learned         senior      counsel

               appearing        for     the    appellant      that    there      are    no   eye

               witnesses to the incident, and the incident is said to

               have happened in the ward of the hospital, where the

               delivery took place.             The conviction is based solely on

               circumstantial evidence and the chain of circumstances

               is not complete. It is submitted that the appellant had

               no reason to commit the murder of her new born baby

               girl as she already had a male child and her parents-

                                                       3
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013


               in-law      had   died   even   before          she   was    married.    By

               referring to the oral evidence of PW-8 and PW-9, it is

               submitted that even according to the deposition of said

               witnesses it is clearly established that the new born

               was kept in the incubator with an oxygen mask. Further

               the appellant-mother was sleepy in view of the drugs

               administered on her and by the time she has seen the

               child, the new born was dead.               It is submitted that the

               trial court as well as the High Court has committed

               error in convicting the appellant in absence of proving

               chain of circumstances, leading to her conviction. It

               is also brought to the notice of this Court that though

               incident occurred on 24th August 2007 post-mortem was

               conducted on the body only on 26th August and further,

               crime      was    registered    on       27th   August      2007.   It   is

               submitted, if the totality of evidence is taken into

               consideration, the guilt of the accused-appellant is

               not proved beyond reasonable doubt and the judgments of

               the High Court as well as the trial court are based on

               surmises and conjectures.

               7.       On the other hand, it is contended by the learned

               counsel appearing for the State, after the birth of the

               child the new born was kept in the incubator upto 04:30

               p.m. and after 04:30 p.m. baby girl was handed over to

                                                    4
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013


               the appellant herein.           Thereafter she was found dead by

               nursing staff of the hospital.                   Further it is submitted

               that      though    the    conviction           rests    on   circumstantial

               evidence, chain is established to prove the guilt of

               the      accused-appellant,       and       there       are   no   grounds    to

               interfere      with     the    well    considered         judgment    of     the

               trial court, as confirmed by the High Court.

               8.       Having heard learned counsel on both sides, we

               have perused the impugned judgments and other material

               placed on record.

               9.       In this case it is clear from the record that the

               conviction         of   the    appellant          herein      is    based     on

               circumstantial evidence. The trial court mainly relied

               on the evidence of two staff nurses – PW-8 and 9, who

               have deposed that baby girl was placed with the mother

               at about 04:30 p.m. and the child was found dead by

               06:30 p.m. The husband of the appellant was examined by

               the      prosecution      as   PW-7.       In    his    deposition    he     has

               stated that on 24th August 2007 he had taken his wife,

               i.e., the appellant herein to Lady Hardinge Medical

               College Hospital, for delivery and on the same day at

               around 12:00 noon appellant gave birth to a female

               baby.      He was called to the labour room and the nurse

               had shown him the new born baby and at that time eyes

                                                      5
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013


               of the baby were closed. She was not moving and she was

               not weeping.         He has also stated that there was also a

               red mark on the nose of the child. At around 05:00 p.m.

               again      when     he    was   called        by   the    nurse    and     he   was

               informed that child had expired and on questioning,

               staff have not given any reason for death. Further it

               is also stated that he was not allowed to meet his wife

               and he was allowed only after post-mortem was conducted

               on the body of the child on 26th August 2007. None of

               the       doctors    on    duty      on   the      date    of     delivery      was

               examined.         PW-8,    staff      nurse        was    examined.      In     her

               deposition        she     has   stated        that   new    born     was      under

               observation in incubator. She has deposed that the new

               born was handed over to the mother at around 04:30 p.m.

               by       taking   her     out   of    the      incubator.       Thereafter       at

               around 06:30 p.m. during rounds Ward Doctor found baby

               was sick. PW-8 in her cross-examination has stated that

               baby was on oxygen mask in the incubator. Another staff

               nurse, by name, Sangeeta Rani was examined as PW-9 who

               has deposed that on the date of incident she joined

               duty at 03:00 p.m. and new born baby had been kept in

               the incubator and had been on oxygen mask.

               10. By considering the oral evidence on record and

               taking into consideration the post-mortem report, the

                                                         6
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013


               appellant was convicted for the offence by attributing

               motive that she has strangulated her because the new

               born is a baby girl.              There is no evidence on record to

               draw such a conclusion against the appellant. It is

               clear from the evidence on record, as deposed by PW-7,

               they already had a male child of the age of 5 years.

               He has also stated that as they already had a male

               child,         they    wanted    a   female   child     to   complete   the

               family. He further stated that his brother had three

               daughters which shows that the family was not orthodox

               and was not averse to have a female child. It is clear

               from      the    evidence       on   record   that     immediately    after

               birth the baby was put in incubator with oxygen mask

               and it is also clear that she has not opened the eyes

               and      she    did    not    cry.   PW-7,    though    he   was   declared

               hostile by the prosecution, but he has stated in his

               deposition that he was called to the labour room at

               05:00 p.m. to inform that his baby had expired and he

               was not allowed to see her wife who is the appellant

               herein upto 26th August 2007 on which date dead body of

               the baby girl was sent for post-mortem. It is also to

               be noticed that there is no reason for sending the body

               for post-mortem on 26th August when the baby girl died

               on 24th August 2007.             At the same time, it is also to be

               noticed         that    the     crime   was   registered     against    the
                                                       7
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013


               appellant only on 31st August 2007. It is true that in

               the post-mortem, doctor has opined that death is due to

               asphyxia and there were marks of strangulation, but at

               the same time if totality of evidence on record is

               considered, motive is not established and it is totally

               unnatural for the appellant-mother to kill her own baby

               by strangulation. It is also clear from the record that

               in view of the drugs administered on her she was sleepy

               and drowsy. In absence of any clear evidence on record,

               High Court as well as the Trial Court committed error,

               in attributing motive to the appellant that, she has

               killed her baby as she was female. The Trial court as

               well     as   the     High     Court       has   based    conviction     on

               presumptions         without    any    basis.     It     is   fairly   well

               settled       that     to    base      conviction        solely   on   the

               circumstantial evidence, unless chain of circumstances

               is established conviction cannot be recorded.                     From the

               totality of evidence on record it is clear that the

               baby girl was put in incubator with an oxygen mask and

               she has also not opened her eyes and she did not cry

               after birth.         There was a possibility of natural death.

               Though the doctor has opined in the post-mortem report,

               the cause of death is asphyxia but in absence of any

               clear evidence on record it is not safe to convict the

               appellant for the offence under Section 302 IPC.                         As
                                                      8
Crl.A.No.1268 of 2013


               the evidence on record is not sufficient to bring home

               the guilt of the accused, beyond reasonable doubt. We

               are      of   the    considered   view    that    the    appellant   is

               entitled to benefit of doubt, for acquittal from the

               charge framed against her.

               11. For the aforesaid reasons, this criminal appeal is

               allowed.       The    judgment    of     the     trial   court   dated

               19.12.2009, as well as the impugned judgment of the

               High Court dated 12.03.2010, in Criminal Appeal No. 168

               of 2010 by the High Court of Delhi are set aside,

               consequently the appellant is acquitted of the charge

               framed against her. As the appellant is on bail, her

               bail bonds stand cancelled.


                                                        .................... J.
                                                        [MOHAN M.SHANTANAGOUDAR]




                                                        .................... J.
                                                        [R. SUBHASH REDDY]

               New Delhi.
               December 17, 2019.


                                                  9

