
Supreme Court of India
Kaki vs State Of Punjab on 5 May, 2009Bench: S.B. Sinha, Mukundakam Sharma
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 516 OF 2007
KAKI                                                                 ...    APPELLANT(S)
                                            :VERSUS:

STATE OF PUNJAB                                                      ...   RESPONDENT(S)



                                            ORDER

                Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and having been taken

       through the judgments of the Courts below as also keeping in view the position of the

       prosecutrix, we are of the opinion that no case has been made out for our interference

       in the matter.


                Admittedly, Ajaib Singh, who was convicted for commission of an offence

       under Section 376 of the I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

       10 years, has not approached this Court. The appellant herein is the sister of the

       mother of the prosecutrix. It has been established by the prosecution by bringing

       cogent and sufficient evidence on record that on the intervening night of 11/12.4.1992,

       the appellant enticed the prosecutrix to the house of one Sarwan Singh, which is at

       some distance, so as to facilitate Ajaib Singh to commit rape upon her.




                                           -2-
                Learned counsel for the appellant submits that keeping in view the fact that
the appellant has two daughters, the sentence imposed upon her may be converted

into the period already undergone by her.


         Keeping in view the object and the purport for which the provisions of

Section 366 of the I.P.C. was enacted and furthermore in view of the relationship

between the parties, on the basis whereof the prosecutrix must have placed explicit

trust and reliance on her for the purpose of accompanying her in the night to a place

at some distance, i.e. on the pretext that she (appellant) was going to the field for

easing herself, we are of the opinion that no case has been made out for interference

with the quantum of sentence.


         The appeal is accordingly dismissed.


                                                ...........................J
                                                (S.B. SINHA)



                                             ...........................J
                                            (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)

NEW DELHI,
MAY 5, 2009.

