
Supreme Court of India
Ramuthai vs State, Rep. By Inspector Of Police ... on 2 August, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 2316 of 2009

                                            1





                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2316 OF 2009





            RAMUTHAI                               .....        APPELLANT

                                          VERSUS

            STATE REP. BY 
            INSPECTOR OF POLICE & ANR.             .....        RESPONDENT




                                           WITH
                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2317 OF 2009



            NALLAN @ SANTHANAM                     .....        APPELLANT



                                          VERSUS

            STATE REP. BY 
            INSPECTOR OF POLICE & ANR.             .....        RESPONDENT





                                        O R D E R

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2317 OF 2009

                     The appellant Nallan is stated to have died during 

         the pendency of this appeal in this Court while undergoing 

         his sentence.   We, accordingly, dispose of the appeal as 

         having abated.




CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2316 OF 2009


Crl.A. No. 2316 of 2009

                                                2
         1.          This appeal arises out of the following facts:

         1.1         Malaisamy   the   deceased,   son   of   P.W.   1,   was   a 

         silversmith and was working in that capacity in some shop. 

         Palani   Kumar,   son   of   A1   and   A2   i.e.   Nallan   and   Ramuthai 

         respectively was a friend of the deceased. As Palani Kumar 

         was   a   person   of   dubious   credentials   A1   and   A2   were   not 

         happy  with  the  association  and  they  would  often  tell  the 

         accused   that   they   would   not   permit   their   son   to   go   with 

         them and some incident had taken place a week prior to the 

         present  one  and  there  was  a  great  deal  of  unpleasantness 

         on that account.   At about 9:00p.m. on the 21st September, 

         2002,   P.W.   1   Ramanathan   went   to   the   nearby   shop   to 

         purchase   a   beedi   while   the   deceased   followed   him   for 

         purchasing  a  mosquito  coil.    After  the  deceased  had  made 

         his purchase and was proceeding towards his house he found 

         A1  to  A6  armed  with  cutting  weapons  standing  and  waiting 

         for   him.     A2,   the   appellant   herein,   exhorted   her   co-

         accused   to   kill   Malaisamy   on   which   the   other   accused 

         attacked  him  with  their  weapons  killing  him  at  the  spot. 

         A First Information Report was thereafter lodged by P.W. 1 

         for   offences   punishable   under   Section   302   etc.   of   the 

         Indian Penal Code.   The trial court on a consideration of 

         the   evidence   acquitted   A7   and   A8   of   all   charges.     The 

         other   accused   were   however   convicted   and   sentenced   under 

         Section 302 etc. of the IPC and awarded suitable terms of 


Crl.A. No. 2316 of 2009

                                                  3





         imprisonment.   An appeal was thereafter taken to the High 

         Court by the convicted accused and the High Court has, by 

         the   impugned   judgment,   acquitted   A5   and   A6   as   well.     It 

         appears that A3 and A4 filed no special leave petitions in 

         this   Court   whereas   A1   and   A2   filed   Criminal   Appeal   Nos. 

         2316 and 2317 of 2009.  The appeal filed by A1 Nallan has 

         already been disposed of by us as having abated and we are 

         now     left   with   the   appeal   of   Ramuthai,   the   appellant 

         before us.

         2.          It   will   be   seen   that   the   appellant   has   been 

         convicted  under  Section  302  read  with  Section  109  of  the 

         IPC.   The basis of her conviction lies in the evidence of 

         four eye witnesses Pws. 1 to 4.  The High Court has found 

         that   P.Ws.   2   and   4   who   were   close   relatives   of   the 

         complainant party could not be relied upon and the entire 

         case   therefore   hinged   on   the   evidence   of   P.Ws.   1   and   3, 

         the father and the uncle of the deceased.  

         3.          Mr.   Jayanth   Muth   Raj,   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

         appellant    has,  accordingly,  argued  that  in  the  light  of 

         this uncertain evidence and in the background of the fact 

         that the appellant had been charged for exhorting her co-

         accused   to   kill   the   deceased   and   no   weapon   had   been 

         recovered   from   her,   it   could   not   be   said   that   she   had 

         abetted the murder.   He has further pointed out that some 

         emphasis had  been laid by the High Court on the statement 


Crl.A. No. 2316 of 2009

                                                 4





         of P.W. 3 who could be said to be an independent witness 

         as he had deposed that he and his brother P.W. 1 had not 

         been   on   speaking   terms   for   25   years   and   as   such   his 

         evidence could be relied upon.  Mr. Muth Raj has, however, 

         pointed   out   that   from   the   statement   of   P.W.   18,   the 

         Investigating Officer, it was not clear as to whether the 

         statement   of   P.W.   3   had   been   recorded   under   Section   161 

         Cr.P.C. or not and as such his evidence had to be looked 

         upon   with   suspicion.     He   has   finally   submitted   that   the 

         fact   that   P.W.   18,   the   Investigating   Officer,   bore   deep 

         animosity     with   A1   and   A2   was   clear   from   the   record 

         inasmuch   that   Palani   Kumar   aforesaid   had   died   in   police 

         custody   and   on   a   complaint   made   by   the   appellant,   an 

         inquiry had been conducted not only by the National Human 

         Rights   Commission   but   also   by   senior   police   officers 

         against him.  

         4.          Mr. Subramonium Prasad, the learned counsel for the 

         respondent-State   has   however,   supported   the   judgments   of 

         the trial court and the High Court.  

         5.          We   have   considered   the   arguments   advanced   by   the 

         learned counsel.   It is the obligation of the prosecution 

         to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and if a doubt 

         is   cast   on   the   evidence,   the   benefit   thereof   must   go   to 

         the   accused.     In   the   case   before   us   the   only   part 

         attributed  to  the  appellant  is  that  she  had  exhorted  her 


Crl.A. No. 2316 of 2009

                                                5





         co-accused   to   commit   the   murder.     We   find   this   to   be 

         rather  far-fetched  as  it  is  apparent  that  a  large  number 

         of   persons   had   come   armed   to   the   place   of   incident   and 

         there   was   no   need   for   her   to   exhort   them.     We   also   see 

         that the evidence of P.W. 5 on this aspect appears to be 

         somewhat ambivalent.  The High Court itself has refused to 

         rely on the evidence of P.W. 2 and P.W. 4 and as submitted 

         by   the   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant,   there   is   some 

         uncertainty with regard to the evidence of P.W.3 as well. 

         In   the   light   of   the   fact   that   P.W.   18   admittedly   bore 

         grievous enmity against A1 and A2 the possibility that he 

         had   roped   in   A2   to   make   out   a   false   case   to   settle 

         personal scores, cannot also be ruled out.  

         6.          For   these   cumulative   reasons,   we   find   that   the 

         appellant's conviction  is unacceptable.   We,  accordingly, 

         allow the appeal, set aside the order of the courts below 

         insofar   as   the   appellant   Ramuthai   is   concerned   and   order 

         her acquittal.  She is stated to be in custody.  She shall 

         be released forthwith if not wanted in connection with any 

         other case.


                                                        ......................J
                                                        [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]


Crl.A. No. 2316 of 2009

                             6





                                     ......................J
                                     [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]
         NEW DELHI
         AUGUST 02, 2011.


Crl.A. No. 2316 of 2009

                                                  7





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2316 OF 2009




            RAMUTHAI                                    .....         APPELLANT

                                               VERSUS

            STATE REP. BY 
            INSPECTOR OF POLICE & ANR.                  .....         RESPONDENT





                                             O R D E R




                     We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.

                     Vide our separate reasoned order, we have allowed 

         the appeal and ordered the acquittal of the appellant 

         herein.

                     It   is   stated   that   the   appellant   Ramuthai   is   in 

         custody.  She shall be released forthwith if not wanted 

         in connection with any other case. 

                     The reasoned order shall be separately placed on 

         record.  


                                                          ......................J
                                                          [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                          ......................J
                                                          [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]


Crl.A. No. 2316 of 2009

                             8





         NEW DELHI
         AUGUST 02, 2011.



