
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Leela Ram @ Leela Dhar on 13 December, 2018Author: Hon'Ble Dr. Chandrachud
Bench: Hon'Ble Dr. Chandrachud, M.R. Shah
                                           1


                                                                         REPORTABLE




                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1441 OF 2013


STATE OF RAJASTHAN                                                  ... APPELLANT(S)


                                          VS.

LEELA RAM @ LEELA DHAR                                            ... RESPONDENT(S)




                                   JUDGMENT

DR DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD, J.




1     This appeal arises from a judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court of

Judicature for Rajasthan dated 13 August 2008. The High Court, while allowing the

appeal filed by the respondent, convicted him under Section 304 Part-II of the Indian

Penal Code ('Penal Code') instead of Section 302. The High Court sentenced the

respondent to the period which was already undergone, stated to have been

approximately five years and five months. The State is in appeal against the decision.



2     A First Information Report was lodged by Satya Narayan Swami (PW-2) at
                                             2


Singhana (Rajasthan), that at about 6.30 p.m. on 27 February 2003, the deceased-Ram

Kumwar Swami - was proceeding for some work at a chakki. While he was passing by

the hand pump near the house of Sriram Swami, three persons - Rajesh, Jagdish and

Leela Ram (the respondent herein) attacked the deceased and caused serious injuries

to him. The case of the prosecution is that the respondent inflicted an axe injury on the

skull of the deceased which was the cause of death. Rajesh, Jagdish and the

respondent were tried for offences under Sections 341, 323, 336 and 302, read with

Section 34 of the Penal Code. The case of the prosecution rested principally on the

evidence of PW-1 Basanti Devi, the complainant PW-2 Satya Narayan Swami, PW-3

Nathu Ram and PW-4 Gyarsi Lal.           PW-1, PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4 were all eye-

witnesses to the incident. PW-4 is also an injured witness.



3     The cause of death, as deposed to by PW-5 Dr. Hari Singh          Gothwal, was the

injury which was sustained on the skull by the deceased. While conducting the post-

mortem, PW-5 observed the following injury on the body of the deceased:


             "Injury No.1 :- Crush injury 10 cm x 0.5 cm x depth of
             bone in the middle of the skull. The left eye was closed
             as an impact of this injury. The injury was caused with
             the help of sharp edged weapon. The injury was caused
             within the duration of six hours."

4     PW-4 Gyarsi Lal had also sustained the following injuries :


            "(1) Contusion 5x3 cm in the lower region of
                left thigh.
             (2) Abrasion and deformity 1x0.5 cm in the
                lower region of the right forearm."
                                               3
5     The Trial Court believed the depositions of PW-1, PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4.

Adverting to the evidence of PW-2, the Trial Court held that the accused had launched

an assault on his brother with an intention to grab the possession of his land. All the

above eye-witnesses stated that the respondent-Leela Ram had attacked the deceased

with an axe on the skull. PW-5 stated that the injury on the skull was the cause of

death and was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course. Besides the ocular

evidence of PW-1 to PW-4, the medical evidence and the deposition of PW-5, the

prosecution relied on the recovery of a blood stained axe at the behest of the

respondent. The axe was recovered vide seizure memo Exh. P-18. The Trial Court

convicted Leela Ram for the offences under Sections 341, 323 and 302 of the Penal

Code. He was, however, acquitted of the offence under Section 336. Rajesh and

Jagdish were acquitted by the Trial Court.




6     Criminal Appeal No.580/2005 was filed by the respondent against the judgment

of conviction. A criminal revision, being Criminal Revision Petition No.958/2005, was

filed by the complainant against the acquittal of the two co-accused.




7     The High Court by its judgment dated 13 August 2008, allowed the appeal of the

respondent in part and convicted him of an offence under Section 304 Part-II of the

Penal Code. In coming to this conclusion, the High Court adverted to the following

circumstances, which in its view emerged from the evidence adduced by the

prosecution:


               “(i)   Prosecution is able to establish that appellant
                      inflicted injury with blunt object on the head of
                                               4


                      the deceased.

              (ii)    Injury on head attributed to appellant gets
                      corroboration from the post mortem report.

              (iii)   The death was caused without premeditation and
                      the appellant did not act in a cruel or unusual
                      manner. Incident appears to have occurred on a
                      spur of moment. Something sparked suddenly
                      and appellant inflicted single blow on the head of
                      Ram Kumar.

              (iv)    There is no trustworthy evidence on record to
                      prove that co-accused Rajesh Kumar and
                      Jagdish Prasad had shared common intention
                      with the appellant."

8       The revision filed by the complainant was dismissed.



9       Assailing the judgment of the High Court, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the State of Rajasthan submits that :

(i)     The consistent account of four eye-witnesses - PW-1, PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4

        indicates that it was the respondent who had inflicted an injury with an axe on a

        vital part of the body of the deceased, namely, his skull;

(ii)    The medical evidence in the form of the post-mortem report and the deposition of

        PW-5 establishes beyond doubt that the death was caused as a result of the

        injury sustained because of a sharp-edged weapon; and

(iii)   The fact that the injury was caused by the axe is also corroborated by its

        recovery vide seizure memo Exh.P-18 and by the FSL report which reported

        blood stains on the axe.



Learned counsel submits that the finding of the High Court that an incident took place

without pre-meditation, so as to bring the case within the Exception 4 of Section 300 of
                                            5


the Penal Code, is based on no evidence whatsoever. On the contrary, the evidence

clearly establishes that the respondent was armed with a lethal weapon which was

used to inflict a serious injury on a vital part of the body of the deceased. Learned

counsel submits that the mere fact that there was a single blow, is not a circumstance

which would warrant the conviction under Section 302 being altered to one under

Section 304 Part-II. On the contrary, learned counsel submitted that the case would fall

under Section 300 (Fourthly) since the act of the respondent was so imminently

dangerous that it must in all probability cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to

cause death.



10    On the other hand, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent

submitted that the case of the prosecution has been disbelieved by the Trial Court in

regard to the two co-accused - Rajesh and Jagdish. According to this submission, the

prosecution had sought to adduce evidence to the effect that a lathi had been used in

the course of the incident by the two co-accused. This was not accepted by the Trial

Court. Hence, emphasis was placed on the evidence of PW-5 that the injury could

have been caused due to a blunt object. The judgment of the High Court convicting the

respondent under 304 Part-II, it was urged, ought not to be disturbed.



11    In assessing the rival submissions, it would be necessary to advert to the

evidence of the four eye-witnesses who have been believed, both by the Trial Court and

by the High Court, insofar as the complicity of the respondent is concerned. PW-2, who

is the complainant, has deposed to the genesis of the incident. According to him, when

the deceased was passing by the house of Sri Ram Swamy, he was seized upon by the

respondent (together with the two co-accused). Leela Ram, the respondent, inflicted an
                                                      6


axe blow on the skull of the deceased. The evidence of PW-2 on the involvement of the

respondent finds abundant corroboration in the deposition of PW-1 Basanti Devi, the

complainant PW-2 Satya Narayan Swami, PW-3 Nathu Ram and PW-4 Gyarsi Lal.

PW-4, is an injured eye-witness.              His presence is hence established in any event

beyond all reasonable doubt. From the evidence of these witnesses coupled with the

medical evidence, it has emerged that the respondent inflicted an axe blow in the centre

of the skull of the deceased. The evidence of PW-5 was clear in indicating that the

injury was caused with the help of a sharp edged weapon. PW-5 also stated that the

cranium and spinal cord and the parietal bone had been fractured. The injury on the

skull, lead to coma and was the cause of death. Coupled with these circumstances is

the recovery of the weapon of offence which was found to be blood stained. On the

basis of this unimpeachable evidence, it is clear that : (i) death was caused as a result

of the injury inflicted upon the skull of the deceased by the use of the axe; and (ii) the

respondent was the author of the injury and wielded the axe, as a result of which death

was the immediate and natural cause.



12        In Mahesh Balmiki v State of M P1, this Court while deciding the question of

whether a single blow with a knife on the chest of the deceased would attract Section

302, held thus:


                  “9. … there is no principle that in all cases of a single blow
                  Section 302 IPC is not attracted. A single blow may, in some
                  cases, entail conviction under Section 302 IPC, in some
                  cases under Section 304 IPC and in some other cases under
                  Section 326 IPC. The question with regard to the nature of
                  offence has to be determined on the facts and in the
                  circumstances of each case. The nature of the injury, whether
                  it is on the vital or non-vital part of the body, the weapon
1
    (2000) 1 SCC 319
                                                        7


                  used, the circumstances in which the injury is caused and the
                  manner in which the injury is inflicted are all relevant factors
                  which may go to determine the required intention or
                  knowledge of the offender and the offence committed by him.
                  In the instant case, the deceased was disabled from saving
                  himself because he was held by the associates of the
                  appellant who inflicted though a single yet a fatal blow of the
                  description noted above. These facts clearly establish that the
                  appellant had the intention to kill the deceased. In any event,
                  he can safely be attributed the knowledge that the knife-blow
                  given by him was so imminently dangerous that it must in all
                  probability cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to
                  cause death.”



In Hukam Chand v State of Haryana2, this Court while dealing with the question of

whether a blow on the skull with a pharsa would attract a conviction under Section 302,

held thus :


                  “15. Coming back to the issue raised as regards the
                  invocation of Section 304 Part II IPC, strong reliance was
                  placed on a decision of this Court in Pularu v. State of
                  M.P.[1993 SCC (Cri) 1023 : AIR 1993 SC 1487] , wherein K.
                  Jayachandra Reddy, J., as His Lordship then was, speaking
                  for the Bench in para 7 of the Report stated: [SCC (Cri) p.
                  1025, para 7]

                  “7. That takes us to the nature of the offence. All the three
                  eyewitnesses have spoken that the appellant dealt only one
                  blow with the agricultural implement. Having regard to the
                  time and the surrounding circumstances it is difficult to hold
                  that he intended to cause the death of the deceased
                  particularly, when he was not armed with any deadly weapon
                  as such. As an agriculturist he must have been having a
                  tabbal in his hands and if in those circumstances he dealt a
                  single blow it is difficult to convict him by invoking clause 1stly
                  or 3rdly of Section 300 IPC. It cannot be said that he intended
                  to cause that particular injury which unfortunately resulted in
                  the fracture of bones. Therefore, the offence committed by
                  him would be one amounting to culpable homicide punishable
                  under Section 304 Part II IPC…

                  16. While it is true that there was only one blow but the
                  medical evidence on record definitely indicates that the
                  severity of the blow was such that it was sufficient for causing

2
    (2002) 8 SCC 421
                                                       8


                  death. In Pularu [1993 SCC (Cri) 1023 : AIR 1993 SC 1487]
                  the appellant dealt only one blow with an agricultural
                  implement. This Court having regard to the fact that Pularu
                  was an agriculturist came to a conclusion that question of
                  there being any intent to cause death of the deceased would
                  not arise since he was not armed with any deadly weapon as
                  such. Presently, however, the situation is slightly different.
                  Hukam Chand was in the house. He was called in and he
                  arrived at the scene and place of occurrence with a pharsa
                  which by all means is a deadly weapon and it is this pharsa
                  which was used to hit the deceased at his head resulting in
                  his immediate collapse and subsequent death. The story set
                  up by the appellant, as noticed hereinbefore belies the
                  incident and cannot but be ascribed to be a totally fabricated
                  one. Injuries suffered by Udai Chand, the deceased, cannot
                  be said to be inflicted as a matter of chance while grappling
                  with each other. The nature of the injuries, as noticed
                  hereinbefore, depicts it otherwise. If that be the case which
                  stands to reason that there was in fact a deliberate pharsa-
                  blow on the deceased, then and in that event, a simple
                  question by itself would negate the plea of the accused,
                  namely, as to the reason why Hukam Chand arrived at the
                  place of occurrence with a pharsa in his hand. The factum of
                  bringing in the pharsa at the place of occurrence from his
                  house when he was sent for cannot be ignored. It definitely
                  indicates the intent to use it and thereby cause death.”




In Dhirajbhai Gorakhbhai Nayak v State of Gujarat3, this Court while discussing the

ingredients of the Exception 4 of Section 300 IPC, held thus:



                  “11. The fourth exception of Section 300 IPC covers acts
                  done in a sudden fight. The said Exception deals with a case
                  of prosecution (sic provocation) not covered by the first
                  exception, after which its place would have been more
                  appropriate. The Exception is founded upon the same
                  principle, for in both there is absence of premeditation. But,
                  while in the case of Exception 1 there is total deprivation of
                  self-control, in case of Exception 4, there is only that heat of
                  passion which clouds men's sober reason and urges them to
                  deeds which they would not otherwise do. There is
                  provocation in Exception 4 as in Exception 1, but the injury
                  done is not the direct consequence of that provocation. In
                  fact, Exception 4 deals with cases in which notwithstanding


3
    (2003) 9 SCC 322
                                                       9


                  that a blow may have been struck, or some provocation given
                  in the origin of the dispute or in whatever way the quarrel may
                  have originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties
                  puts them in respect of guilt upon an equal footing. A “sudden
                  fight” implies mutual provocation and blows on each side. The
                  homicide committed is then clearly not traceable to unilateral
                  provocation, nor could in such cases the whole blame be
                  placed on one side. For if it were so, the Exception more
                  appropriately applicable would be Exception 1. There is no
                  previous deliberation or determination to fight. A fight
                  suddenly takes place, for which both parties are more or less
                  to be blamed. It may be that one of them starts it, but if the
                  other had not aggravated it by his own conduct it would not
                  have taken the serious turn it did. There is then mutual
                  provocation and aggravation, and it is difficult to apportion the
                  share of blame which attaches to each fighter. The help of
                  Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused (a) without
                  premeditation, (b) in a sudden fight, (c) without the offenders
                  having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
                  manner, and (d) the fight must have been with the person
                  killed. To bring a case within Exception 4 all the ingredients
                  mentioned in it must be found. It is to be noted that the “fight”
                  occurring in Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC is not defined in
                  IPC. It takes two to make a fight. Heat of passion requires that
                  there must be no time for the passions to cool down and in
                  this case, the parties had worked themselves into a fury on
                  account of the verbal altercation in the beginning. A fight is a
                  combat between two and more persons whether with or
                  without weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any general
                  rule as to what shall be deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is a
                  question of fact and whether a quarrel is sudden or not must
                  necessarily depend upon the proved facts of each case. For
                  the application of Exception 4, it is not sufficient to show that
                  there was a sudden quarrel and there was no premeditation. It
                  must further be shown that the offender has not taken undue
                  advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. The
                  expression “undue advantage” as used in the provision
                  means “unfair advantage”.”



In Pulicherla Nagaraju v State of A P4, this Court while deciding whether a case falls

under Section 302 or 304 Part I of 304 Part II, held thus :

                  “29. Therefore, the court should proceed to decide the pivotal
                  question of intention, with care and caution, as that will decide
                  whether the case falls under Section 302 or 304 Part I or 304
                  Part II. Many petty or insignificant matters — plucking of a

4
    (2006) 11 SCC 444
                                                        10


                  fruit, straying of cattle, quarrel of children, utterance of a rude
                  word or even an objectionable glance, may lead to
                  altercations and group clashes culminating in deaths. Usual
                  motives like revenge, greed, jealousy or suspicion may be
                  totally absent in such cases. There may be no intention.
                  There may be no premeditation. In fact, there may not even
                  be criminality. At the other end of the spectrum, there may be
                  cases of murder where the accused attempts to avoid the
                  penalty for murder by attempting to put forth a case that there
                  was no intention to cause death. It is for the courts to ensure
                  that the cases of murder punishable under Section 302, are
                  not converted into offences punishable under Section 304
                  Part I/II, or cases of culpable homicide not amounting to
                  murder, are treated as murder punishable under Section 302.
                  The intention to cause death can be gathered generally from
                  a combination of a few or several of the following, among
                  other, circumstances: (i) nature of the weapon used; (ii)
                  whether the weapon was carried by the accused or was
                  picked up from the spot; (iii) whether the blow is aimed at a
                  vital part of the body; (iv) the amount of force employed in
                  causing injury; (v) whether the act was in the course of
                  sudden quarrel or sudden fight or free for all fight; (vi) whether
                  the incident occurs by chance or whether there was any
                  premeditation; (vii) whether there was any prior enmity or
                  whether the deceased was a stranger; (viii) whether there
                  was any grave and sudden provocation, and if so, the cause
                  for such provocation; (ix) whether it was in the heat of
                  passion; (x) whether the person inflicting the injury has taken
                  undue advantage or has acted in a cruel and unusual
                  manner; (xi) whether the accused dealt a single blow or
                  several blows. The above list of circumstances is, of course,
                  not exhaustive and there may be several other special
                  circumstances with reference to individual cases which may
                  throw light on the question of intention. Be that as it may.”


In Singapagu Anjaiah v State of A P5, this Court while deciding the question of

whether a blow on the skull of the deceased with a crowbar would attract Section 302,

held thus :

                  “16. In our opinion, as nobody can enter into the mind of the
                  accused, his intention has to be gathered from the weapon
                  used, the part of the body chosen for the assault and the
                  nature of the injuries caused. Here, the appellant had chosen
                  a crowbar as the weapon of offence. He has further chosen a
                  vital part of the body i.e. the head for causing the injury which


5
    (2010) 9 SCC 799
                                                      11


                  had caused multiple fractures of skull. This clearly shows the
                  force with which the appellant had used the weapon. The
                  cumulative effect of all these factors irresistibly leads to one
                  and the only conclusion that the appellant intended to cause
                  death of the deceased.”



In Som Raj v State of H P6, this Court while deciding the question of whether a single

blow on the skull with a darat would attract conviction under Section 302, held thus :

                  “16.2. From the statements of Dr Suman Saxena (PW 4) and
                  Dr B.M. Gupta (PW 5), the nature of injuries caused to the
                  deceased has been brought out. A perusal thereof would
                  leave no room for doubt that the appellant-accused had
                  chosen the sharp side of the darat and not the blunt side. The
                  ferocity with which the aforesaid blow was struck clearly
                  emerges from the fact that the blow resulted in cutting
                  through the skull of the deceased and caused a hole therein,
                  resulting in exposing the brain tissue. When a blow with a
                  deadly weapon is struck with ferocity, it is apparent that the
                  assailant intends to cause bodily injury of a nature which he
                  knows is so imminently dangerous, that it must in all
                  probability cause death.

                  16.3. The place where the blow was struck (at the back of the
                  head of the deceased) by the appellant-accused, also leads
                  to the same inference.

                  16.4. It is not the case of the appellant-accused that the
                  occurrence arose out of a sudden quarrel. It is also not his
                  case that the blow was struck in the heat of the moment. It is
                  not even his case that he had retaliated as a consequence of
                  provocation at the hands of the deceased. He has therefore
                  no excuse for such an extreme act.

                  16.5. Another material fact is the relationship between the
                  parties. The appellant-accused was an uncle to the
                  deceased. In such circumstances, there is hardly any cause
                  to doubt the intent and knowledge of the appellant-accused.

                  16.6. Besides the aforesaid factual position, it would be
                  incorrect to treat the instant incident as one wherein a single
                  blow had been inflicted by the accused. As many as five
                  witnesses of the occurrence have stated in unison, that the
                  appellant-accused was in the process of inflicting a second
                  blow on the deceased, when they caught hold of him,


6
    (2013) 14 SCC 246
                                                 12


             whereupon one of them (Mohinder Singh, PW 6) snatched
             the darat from the appellant-accused, and threw it away. In
             such a situation, it would be improper to treat/determine the
             culpability of the appellant-accused by assuming that he had
             inflicted only one injury on the deceased.

             16.7. Keeping in mind the parameters of the judgments
             referred to by the learned counsel for the rival parties (which
             have been extracted above), we have no doubt in our mind
             that the appellant-accused must be deemed to have
             committed the offence of “culpable homicide amounting to
             murder” under Section 302 of the Penal Code, as the
             appellant-accused Som Raj had struck the darat-blow with
             the intention of causing such bodily injury, which he knew was
             so imminently dangerous, that it would in all probability cause
             the death of Sardari Lal. Having recorded the aforesaid
             conclusion, we are satisfied, that the appellant-accused was
             justifiably convicted for the offence under Section 302 of the
             Penal Code and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment
             for life, as also, to pay a fine of Rs 10,000 (and in default, to
             undergo further simple imprisonment for a period of one
             year).
             17. In view of our aforesaid conclusions, the instant appeal
             being devoid of merit, is dismissed.”



13    The High Court has, in our view, proceeded entirely on the basis of surmise in

opining that the death was caused without pre-meditation and on the spur of the

moment.    In arriving at that inference, the High Court has evidently ignored the

evidence, bearing upon the nature of the incident, the consistent account that it was the

respondent who had inflicted the blow, the weapon of offence and the vital part of the

body on which the injury was inflicted. The fact that the co-accused, Rajesh and

Jagdish, have been acquitted by the Trial Court, is in our view no reason to doubt the

testimony of all the eye-witnesses which implicated the respondent. The death was

attributable to the assault by the respondent on the deceased, during the course of the

incident. Having regard to the above facts and circumstances of the case, it is evident

that the injury which was caused to the deceased was [within the meaning of Section

300 (Fourthly)] of a nature that the person committing the act knew that it was so
                                            13


imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death or such bodily injury as

is likely to cause death.

14    In seeking to place the facts of the present case within the Exception 4, the High

Court has dwelt on whether the incident took place without pre-meditation. Exception 4

is extracted below :


             "Exception 4.- Culpable homicide is not murder if it is
             committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the
             heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the
             offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a
             cruel or unusual manner."

15    Under Exception 4, culpable homicide is not murder if the stipulations contained

in that provision are fulfilled. They are : (i) that the act was committed without pre-

meditation; (ii) that there was a sudden fight; (iii) the act must be in the heat of passion

upon a sudden quarrel; and (iv) the offender should not have taken undue advantage or

acted in a cruel or unusual manner.




16    While learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent sought to place

reliance on the statement of the respondent under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973, that it was the deceased who came to their house and started pelting

stones, it is evident that this defence has no basis in the evidence. Above all, the

deceased was unarmed when he was seized upon and assaulted by the respondent.
                                           14


17    In the above circumstances, we are affirmatively of the view that the judgment of

the High Court is manifestly perverse and is totally contrary to the evidence on the

record. The interference of this Court is warranted to obviate a complete failure or

miscarriage of justice.




18    We allow the appeal and while setting aside the judgment of the High Court,

restore the conviction of the respondent by the Trial Court under Section 302 of the

Penal Code.     The respondent is sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life.        The

respondent shall forthwith surrender to his sentence. A copy of this order shall be

forwarded by the Registry to the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the area concerned to

secure compliance.




19    Pending application, if any, shall stand disposed of.




                                            ………..…………………….............................J.
                                             [DR DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD]



                                            ………………………………...........................J.
                                             [M R SHAH]
New Delhi;
13th December, 2018.

