
Supreme Court of India
Mool Chand And Anr vs State Of Rajasthan on 29 March, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 761 of 2005

                                                1





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 761 of 2005





            MOOL CHAND AND ANR.                       ..... APPELLANT



                                             VERSUS

             
            STATE OF RAJASTHAN                           .....       RESPONDENT





                                              WITH

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 968 OF 2005





                                           O R D E R

         Criminal Appeal No. 968 of 2005

                     Mr.   Calla,   learned   Senior   counsel   appearing   on 

         behalf   of   the   appellant   states   that   the   apepllant   has 

         already undergone the sentence awarded to him and he has 

         since   been   released,   he   does   not   press   this   appeal. 

         This Appeal stands dismissed as not pressed.




         Criminal Appeal No. 761 of 2005


Crl.A. No. 761 of 2005

                                                 2
         1.          Appellants are father-in-law and mother-in-law of 

         the   deceased   Premlata.     They   alongwith   the   husband   of 

         the   deceased   namely   Virendra   Kumar   and   their   daughter 

         Alka were put on trial for the offences under Sections 

         302, 304B and 498A of the Indian Penal Code.   The trial 

         court by its judgment dated 7th February, 2001, acquitted 

         the   appellants   and   their   daughter   of   all   the   charges 

         levelled   against   them.     However,   the   husband   Virendra 

         Kumar   was   found   guilty   of   offence   under   Sections   304B 

         and   498A   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code.     The   State   of 

         Rajasthan   aggrieved   by   the   acquittal   of   the   appellants 

         and   Alka   preferred   an   appeal   before   the   High   Court. 

         Virendra   Kumar,   aggrieved   by   his   conviction   had   also 

         preferred   an   apepal.     Both   the   apepals   were   heard 

         together by the High Court and disposed of by a common 

         judgment.  The appeal preferred by the State against the 

         acquittal of the appellants and Alka was partly allowed. 

         The High Court maintained the acquittal of Alka but set 

         aside   the   order   of   acquittal   of   the   appellants   and 

         convicted them for offences under Section 304B and 498A 

         of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to undergo 

         rigorous   imprisonment   for   seven   years   and   three   years 

         respectively besides the fine.


         2.          Appellants,   aggrieved   by   the   same   have   preferred 


Crl.A. No. 761 of 2005

                                                3





         this appeal.


         3.          The prosecution commenced on the basis of a report 

         given   by   the   father   of   the   deceased   P.W.   1   Ramesh 

         Chander on 16.7.1998 alleging therein that his daughter 

         Premlata   was   married   to   accused   Virendra   Kumar   about 

         four   years   ago.     He   received   an   information   on   phone 

         from   the   co-accused   Alka   (since   acquitted)   that   the 

         deceased, his daughter - Premlata, had committed suicide 

         by hanging herself.   According to the report, after ten 

         minutes   of   the   aforesaid   telephonic   conversation,   he 

         received   another   telephone   call   from   the   appellant 

         Sunita, mother-in-law asking him to come immediately to 

         take the dead body of his daughter.   On the telephonic 

         communication the informant Ramesh Chand along with his 

         other   family   members   and   friends   reached   at   the 

         matrimonial   home   of   their   daughter   and   found   the   dead 

         body   hanging   with   a   sari.     It   has   been   alleged   by   the 

         father   of   the   deceased   that   the   accused   persons   had 

         hanged his daughter and further that the appellants were 

         regularly   making   demands   for   dowry   and   due   to   the 

         harrassment meted out to the her, she committed suicide.




         4.          The trial court on perusal of the evidence came to 

         the   conclusion   that   there   is   no   evidence   to   show   that 


Crl.A. No. 761 of 2005

                                                   4





         these   appellants   harassed   the   deceased   for   demand   of 

         dowry soon before the death and, accordingly, acquitted 

         these   appellants.     In   this   connection,   the   trial   court 

         observed as follows:


                           "There   is   no   evidence   of   the 
                   prosecution side to prove the offence under 
                   Section   498A   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code.     In 
                   Ex.   P-1   there   is   no   such   evidence   that   the 
                   deceased   was   used   to   be   harassed   or 
                   distressed   or   used   to   be   taunted   or 
                   subjected to cruel behaviour and nor in the 
                   police   statement,   there   is   any   such 
                   statement.     Even   to   the   extent   that   in   the 
                   statement recorded before the court, it has 
                   not   been   revealed   that   as   to   what 
                   illtreatment   or   cruelty   was   subjected   with 
                   the   deceased   Smt.   Premlata   by   her   in-laws 
                   for dowry demand."

         5.          The   High   Court,   however,   in   appeal   without 

         assigning   any   reason   came   to   the   conclusion   that   the 

         finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court is not 

         based on correct appreciation of evidence.  We have been 

         taken through the evidence of the prosecution witnesses 

         and   from   that   it   cannot   be   inferred   that   these 

         appellants   subjected   the   deceased   to   cruelty   in 

         connection   with   the   demand   of   dowry   soon   before   the 

         death.  


         6.          In our opinion, the trial court while giving the 

         appellants   benefit   of   doubt   assigned   good   and   cogent 


Crl.A. No. 761 of 2005

                                                 5





         reasons   and   in   any   view   of   the   matter   the   conclusion 

         arrived by it was one of the possible conclusion.   That 

         being   the   position,   the   High   Court   erred   in   reversing 

         the judgment of acquittal to that of conviction.  




         7.          In   the   result,   the   appeal   is   allowed,   impugned 

         judgment of conviction and sentence is set aside.   The 

         appellants   are   on   bail.     They   are   discharged   of   their 

         bail bonds. 


                                           ..............................J
                                           [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                           ..............................J
                                           [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

         NEW DELHI
         MARCH 29, 2011.



