
Supreme Court of India
Prahlad vs The State Of Rajasthan on 14 November, 2018Bench: M R Shah, M M Shantanagoudar, N V Ramana
                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


           CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1794­1796 OF 2017




      Prahlad                                               ..Appellant


                                     Versus


      State of Rajasthan                                  ..Respondents
                                   O R D E R




      These   appeals   are   presented   by   the   convicted

accused/appellant (hereinafter referred to as ‘accused’) against the

judgment dated 1.9.2016 passed by the High Court of Judicature at

Rajasthan   in   D.B.   Criminal   Murder   (Death)   Reference   No.   01   of

                                                                             1
2015,   D.B.  Criminal   Appeal Nos. 970 of 2015 and  D.B. Criminal

Jail Appeal No. 1011 of 2015. By the impugned judgment, the High

Court   confirmed   the   judgment   dated   18.9.2015   passed   by   the

District   and   Sessions   Judge,   Pratapgarh,   imposing   capital

punishment   in   Sessions   Case   No.   149   of   2013   for   committing

offences punishable under Section 302 IPC, and under Sections 3

and 4 of The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012

(hereinafter referred to as ‘the POCSO Act’).


2.    The case of the prosecution in brief is that the minor daughter

(X) of the informant Prabhu Lal, aged about 8 years, was taken at

around   4.00   p.m.   on   5.7.2013   while   she   was   playing   along   with

other children at the informant’s house. She was taken away by the

accused   on   the   pretext   of   giving   her   chocolates   from   a   shop.

However, the minor victim (X) did not come back. The informant,

his brother Bhanwar Lal, and other family members were not in the

house   that   evening   at   the   relevant   time   and   they   were   informed

about the incident subsequently by the informant’s niece Lali when

they   came   back   to   their   house.   They   searched   for   the   girl

throughout   the   night,   however  in  the   morning  to   the  informant’s

                                                                                2
dismay, the body of X was found near the house of Nagji, son of

Gautam Meena. The first information was lodged at 1.00 p.m. on

6.7.2013 by the father of X, with the allegations of rape and murder

against   the   accused.   The   Trial   Court   upon   evaluation   of   the

material   on   record,   convicted   the   accused   for   the   offences

punishable under Section 302 IPC, and under Sections 3 and 4 of

POCSO   Act,   vide   judgment   dated   18.9.2015   and   passed   the

sentence   of   capital   punishment.   Consequently,   the   Trial   Court

made reference to the High Court under Section 366 of Cr.P.C. for

the confirmation of this death sentence. The accused also preferred

appeals against the judgment and order of conviction, and sought

for acquittal. The reference was allowed, and the appeals filed by

the convicted accused came to be dismissed by the High Court.  


3.    The   learned   counsel   for   the   accused   taking   us   through   the

material on record submits that the Trial Court is not justified in

convicting the accused for the offences under Section 302 IPC as

well   as   under   Section   4   of   the   POCSO   Act.   The   case   rests   on

circumstantial   evidence   and   these   circumstances   are   not   duly

proved.  He further argues that the chain of circumstances is not

                                                                                 3
complete   and,   therefore,   the   accused   is   entitled   for   acquittal.   He

also submits that, absolutely no evidence is found on record against

him   for   the   offences   under   Sections   3   and   4   of   the   POCSO   Act.

Lastly, he submits that the imposition of capital punishment on the

accused is illegal, and the case at hand is not a rarest of the rare

case.


        Per contra, the learned counsel for the State argues in support

of the judgments of the courts below.


4.      The   present   case   rests   on   circumstantial   evidence.   The

evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 4 clearly prove that the mother of the

deceased was treating the accused as her own brother, and on the

eve of Rakhi festival, she even used to tie Rakhi on the hand of the

accused. Hence, the child of the informant was treating the accused

as a maternal uncle and this fact was also known to all the villagers

because the accused used to visit the residence of the informant as

one   of   their   relatives.   All   the   family   members   of   the   informant

trusted the accused. Since the deceased was treating the accused

as her uncle, she did not have any reason to disbelieve or doubt the

offer made to go with him for getting the chocolates.

                                                                                   4
5.    PW2, Lali @ Lalita has deposed that the accused came to the

house   of   the   informant   and   took   his   daughter   with   him.   PW4,

Chameli   also   has   deposed   that,   on   the   date   of   the   incident,   the

accused   took   the   minor   victim   on   the   pretext   of   giving   her

chocolates   and   also   deposed   that,   at   the   point   of   time   of   the

incident,   the   child   was   8   years   of   age.     Because   of   the   cordial

relationship the accused had with the victim’s family, PWs 2 and 4

thought that the accused had taken the child genuinely for getting

her chocolates without any ill intentions.


6.    From the evidence of PWs 2 and 4 as well as the evidence of

the  informant PW1, it  is clear that the accused was treated as a

family member of the informant and that the minor victim believed

that the accused is her Mama (uncle) due to the trust her family

had   upon   the   accused,   because   of   which,   the   victim   went   along

with the accused when she was offered the chocolates and toffee.

The   evidence   also   supports   the   case   of   the   prosecution   fully   in

respect of the last seen circumstance.


7. PW5, Sattu is a shopkeeper from whom the accused purchased

the chocolates, biscuit and miraz. The evidence of PW7, Shyam Lal
                                                                                    5
also   supports   the   evidence   of   PW5   relating   to   the   purchase   of

chocolates and  miraz  from the shop. PW9, Dashrath also supports

the evidence of the prosecution, more particularly the evidence of

PW1.


8.     PW10, Dr. O.P. Dayma, is the member of the Medical Board

along with two other doctors who examined the dead body of the

victim. They preserved smear from the vagina of the deceased girl,

prepared   slides   and   sent   it   for   Forensic   Science   Laboratory

examination.   PW10   deposed   that,   on   medical   examination,   five

injuries were found which were on the thighs, right leg, nose and

right wrist of the victim. In the post mortem report, PW10 opined

that the cause of death was due to hemorrhage shock. PW11, Dr.

Neelam   Gupta   reiterated   the   proceedings   of   the   post   mortem

examination as well as the opinion reached.


9.     No   explanation   is   forthcoming   from   the   statement   of   the

accused   under   Section   313   Cr.P.C.   as   to   when   he   parted   the

company  of  the  victim.   Also, no explanation is there as to what

happened after getting the chocolates for the victim.  The silence on

the part of the accused, in such a matter wherein he is expected to
                                                                               6
come out with an explanation, leads to an adverse inference against

the accused.


10.   We  find that  there  is ample material against the accused to

convict   him   for   the   offence   under   Section   302   IPC.   All   the

circumstances relied upon by the prosecution stand proved so as to

complete the chain of circumstances in respect of the offence under

Section 302 of the IPC.  The Trial Court and the High Court are, on

facts,   justified   in   convicting   the   accused   for   the   offence   under

Section   302   of   the   IPC.     However,   we   are   unable   to   find   reliable

material against the accused for the offences under Section 3 and 4

of the POCSO Act.


11.   The post­mortem report reveals the following injuries on the

body of the victim:


           1.       3x1 cm on left thigh on anterior knee.

           2.       6x1 cm on right leg.

           3.       2x1 cm abrasion on right thigh.

           4.       1x1.5 cm on nose.

           5.       1x1 cm on right wrist.




                                                                                     7
      In   the   Examination­in­Chief   itself,   the   doctor   PW10   who

conducted   the   post­mortem   examination   has   deposed   that   the

genital organs of the victim were normal.  The doctor further opined

that   the   death   of   the   deceased   was   caused   due   to   acute

hemorrhage.   Post­mortem   report   is   at   Ex.   P15.   In   the   cross­

examination, the doctor has admitted that all the aforementioned

five injuries are simple in nature and they are likely to be caused by

falling.  Fracture  on the   left rib nos. 10 and 11 mentioned in the

post­mortem   report   can   be   caused   by   falling   on   a   stone.   PW10

further stated that the genital organs of the deceased were healthy

and no marks of any injury were present on the private parts of the

deceased.   Signs   of   sperm   ejaculation  were also  not  found  on  the

external skin near the genital organs of the deceased. No injury was

present on the  head  of the deceased. The doctor further deposed

that when forcible sexual intercourse is committed upon a tender

girl,   there   is   a   possibility   of   her   vagina   getting   ruptured   and

bleeding from her genitals. There is no such mention in the post­

mortem report. The FSL report regarding vaginal swab which was

sent for examination is not helpful for the prosecution to prove the


                                                                                 8
offence   under   Sections   3   and   4   of   the   POCSO   Act.   Prosecution,

practically   relies   upon   the   doctor’s   evidence   only   for   proving   the

offence   under   Section   4   of   the   POCSO   Act.   No   other   material   is

placed   on   record   by   the   prosecution   to   prove   the   offence   under

Section   4   of   the   POCSO   Act.   However,   the   evidence   relating   to

penetration into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a child etc.

or any part of the body is not found. The Trial Court as well as the

High Court have not gone into the depth of the evidence relating to

offence   of   penetrative   sexual   assault,   in   detail.   Certain   casual

observations are made which are not supported by the evidence led

by the prosecution.  In light of the aforementioned evidence of PW10

doctor, and in view of the fact that no other reliable evidence exists

to prove the charge of penetrative sexual assault, i.e. any of the acts

as   detailed   in   Section   3   of   the   POCSO   Act,   it   is   our   considered

opinion that the Trial Court and the High Court are not justified in

convicting   the   accused   for   the   offence   under   Section   4   of   the

POCSO   Act.   We   find   from   the   judgment   of   the   High   Court   that

absolutely no reason, much less any valid reasons were assigned for

convicting the accused for the offence punishable under the POCSO


                                                                                     9
Act. Since no reliable material is available against the accused for

the aforementioned offence of the POCSO Act, the benefit of doubt

would go in the favour of the accused. After scanning through the

entire materials on record in order to satisfy the conscience, and

having regard to the  seriousness of the charge, we conclude that

the accused needs to be given the benefit of doubt in so far as the

offence punishable under Section 4 of the POCSO Act is concerned.


12.   Since the accused is to be acquitted for offence under Section

4 of the POCSO Act, in our considered opinion, this is not a fit case

to   impose   the   death   penalty   on   him,   inasmuch   as   the   appellant

does   not   have   any   criminal   background,   nor   is   he   a   habitual

offender.  Motive for the offence of murder is not clear and of course

it   is   generally   hidden,   known   to   the   accused   only.   Under   such

circumstances, the court will have to see as to whether the case at

hand falls under the ‘rarest of the rare’ case category. The accused

was also young during the relevant point of time. The duty is on the

State to show that there is no possibility of reform or rehabilitation

of the accused. When the offence is not gruesome, not cold­blooded

murder,   nor   is   committed   in   a   diabolical   manner,   the   court   will

                                                                                10
impose   life   imprisonment.     In   the   case   at   hand,   the   mitigating

factors   outweigh   the   aggravating   factors.   The   only   aggravating

factor   in   the   matter   is   that   the   accused   took   advantage   of   his

position   in   the   victim’s   family   for   committing   the   murder   of   the

minor girl inasmuch as the minor girl was treating the accused as

her Mama (uncle).


13.       We   do   not   find   that   the   murder   has   been   committed   with

extreme brutality or that the same involves exceptional depravity.

On   the  other   hand,   as  mentioned supra, the accused was young

and the probability that he would commit criminal acts of violence

in the future is not available on record. There is every probability

that the accused can be reformed and rehabilitated. In this context,

the observations made by this Court in the case of Bachan Singh v.

State of Punjab1, is reproduced as follows:


              “209. There are numerous other circumstances
              justifying   the   passing   of   the   lighter   sentence;
              as   there   are   countervailing   circumstances   of
              aggravation. “We cannot obviously feed into a
              judicial computer all such situations since they
              are astrological imponderables in an imperfect
              and undulating society.” Nonetheless, it cannot

1   (1980) 2 SCC 684.
                                                                                 11
            be over­emphasised that the scope and concept
            of   mitigating   factors   in   the   area   of   death
            penalty   must   receive   a   liberal   and   expansive
            construction by the courts in accord with the
            sentencing policy writ large in section 354 (3).
            Judges should never be bloodthirsty. Hanging
            of murderers has never been too good for them.
            Facts and figures, albeit incomplete, furnished
            by the Union of India, show that in the past,
            courts have inflicted the extreme penalty with
            extreme   infrequency­   a   fact   which   attests   to
            the   caution  and compassion which they  have
            always brought to bear on the exercise of their
            sentencing   discretion  in  so  grave a matter. It
            is,   therefore,   imperative   to   voice   the   concern
            that   courts,   aided   by   the   broad   illustrative
            guidelines   indicated   by   us,  will  discharge  the
            onerous   function   with   evermore   scrupulous
            care and humane concern, directed along the
            highroad   of   legislative   policy   outlined   in
            Section 354 (3), viz., that for persons convicted
            of   murder,   life   imprisonment   is   the   rule   and
            death   sentence   an   exception.   A   real   and
            abiding  concern for the dignity of the human
            life   postulates   resistance   to   taking   a   life
            through law’s instrumentality. That ought not
            to   be   done   save   in   the   rarest   of   rare   cases
            when the alternative option is unquestionably
            foreclosed.”

14.   Be that as it may, since the offence of rape is not proved and

as   the  offence   of  murder is proved beyond reasonable doubt, the

accused is liable to be convicted for the offence under Section 302

IPC.   In   view   of   the   aforementioned   reasons,   the   judgment   of   the

                                                                                12
Trial Court as well as the High Court convicting the accused for the

offences under Sections 3 and 4 of the POCSO Act and imposing

capital   punishment   on   him   stands   set   aside.   However,   for   the

offence under Section 302 IPC, the accused is sentenced to undergo

imprisonment  for  life.  Appeals are partly allowed in the aforesaid

terms.


                                                   .................................................J.
                                                                         (N. V. RAMANA)




                                             .................................................J.
                                        (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)




                                          .................................................J.
                                   (MUKESHKUMAR RASIKBHAI SHAH)

New Delhi;
November 14, 2018.


                                                                                                  13

