
Supreme Court of India
J.Jayalalitha vs C.Kuppusamy & Ors on 21 November, 2012Author: ........................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1833 OF 2012
                   (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 3699 of 2007)


J.JAYALALITHAA                                     Appellant

                 VERSUS

C.KUPPUSAMY & ORS.                                Respondents


                                O R D E R

1.      Leave granted.

2.      This appeal by special leave is directed against  the  judgment  and
order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras in Writ Petition  No.
12996 of 2002 with W.P.M.P.  Nos.17487  of  2002  and  1168  of  2007  dated
13.06.2007.

3.      It is essential to briefly outlay the facts that led to this  appeal
before us.  The lis  relates to the Legislative Assembly Elections  held  in
the year 2001 for the State of Tamil Nadu.  The Appellant  had  proposed  to
contest as a  candidate  and  filed  her  nomination  forms  in  4  Assembly
Constituencies viz. Krishnagiri, Andipatti, Bhuvanagiri  and  Padukottai  on
16.04.2001, 18.04.2001, 23.04.2001 and  23.04.2001,  respectively.  Therein,
with each nomination form, she had given a  declaration  that  she  had  not
been and would not be nominated as a candidate at the  said  elections  from
more than two Assembly Constituencies.  However,  she  was  disqualified  to
contest the elections on the ground of her conviction  in  a  criminal  case
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.

4.      One Shri C.  Kuppusamy  (the  Respondent  No.1  herein),  Member  of
Parliament,  had  approached  the  High  Court  under  Article  226  of  the
Constitution of India by way of Public Interest  Litigation  impleading  the
Chief Election Commissioner,  Chief  Electoral  Officer  and  the  Returning
Officers of  Bhuvanagiri,  Padukottai,  Andipatti  and  Dharmapuri  Assembly
Constituencies as Respondent Nos. 1 to 6, respectively.   In  the  aforesaid
Writ Petition, he sought for,  inter  alia,  a  writ  or  direction  to  the
respondents therein to initiate appropriate action by launching  prosecution
against the Appellant in accordance with law  for  the  offence  alleged  to
have been committed by her under  Section  177  of  the  Indian  Penal  Code
(“IPC” for short) and to directly control and monitor the same  under  their
powers of the judicial superintendence.

5.      Strangely, Respondent No.1 had not impleaded the  Appellant  in  the
aforesaid Writ Petition.  The Appellant had to implead herself by  filing  a
separate W.P.M.P. No. 1168 of 2007, which was  allowed  by  the  High  Court
and,  accordingly,  she  was  impleaded  as  Respondent  No.7  in  the  writ
petition.

6.      The Respondent No.1 had submitted  that  the  Appellant,  by  filing
more than 2 nomination forms for candidature  in  elections,  has  acted  in
breach of Section 33(7) (b) of the Representation of the Peoples  Act,  1951
(“the Act” for short) and by making a  false  declaration  at  the  time  of
filing of nomination forms before Returning  Officers  of  Bhuvanagiri  (the
3rd) and Pudukkottai (the 4th) Assembly  Constituencies,  is  liable  to  be
prosecuted under Section 177 of IPC.   He had further  submitted,  that  the
representations made by him before the  Chief  Election  Commissioner  (“the
Commissioner” for  short)  and  the  Chief  Electoral  Officer  to  initiate
criminal action against the Appellant have not yielded any  results  and  no
action under the aforesaid statutory provisions was  initiated  against  the
Appellant.

7.      The  Commissioner  and  the  Chief  Electoral  Officer  had  jointly
opposed the allegation of inaction on their  part  and  had  further  stated
that the Commissioner had conveyed its desire that the  matter  be  examined
by the Returning Officers of the 3rd and the 4th Assembly Constituencies  in
the light of the clarification issued by them.  It was further submitted  by
them that consequent to  the  aforesaid  direction,  it  was  for  the  said
Returning Officers to apply their mind while considering the allegations  of
false declaration so made or suppression of facts by the Appellant.

8.       Respondent  No.7  therein,  i.e.,  the  Appellant  before  us,  had
contended that no offence,  as  alleged  in  the  Writ  Petition,  has  been
committed by her.

9.    The High Court, after considering the case of the  parties,  concluded
that the Returning Officers of the 3rd and the 4th  Assembly  Constituencies
were not justified in  not  initiating  appropriate  proceedings  under  the
statutory provisions and therefore has directed the Respondent Nos. 1  to  4
therein to initiate appropriate action against the Appellant  in  accordance
with law within a particular time frame.  It is this judgment and  order  of
the High Court which is the subject matter of this appeal.

10.  We  have  heard  Shri  U.U.  Lalit,  learned  senior  counsel  for  the
Appellant, Shri Altaf Ahmed, learned senior counsel for Respondent No.1  and
Smt. Meenakshi Arora, learned counsel for the Commissioner.

11.     At the time of hearing of this appeal, two reports submitted by  the
Returning Officers of the 3rd and the  4th  Assembly  Constituencies,  dated
10.11.2001 and 14.12.2001 respectively have  been  brought  to  our  notice.
The said reports were submitted in pursuance of the direction issued by  the
Chief Electoral Officer to the Returning Officers of the  3rd  and  the  4th
Assembly Constituencies in respect of the 4 nomination forms  filed  by  the
Appellant.  We have carefully  perused  the  said  reports.   The  Returning
Officers  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  Appellant  had  produced  the  2
nomination  forms  filed  for  candidature  in  Andipatti  and   Krishnagiri
Assembly Constituencies before them at the time of scrutiny  and  therefore,
the case of suppression of facts at the time of scrutiny could not  be  made
out.  It is  on  the  basis  of  this  observation  that  they  discard  the
necessity of taking any  action  against  the  Appellant  for  giving  false
declaration.

12.     It is also brought to our notice that  the  said  reports  were  not
placed before the High Court.  These reports, outlaying the opinion  of  the
Returning Officers, are relevant reports which ought to  have  been  placed,
either by the Appellant or by the Respondent No. 1, before  the  High  Court
for its consideration and  appreciation.   In  our  opinion,  had  the  said
reports been placed before the High Court, the High  Court  would  have  had
the opportunity to delve into the reasons assigned and  conclusions  reached
by the Returning Officers.

13.     Further, in our opinion, the High  Court,  while  disposing  of  the
Writ Petition, should have directed the Respondent Nos. 1 to  4  therein  to
reconsider the matter and then decide  whether  any  prosecution  proceeding
should be initiated against the Appellant,  instead  of  directing  them  to
initiate action against  the  Appellant.  The  decision  of  initiating  any
prosecution proceedings must be taken by the authorities  in  the  light  of
the applicable statutory provisions.

14.     In view of the aforesaid discussion, the judgment and  order  passed
by the High Court, requires to be set aside and the matter  requires  to  be
remanded to the High Court for fresh disposal in accordance with law.

15.     Accordingly, while allowing this appeal, we set aside  the  judgment
and order passed by the High Court and remand the matter to the  High  Court
for fresh disposal in accordance with law. We also permit the  Appellant  to
produce the reports passed by the Returning Officers  dated  10.11.2001  and
14.12.2001. We permit the respondents to file their  additional  objections,
if any, before the High Court.

16.     We are informed by the learned  senior  counsel  appearing  for  the
parties that pursuant to the order and direction issued by the  High  Court,
Returning Officers of the 3rd  and  the  4th  Assembly  Constituencies  have
filed a complaint before an appropriate forum. Since we have set  aside  the
judgment and order passed by  the  High  Court,  we  quash  all  proceedings
initiated by Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 therein.

17.     We further clarify that we have not expressed  any  opinion  on  the
merits or demerits of the case or on the contentions canvassed by  both  the
learned Senior Counsel.

18.     Before parting, since the matter is pending  before  various  forums
for the last 11 years, we request the High Court to decide the  lis  between
the parties as expeditiously as possible, at any rate,  within  four  months
from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.

        Ordered accordingly.

                                        ........................J.
                                        (H.L. DATTU)



                                        ........................J.
                                        (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)

NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER 21, 2012



