
Supreme Court of India
Hasan vs State Of U.P. & Anr on 17 October, 2008Bench: S.B. Sinha, Cyriac Joseph
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2008
                            [Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 3239/2008]


HASAN                                                             ...     APPELLANT(S)

                                          :VERSUS:

STATE OF U.P. AND ANR.                                            ...     RESPONDENT(S)



                                          ORDER

              Leave granted.

              The first informant is before us aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the

     judgment and order dated 8.2.2008 passed by the High Court of Judicature at

     Allahabad granting bail in favour of the second respondent herein.



              Learned counsel for the appellant submits that keeping in view the

     statements made by Smt. Munni as also the order of the learned Session Judge and

     furthermore in view of the fact that the second respondent had also been proceeded

     against for having committed cognizable offence, the High Court should have not

     granted bail in his favour.

              Learned counsel for the second respondent on the other hand, contended

     that the medical evidence does not support the prosecution case.




                                         -2-
            Be that as it may, in view of the fact that the High Court in passing the

impugned judgment has not assigned any reasons, whatsoever, we are of the opinion

that the impugned judgment cannot be sustained.



            We are saying so as the learned Additional Government Advocate, appearing

on behalf of the State, raised a contention before the High Court that respondent No.2

was a person having criminal antecedents. The High Court, in our opinion, should

have considered that aspect of the matter as also other materials which have been

brought on record.


            For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment is set aside and the

matter is directed to be heard afresh by the High Court. The High Court shall take up

this matter for hearing either on 10th November, 2008 or any other date as may be

notified.


            It is made clear that the second respondent shall remain personally present

before the appropriate Bench of the High Court on 10th November, 2008 or any other

date fixed by the High Court.


                                      -3-
            The appeal is allowed with the aforementioned observation and direction.
        The Registry may transmit a copy of this order to the Registrar General of

the Allahabad High Court for compliance.


                                           ...........................J
                                           (S.B. SINHA)



                                            ...........................J
                                           (CYRIAC JOSEPH)

NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 17, 2008.

