
Supreme Court of India
Jawahar Punekar & Ors vs State Of Mahrashtra on 5 December, 2012Author: ........................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1040 OF 2008






JAWAHAR PUNEKAR & ORS.                                  Appellants


                                   VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                    Respondent


                                  O R D E R

  1. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order  passed  by  the
     High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench in Criminal Appeal No.
     238 of 1999, dated 06.03.2006. By the impugned judgment and order,  the
     High Court has confirmed the order of conviction and sentence passed by
     the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Wardha in Sessions Trial No. 152
     of 1997, dated 20.08.1999.

  2. There are six accused persons,  namely  Jawahar  Punekar  (A1),  Chhotu
     Punekar (A2),  Santosh  Punekar  (A3),  Bandu  Punekar  (A4),  Pannalal
     Punekar (A5) and Smt. Lilabai  Punekar  (A6),  belonging  to  the  same
     family, before us, as appellants in this appeal.  All these  appellants
     question the conviction and sentence awarded by  the  Trial  Court  and
     subsequently confirmed by the High Court.

  3. The appellants were tried by the  Trial  Court  on  a  charge  that  on
     08.02.1997 approximately at 08:40 p.m. at  Hawaldarpura,  Wardha,  they
     had formed an unlawful assembly with the common object of murdering one
     Abdul Jakir Faruki (“the deceased” for  short)  and  committed  offence
     punishable under Sections 147, 148, 506, 302 read with Section  149  of
     the Indian Penal Code (“the IPC” for short).

  4. The Trial Court, vide judgment and order  dated  20.08.1999,  convicted
     the appellants for the offences punishable under Section 302 read  with
     Section 149 of the IPC and sentenced them to imprisonment for life.

  5. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence passed by  the
     Trial Court, the appellants had appealed before  the  High  Court.  The
     High Court, after re-appreciating and analyzing the entire evidence  on
     record, arrived at the conclusion that the Trial Court is justified  in
     convicting the appellants for the offences under Section 302 read  with
     Section 149 of the IPC reasoning that the very fact that the appellants
     on date of the incident had accosted the deceased, forming an  unlawful
     assembly wherein A1 and A2 were armed with deadly  weapons  like  sword
     and gupti (sword stick), A3 and A4 were assisting  them  by  assaulting
     the deceased with  fists,  slaps  and  stones  while  A5  and  A6  were
     instigating them not to spare the deceased,  speaks  volumes  of  their
     common object in intentionally causing the brutal injuries resulting in
     his death on the spot.  It is that order which is called in question by
     the appellants in this appeal.

  6. We have heard Shri. Rabin Majumdar, learned counsel for the  appellants
     and Shri. Sushil Karanjkar, learned counsel for  the  respondent-State.
     We have also perused the evidence of the  eye  witnesses,  namely,  Mr.
     Kamalkishor (PW-1),  Mr.Jugalkishor  (PW-2),  Mr.  Lakhan  (PW-3),  Ms.
     Rafika (PW-4) and also looked into the report of  the  Medical  Officer
     (PW-13).

  7. The Trial Court and the High Court,  after  due  appreciation  and  re-
     appreciation of evidence on record,  respectively,  have  come  to  the
     conclusion that the death of the deceased is homicidal. Having  perused
     the report of PW-13, wherein the 31 injuries caused to the deceased are
     enumerated along with possible attribution of each injury  towards  his
     death, we concur with the above conclusion reached by the Courts below.
      This aspect of the matter is not in doubt in this appeal.

  8. Sri Majumdar would submit that the statements  of  the  aforesaid  eye-
     witnesses raise suspicion and cannot be relied upon to convict A1 to A4
     of the aforesaid offence as the statements so  made  are  “parrot-like”
     carry the element of fabrication. He would also submit that A5  and  A6
     could not have been  charged  of  the  aforesaid  offence  since  their
     presence itself at the time of incident is doubtful.

  9. Analyzing the first submission regarding the veracity of the statements
     of the eye-witnesses with respect to the offence committed by A1 to A4,
     we find from the evidence that the said  witnesses  have  narrated  the
     incident in the sequence it occurred and  corroborate  each  other.  In
     their cross-examination, nothing has been brought on record to indicate
     that the said accused were not present at the scene of incident or have
     been falsely implicated. A concurrent reading of their evidence clearly
     depicts as to what transpired on the fateful day of the incident. Their
     statements are univocal and complete the jigsaw to  bring  out  a  neat
     picture of the incident.

 10. The only question which survives is that why the statements of the said
     eye-witnesses should be disbelieved. The perusal of evidence on  record
     indicates that no other theory of commission of offence could  possibly
     be attributed but for the one presented by the prosecution and accepted
     by the Courts below. Also, the  question  of  surmises  or  conjectures
     cannot be drawn as neither the statements nor the cross-examination  of
     the eye-witnesses indicate anything but the truth  of  the  prosecution
     story in respect of the offence committed by A1 to A4. The evidence  of
     eye-witnesses, therefore, is of sterling quality  and  thus  cannot  be
     disbelieved.

 11.  In our view, the roles attributed to A5 and A6 during  the  commission
     of offence need  to  be  re-considered  and  the  evidence  on  record,
     therefore, has to be re-appreciated in their context. PW-1, who is also
     the author of the First Information Report, in his evidence has  stated
     that A5 and A6 were instigating A1 to A4 to assault the deceased.  This
     instigation by A5 and A6 was after the crime was committed by A1 to A4.
      To the same effect is the evidence of PW-2, who is the brother of  PW-
     1.

 12. However, PW-3, who at the relevant time was accompanying the  deceased,
     in his evidence has stated that A5 and  A6  reached  the  spot  of  the
     incident subsequently and  not  when  A1  to  A4  were  assaulting  the
     deceased.  In the cross-examination also he sticks to  that  statement.
     PW-4, mother of the deceased, in her evidence has not  stated  anything
     with regard to the presence of A5 and A6.  PW-6, who is  also  an  eye-
     witness to the incident and nephew  of  the  deceased,  also  does  not
     mention the presence of A5 and A6 when A1 to  A4  were  assaulting  the
     deceased.  In our view, the presence of A5 and A6,  therefore,  at  the
     time of the incident is doubtful and thus the benefit of doubt requires
     to be extended to them.

 13. Since we have doubted the presence of A5 and A6 in  the  commission  of
     offence, the charge against A1 to  A4  requires  to  be  modified  from
     Section 302 read with Section 149 of the IPC  to  that  of  an  offence
     under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC. It must  be  pointed
     out that the evidence on record makes  it  abundantly  clear  that  the
     common object of the unlawful assembly so formed was  intentionally  to
     cause the death of the deceased. This Court in Bhagwan Baksh  Singh  v.
     State of U.P., Cr. A. No. 37 of 1957, decided on 18.08.1958, had upheld
     the conversion of conviction  under  Sections  302  read  with  149  to
     Sections 302 read with 34 of the IPC in similar set  of  circumstances,
     i.e., benefit of doubt being given to seven out of ten accused  persons
     and intention in commission of offence being clearly made  out  in  the
     charge-sheet. Therefore, A1 to A4 had ample notice  of  the  charge  of
     common intention. In the light of benefit of doubt extended to  A5  and
     A6, the conviction of A1 to A4 is modified to  Section  302  read  with
     Section 34 of the IPC.

 14. In the result, we partly allow this appeal and sustain  the  conviction
     and sentence of A1 to A4.  We are informed that A3 to A6 are already on
     bail.  Therefore, A5 and A6 are discharged of their bail bonds.   Since
     we have confirmed the judgment of the Trial Court,  as  upheld  by  the
     High Court,  insofar as A1  to  A4  are  concerned,  A3  and  A4  shall
     surrender before the respondent authorities forthwith to serve out  the
     remaining part of their sentence.

                Ordered accordingly.

                                        ........................J.
                                        (H.L. DATTU)






                                        ........................J.
                                        (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)


    NEW DELHI
    DECEMBER 05, 2012

