
Supreme Court of India
Tukaram & Ors vs State Of Maharashtra on 24 February, 2011Author: .................J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                                         REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF  INDIA
                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION                     

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.   902   OF 2007



       TUKARAM & ORS.                                ..  APPELLANT(S)

                          vs.

       STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                          ..  RESPONDENT(S)

                                   WITH




                                                                          CRIMINAL 
                                                                          APPEAL 
                                                                          NO. 1195 
                                                                          OF 2007





                                                                          WITH




                                                                          CRIMINAL 
                                                                          APPEAL 
                                                                          NO. 
                                                                          615 OF 
                                                                          2011

       (Arising out of SLP(Crl.)No. 1935 of 2011)



                                                      O R D E R

              As per the prosecution story the appellants  and the 

     complainant   party   constituted   two   different   groups   in   an 

     organization  called   the  Dalit   Mukti  Sena.   It  appears   that 

     both groups had been invited to the   marriage of one Anil 

     Janjale   on   the   22nd  May,   1995   which   was   performed   at   the 

     Shishu     Mandir   near   the   Railway   Hospital.     After   the 


marriage   the   deceased   Prakash   was   returning   to   his   home 

along   with   his   friends   Pradeep,   Nana   Mahajan   (PW.2)   and 

others   at   about   11.00   p.m.     As   they   came   near   the   Hindi 

Church all the accused followed them. Bhagwan Salve, since 

deceased,     and   A.6   Jagan   Sonawane   were   armed   with   iron 

rods.     Bhagwan   Salve   caught   hold     of   the   shirt   of   the 

deceased whereupon the other accused assaulted him and hit 

him by giving fist blows whereas A.5 Raju Suryawanshi who 





                                   -2-

was armed with a knife dealt a blow on the left buttock and 

Bhagwan Salve and A.6 Jagan Sonawane hit him with iron rods 

on   the   back   and   stomach.     The   deceased   who   was   then 

grievously injured was taken to the Railway Hospital where 


PW.10 - Dr. Gangurde examined him and admitted him into the 

Surgical   Ward.   His   statement   was   recorded   by   PW.12-

P.I.Panwar and a case under Sections 147, 148, 324, 504 and 

506 r/w 149 of the IPC was registered.  

         On   the   admission   of   the   deceased,   Dr.   Gangurde 

summoned   Dr.   Dhakate     (PW.11)   a   Surgeon,   who   found   an 

injury on the buttocks which was stitched up  the very same 

evening.   On the 24th, however, the patient developed signs 





of   internal   bleeding   and   it   was   decided   to   perform   an 

operation.    On  opening     the   stomach  it   was  found   at  that 

stage   that   the   intestines   had   been   perforated   at   the 

jejunum,   the   spleen   too   was   ruptured   and   there   was   an 

omental tear causing bleeding from the veins and about 100 

c.c. foul smelling liquid was also found in the peritonial 

cavity which was suctioned out. The Spleen was also removed 

and   the   bleeding   areas     were   ligatured.   On   the   5th  June, 


1995   faecal   matter   was   seen   coming   out   from   the   stomach 

which   led   to   the   bursting   of     the   abdomen   and   as   a 

consequence thereof a second operation was performed on the 

6th  June, 1995 and   it was at that stage noticed that the 

buttock   injury   was   8.5   cms.     deep   and   that   a   finger 

inserted from the rectum could meet a finger inserted into 





                                   -3-

the   perforation   on   the   buttocks.   Consequent     to     this 

development the patient developed septicemia and pneumonia 

and died on the 9th  June, 1995 at about 2.00 p.m.     A case 

under   Section   302   was   registered   against   the   accused.   On 

the   completion   of   the   investigation   they   were   brought 

to trial inter alia under Sections  147, 148 and 302/149 of 

the   IPC.     The   Trial   Court   relying   on     the   eye   witnesses 


account and the medical evidence convicted the accused for 

offences punishable under Sections 302/149 etc. of the IPC 

and   sentenced   them   to   various   terms   of   imprisonment.   An 

appeal   was,   thereafter,   taken   to   the   High   Court   and   the 

High Court, has, while confirming the conviction, modified 

the sentence to one under Section 304 (I) read with Section 

149 of the IPC and maintained the sentences and conviction 

under   the   other   provisions   of   the   IPC.     In   doing   so   the 





High Court opined that there was no intention on the part 

of the accused to cause death and the injury that they had 

caused could be said to be likely to cause death.  It is in 

this situation the matter is now before us.

         As   already   indicated   above,   a   very   limited   relief 

can be granted to the accused in this matter. We find from 

the reading of the medical evidence that PW.11 Dr. Dhakate 

at   the   very   initial   stage   did   not   realize   the   gravity   of 


the situation as he had seen  only one injury on the person 

of   the   deceased   which   was   the   external   injury   on   the 

buttocks as he   did not even look at the possibility that 

some   internal   injuries   too   could   have   been   caused 

considering the manner of the attack.


                                   -4-

This comes out from the evidence of the doctors PWs.10 and 





11.   It is true that the Doctors   have   tried to cover up 

their   indifference   and   negligence   by   deposing   that   the 

death   could   be   attributed   to   the   injury   caused   to   the 

abdominal   organs   but   we   are   of   the   opinion   that   had   the 

Doctors been a little vigilant during the 20 days  that the 

deceased   stood   admitted   to     the   hospital   the   possibility 

that he could have been saved cannot be ruled out.  In this 

view of the matter we find that the accused are liable for 


conviction for an offence  under Section 326/149 of the IPC 

instead   of   Section   304(I)   read   with   Section   149   of   the 

I.P.C.  

         The learned counsel for the State has however argued 

that   it   was   clear   from   the   medical   evidence   that   the 

injuries had been caused not only by the fist blows but by 

the beating with the iron rods as well.  It has admittedly 

been so stated   by the eye witnesses but their depositions 





are not supported by the medical reports which reflect only 

an  injury on the buttocks.  

         We are also told that as of today accused Nos. 1-4 

who   had   given   fist   blow   have   under   gone   one   year   and   10 

months   of   the   sentence   whereas   A.5   who   is   said   to   have 

caused   the   knife   injury   has   undergone   three   years   and   20 

days   of   the   sentence   whereas   A.6,   one   of   those   who   had 

caused an injury with an iron rod has undergone 2 years 11 


months. We therefore feel that the ends of justice would be 





                                  -5-




met  if   the  sentence   of  all   the  accused   is  reduced   to  the 

period already undergone. 


        The accused are accordingly held to be liable under 

Section 326/34 of the I.P.C. Their sentence is reduced to 

that   already   undergone.   The   appeals   are   disposed   of 

accordingly.


                                     .................J.
                                         (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)


                                                        
                                                      
                                  ....................J.
                                  (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)



New Delhi,
February 24, 2011.



