
Supreme Court of India
M/S V.G.Saraf & Sons vs H.Ranjith & Anr on 16 March, 2009Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Asok Kumar Ganguly
                                                                     REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 468               OF 2009
               (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 2219 of 2008)


M/s V.G. Saraf and Sons                                       ..Appellants

                                 Versus

H. Ranjith and Anr.                                    ..Respondents




                            JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.


1.    Leave granted.


2.    Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a learned Single

Judge of the Kerala High Court allowing the Revision Petition filed by the

respondent No.1 questioning his conviction for offence punishable under

Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (in short the `Act').

The High Court held that the conviction entered and the sentence imposed
by the Courts below were not sustainable and accordingly allowed the

revision petition.

3.    The primary stand of the appellants in this appeal is that the High

Court erred in acquitting the accused on the ground that Ex.P6, Bill

represents only for Rs.1,61,000/- and that the Ex.P1 cheque was for a sum

of Rs.1,86,606.95. It is pointed out that the evidence of PW-1 the

complainant was to the effect that accused was liable to pay a sum of

Rs.1,81,256.75 and the cash discount and sales tax. It is the case of the

appellants that the High Court misread the evidence of PW-1 to set aside the

concurrent findings recorded by the courts below.



4.    Learned counsel for the respondent No.1 on the other hand supported

the judgment of the High Court.


5.    It is noticed that the evidence of PW-1 was to the effect that the

accused was liable to pay Rs.1,81,256.75 and the cash discount and the

sales tax. It is also seen that the appellants had produced the relevant

documents to substantiate the contention that the cheque in question was

issued to discharge the liability. The documents produced included the

invoices, ledger and bills.


                                    2
6.    It is noticed that the High Court has not examined the matter in

proper perspective. The probative value of the documents produced and the

acceptability of the evidence of PW-1 has not been examined. That being

so, we set aside the impugned order of the High Court and remit the matter

to it to consider the matter afresh taking into account the various aspects

highlighted above.


7.    The appeal is allowed.


                                       ....................................J.
                                       (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                       .....................................J.
                                       (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY)
New Delhi,
March 16, 2009




                                   3

