
Supreme Court of India
State Of M.P vs Dongar Singh on 29 November, 2013Bench: H.L. Gokhale, J. Chelameswar
           
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2030    OF 2013
                   (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.5957/2013)


      STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                   Appellant(s)
                           :VERSUS:
      DONGAR SINGH                               Respondent(s)




                                  O R D E R

               Leave granted.
      2.        Heard  the  learned  counsel  for  both  the  parties.   The
      respondent was proceeded under Section 304A of the Indian  Penal  code
      for having committed the  death  of  one  Bachhraj  due  to  rash  and
      negligent driving. The Judicial  Magistrate,  First  Class,  Chachoda,
      District Guna, awarded the sentence of one year rigorous  imprisonment
      and a fine of Rs.1000/- to the respondent by his order dated 19.2.2007
      which was left undisturbed in appeal by the Sessions Court at District
      Guna.
      3.       The respondent filed a  criminal  revision  before  the  High
      Court of Madhya Pradesh. The only point which was argued on behalf  of
      the respondent in the High Court was with  respect  to  the  sentence,
      that the sentence be reduced to the period already  undergone  by  the
      respondent by then which was only 34 days. The High Court has accepted
      the plea and reduced the sentence only on the ground  that  the  trial
      was pending since 1999. We are not impressed by this  reasoning  given
      by the High Court.  A life has been lost due to the rash and negligent
      driving on the part of  the  respondent  which  could  not  have  been
      ignored.
      4.       In the circumstances, we allow this  appeal,  set  aside  the
      impugned order passed by the High Court and restore  the  order  dated
      19.2.2007 passed by the Judicial Magistrate,  First  Class,  Chachoda,
      District Guna, awarding punishment of rigorous  imprisonment  for  one
      year. The respondent will surrender in two  weeks,  failing  which  he
      shall be taken  into  custody  to  undergo  the  remaining  period  of
      sentence.

                                                  .........................J
               (H.L. GOKHALE)








                                     ...........................J
                                     (J. CHELAMESWAR)
      New Delhi;
      November 29, 2013.

