
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh Home ... vs Raja Etc. on 30 August, 2018Author: R Banumathi
Bench: V Saran, R Banumathi
                                                             1

                                                                                          REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL          No(s).    396-398 OF 2015

     THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                                                    Appellant(s)

                                                            VERSUS

     RAJA ETC.                                                                     Respondent(s)




                                                J U D G M E N T

     R. BANUMATHI, J.:

     (1)                 These appeals arise out of judgment and order dated 29th

     May, 2009 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad

     in Criminal Appeal NO.568 of 2002, Criminal Appeal No.231 of

     2002 and Criminal Appeal NO.250 of 2002 in which the High Court

     reversed the verdict of the conviction and also the sentence

     and acquitted the respondents.


     (2)                 The facts of the case in a nutshell are as follows.                    On

     13th                June,   1995    at   9.00    a.m.        deceased-Shabu     along    with

     Riyazuddin (PW-2) was taking their buffaloes for grazing in the

     jungle.                Complainant, Imamuddin (PW-1) and Hafiz were following

     them.                 The case of the prosecution is that when deceased-Shabu

     and Riyazuddin (PW-2) were so proceeding to the jungle, accused
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.09.05

     Raja
17:42:08 IST
Reason:                  (A-1)   exhorted     the    other       accused   that   they   have   an

     opportunity to kill both the brothers, namely, deceased-Shabu

     and              Riyazuddin    (PW-2).         Raju    (A-2)    and   Aas    Mohammad   (A-3)
                                             2

(since acquitted) who were armed with rifles fired at Shabu and

also on Riyazuddin (PW-2).           Shabu sustained gunshot injuries on

his chest and died on the spot.                  Injured Riyazuddin (PW-2)

received injuries on his right forearm.                   On seeing Imamuddin

(PW-1) and other villagers coming towards them, all the accused

ran away.       On the complaint lodged by Imamuddin (PW-1), law was

set in motion.         Dr. P.K. Chaturvedi (PW-3) conducted post-

mortem     on   dead-body    of     the     deceased-Shabu    and    noted     the

following injuries:

      “1. Gunshot wound 1 cm. x 1 cm x chest cavity deep on
      right side of front of chest 2 cm. Below right nipple
      at 4 O’clock position margins inverted and lacerated.
      No    blackening      and    no     charring      (external    wound)
      detected medially backwards towards left scapula”

(3)   Based upon the evidence of Imamuddin (PW-1) and Riyazuddin

(PW-2), injured witness, the trial court convicted Raja (A-1)

(since     dead)   Raju    (A-2)   and    also   Aas    Mohammad    (A-3)    under

Section 302 I.P.C. read with 34 I.P.C.                 Fourth accused Sarfaraj

was acquitted by the trial court from all the charges.                      In the

appeal preferred by the accused, the High Court set aside the

conviction and acquitted the accused from all the charges.

Being aggrieved, the State is before us.


(4)   We   have    heard    Mr.    V.V.V.    Pattabhiram,     learned   counsel

appearing for the appellant-State and Mr. Yunus Malik, learned

counsel appearing for the respondent(s) and also perused the

impugned judgment of the High Court and the evidence/materials

on record.
                                        3



(5)    Though the trial court held that Imamuddin (PW-1) is a

trustworthy witness, the High Court doubted the presence of

Imamuddin (PW-1) at the time and place of occurrence and also

trustworthiness of his evidence.            It is brought on record that

Imamuddin (PW-1) is an advocate having good practice at the

Bar.     Imamuddin (PW-1) was also then a member of the Nagar

Palika.     In his evidence Imamuddin (PW-1) has admitted that

normally he used to give hearing to the public in the morning

time at the Nagar Palika.          As observed by the High court that

audience to the public by Imamuddin (PW-1) could have been only

before the commencement of court hours and thereafter he would

go to the court.        Occurrence happened on 13th June, 1995 at 9.30

a.m.    It is brought on record that 13th June, 1995 was a working

day.    Imamuddin (PW-1) being a lawyer having good practice and

also a member of the Nagar Palika giving audience to the public

in the morning, the High Court rightly doubted his presence at

the place of occurrence at 9.30 a.m. on the said day.              The High

Court also doubted the evidence of Imamuddin (PW-1) as to why

an advocate like Imamuddin (PW-1) instead of going to the court

would follow his deceased brother-Shabu who was taking the

cattle for grazing in the jungle and PW-1-Imamuddin’s conduct

in    following   his    brother   being    unnatural   and   we   find   it

difficult to take a different view.


(6)    In his evidence, Imamuddin (PW-1) stated that after the

occurrence he went to the court to write down the complaint
                                              4

first.       Here again, the High Court observed that the conduct of

Imamuddin (PW-1) is quite unnatural in the sense that when one

of     his    brothers,       Shabu,   was    killed      and      another    brother,

Riyazuddin (PW-2), sustained injuries in his arm, instead of

taking the injured brother to a hospital or going to the police

station, Imamuddin (PW-1) had gone all the way to the Court

only to write down the complaint.                  Here again, the conduct of

Imamuddin (PW-1), as observed by the High Court appears to be

strange and unnatural.


(7)    The High Court has also referred to the submission of the

counsel who appeared for the accused which in our considered

view is relevant.             As pointed out earlier, the deceased-Shabu

sustained gunshot wound on the chest with chest cavity deep.

Dr. P.K. Chaturvedi (PW-3) in his evidence as pointed out that

there was not a single hole either in the vest, kurta and

tehmad       which     were     sent   along       with     the     dead     body   for

examination.          Even the Inquest Report does not mention any

bullet hole in the clothes of the deceased-Shabu.                            When the

deceased-Shabu sustained gunshot injury on the chest with chest

cavity deep, in the normal course one would expect holes on the

clothes worn by the deceased, namely, western kurta.                           Absence

of bullet holes on the clothes of the deceased creates a doubt

about the case of the prosecution and the time and manner

alleged.       Raising doubts about the case of the prosecution, the

High     Court       has   extended     the       benefit     of     doubt     to   the

respondents-accused to reverse the conviction.
                                     5

(8)   For the foregoing reasons, it cannot be said that the view

taken   by   the   High   Court   suffers    from   any   serious   and

substantial error warranting interference by this Court.


(9)   In the result, the appeals are dismissed.




                                            ..........................J.
                                             (R. BANUMATHI)



                                            ..........................J.
                                             (VINEET SARAN)
NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 30, 2018.

