
Supreme Court of India
Chakarai @ Chakaravarthi vs State Rep By Inspector Of Police on 24 January, 2019Author: M M Shantanagoudar
Bench: D Maheshwari, M M Shantanagoudar
                                                      NON-REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1016 OF 2010


CHAKARAI @ CHAKARAVARTHI                                Appellant

                                   Versus

STATE REP. BY INSPECTOR OF POLICE                       Respondent



                          J U D G M E N T

MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.


     We have heard Mr. Jayanth Muthuraj, learned counsel

for the appellant as well as Mr. S. Raja Rajeshwaran,

learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent –

State.

2.   This appeal by special leave is directed against the

common judgment and order dated 16.06.2009 passed by the

High Court of Judicature at Madras in a batch of Criminal

Appeals   filed    by   the   accused,   confirming    the   judgment

dated 07.02.2007 passed by the Additional District Judge,

FTC 2, Salem, Tamil Nadu in S.C. No. 5 of 2006 to the

extent that it convicted the appellant/Accused No.1 for

the offence under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code


                                                                     1
(in    short,      “the       IPC”)     and    sentenced      him     to     life

imprisonment.

3.    The    brief       facts   relating      to     this   appeal    are    as

under:-

      The deceased Ramamurthy was working as a Collection

Agent in New Centurion Bank at Salem.                   Accused Nos. 1 and

2    had    availed      vehicle      loans    from    the    said    Bank    to

purchase two motor cycles. However, such loans were not

repaid      on     time.      The      deceased      Ramamurthy       used     to

pressurise both the accused to repay the loans. Despite

the same, Accused Nos. 1 and 2 failed to repay the same

and started avoiding him.               About six months prior to the

incident in question, the deceased Ramamurthy had taken

away both the vehicles of Accused Nos. 1 and 2 without

informing        them,   in    order    to    pressurise     them     to   repay

their loans. Accused Nos. 1 and 2 approached the deceased

for   the    return      of   these     vehicles,      but   he     refused   to

oblige, saying that he would return the vehicles only

once they repaid the loans. Accused Nos. 1 and 2 were

inimically disposed towards the deceased Ramamurthy in

that regard.         They sought the help of the other accused

and conspired with them to do away with the life of the

deceased Ramamurthy.

      On    14.5.2005,        Accused    No.1,      along    with    the   other

                                                                                2
accused, called the deceased Ramamurthy over phone to the

place of the incident on the pretext of repaying the

loans.   The   deceased     reached   the    place   and   immediately

thereafter, all the accused pushed the deceased inside

the Maruti van owned by one of the accused, took him away

and killed him. Thereafter, the dead body was thrown near

the house of an advocate at Salem.

4.    On the next day, P.W.18, the Village Administrative

Officer, upon receiving information about an unidentified

dead body, went to the location, saw the dead body and

lodged the first information report.

      The Trial Court convicted all the accused, whereas

the High Court retained the conviction of the appellant

herein under Section 302 of the IPC and acquitted all the

other accused persons, as well as the appellant of all

other charges.

5.    The case of the prosecution is mainly based on the

extra-judicial confession of the accused. Both P.W.8, who

had   allegedly   seen    the   accused     abducting    the     deceased

Ramamurthy,    and   P.W.    11,   who   spoke   about     the    alleged

conspiracy, turned hostile. The circumstances relied upon

by the prosecution are as under:-

a)    Motive for commission of the offence, as deposed to

by P.W.2.

                                                                        3
b)    Accused were seen abducting the deceased by P.W.8.

c)    Conspiracy amongst the accused, deposed to by P.W.11.

d)    Recovery of the Maruti van, weapon and the blood

stained clothes of Accused No.1, based on the confession

made by Accused No.1 before the police. The circumstance

of recovery is deposed to by P.W.18.

e)    The extra-judicial confession spoken to and recorded

by P.W.12.

      It is noteworthy to mention that the High Court has

disbelieved   all      the   circumstances   except    the   extra-

judicial confession.

6.    To satisfy our conscience, we have gone through the

entire material. We do not find any reason to disagree

with the High Court, inasmuch as it has rightly concluded

that the circumstances of motive, abduction by accused,

conspiracy and recovery are not proved beyond reasonable

doubt.

      As mentioned supra, P.W.8, who had allegedly seen the

abduction, and P.W.11, who initially deposed with respect

to the conspiracy, turned hostile. The High Court has

also rightly disbelieved the aspect on motive inasmuch as

the   grievance   of    Accused   Nos.   1   and   2   against   the

deceased was six months prior to the incident, to the

degree that the deceased had allegedly taken away the

                                                                   4
vehicles of the accused without informing them.                              Though

P.W.2,       the    mother       of    the    deceased,      deposed   about    the

motive, it is clear that the same had not been disclosed

by     her     to        the      police       during      the     investigation.

Additionally, although P.W.18 deposed about the recovery

of     certain          articles       which    were       blood   stained,     the

prosecution failed to place the chemical analysis report

on record even though the material objects recovered from

Accused No.1 had been sent for such analysis.                           Moreover,

though the serological report found that the blood groups

found on the clothes of the deceased and the recovered

material objects tallied, the same cannot be relied upon

since the serial number of the requisition sent does not

tally with that of the report. Therefore, in the absence

of reliable matching of blood groups, the evidence of

P.W.18 loses its importance.

7.     Thus,       the    only     remaining        circumstance,      as   rightly

concluded          by    the     High       Court,    is    the    extra-judicial

confession.

       We have perused the extra-judicial confession (Ext.

P-1)    recorded          by   P.W.12        (the    Tahsildar,      Salem),    the

translation in English of which was provided to us by the

learned       counsel       for       the    appellant.     The    extra-judicial

confession gives us an impression that the same has been

                                                                                  5
generated to make the courts believe the case against the

appellant. The extra-judicial confession is suspiciously

full of facts, and graphically discloses the antecedents

of Accused No.1, the situation of his house and what

happened    prior   to   the   incident   in   question   and

thereafter. It is recorded in nearly five full pages, and

not only speaks about the motive to kill, but also gives

graphic details of how each of the accused attacked the

deceased.

    In this context, it would be relevant to refer to

certain observations made by this Court in Thangavelu v.

State of Tamil Nadu, (2002) 6 SCC 498.         Paragraph 7 of

the judgment is extracted below:-


    “At this juncture we may take note of the
    prosecution case that the appellant had made an
    extra-judicial confession to PW 12, another VAO
    on the day following the incident. Though the
    courts below have not placed any reliance on this
    confession, we take note of this document for the
    purpose of appreciating the genuineness of the
    prosecution case. A perusal of this confession
    Ext. P-14 gives us an indication of the attempt
    of the prosecution to build a case against this
    appellant. This extra-judicial confession is so
    full of facts starting from about 25 years prior
    to the date of the incident and graphically
    details what happened over these years to his
    sister and his family which actually is the
    motive suggested by the prosecution for the
    crime. Ext. P-14 is recorded in nearly 4 full
    pages, it not only speaks of his motive to kill

                                                            6
       D-1 and D-2 but also gives graphic details of the
       nature of the attack on the deceased and also
       mentions in detail the persons whom he saw during
       and after the incident. In a manner of speaking,
       if this confession is true the appellant had the
       foresight to guess as to who the prosecution
       witnesses   are   going   to   be   and   gives  an
       impression,   therefore,    he    was   seeking  to
       corroborate   their   future    evidence.   In  our
       opinion, this would hardly be the natural conduct
       of an accused if he was voluntarily making a
       confession. We further notice the unimaginable
       similarity in Exts. P-14 and P-1 as also in the
       evidence of PW 1 which supports the theory of the
       defence that there was an attempt by the
       prosecution to create evidence in this case.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)


       The facts of the present case are similar to the

facts of the aforesaid case, in so far as the extra-

judicial confession is concerned. All the observations

made by this Court in the case of Thangavelu (supra) are

aptly applicable to the case on hand. In the said matter,

this    Court     disbelieved      the    detailed     extra-judicial

confession and acquitted the accused.

8.     Hence, we are of the opinion that the extra-judicial

confession      placed    on   record    cannot   be   relied     upon.

However, even if the extra-judicial confession is to be

believed, it would be unsafe to convict the accused and

award    life    imprisonment     to     him   based   on   the    sole

circumstance      of     an    extra-judicial     confession,      more


                                                                      7
particularly   since   all   the   other   circumstances   remain

unproved, and since the Investigation Officer and P.W. 12

have not acted impartially, which is evident from the

manner of recording the alleged extra-judicial confession

as discussed supra.

9.    In our considered opinion, the High Court was not

justified in convicting the accused based on the sole

circumstance of the extra-judicial confession under the

facts and circumstances of this case.

10.   Accordingly, the judgment passed by the High Court

convicting the Accused No.1/Appellant stands set aside.

The appellant is acquitted of all the charges levelled

against him. He shall be released forthwith, if he is not

required in any other case.

      The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.



                                      ........................J.
                                       (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)




                                      ........................J.
                                             (DINESH MAHESHWARI)

New Delhi,
January 24, 2019




                                                                8

