
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P vs Suman on 7 October, 2010Author: .......................J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 409  of 2005

                                                   1





                              
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF  INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION             

                                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 409 OF 2005





             STATE OF U.P.                                  ..  APPELLANT(S)

                                         vs.

             SUMAN                                          ..  RESPONDENT(S)





                                                            O R D E R

         1.          This is an appeal against acquittal.  

          2.         The   Sessions   Judge   had   convicted   the   respondent 

         herein,   the   wife   of   the   deceased,   Manni,   for   an   offence 

         punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and 

         had   awarded   a   sentence   of   life   imprisonment.     This 

         judgment has been reversed by the High Court.  While doing 

         so, the High Court has given several findings which to our 

         mind   call   for   no   interference.   The   prosecution   story   is 

         that (P.W. 1) Chunna and Smt. Kallo (P.W. 2), the parents 

         of the deceased, had not seen the accused firing the shots 


Crl.A. No. 409  of 2005

                                              2





         but   on   hearing   the   sound   of   firing   they   along   with 

         Rameshwar, brother of PW 2, had entered the room belonging 

         to the accused and the deceased and had found the injured 

         lying there and on enquiry he had told Rameshwar that the 

         accused   had   fired   the   shots   injuring   him.     We   find   it 

         improbable, and it is so found by the High Court, that the 

         respondent,   a young woman, had, at that stage, run away 

         along   with   three   young   children   despite   the   presence   of 

         two men in the room and after bolting the door from the 

         outside.  The improbability of the story has been further 

         highlighted  by  the  High  Court  by  observing    that  as  per 

         the   prosecution,   the   injury   had   been   caused   to   the 

         deceased from a short distance i.e. the firing was within 

         the room but there were no signs of blackening, tattooing 

         or charring around the wounds and as a shot gun had been 

         used   allegedly     from   a   distance   of   8   to   10   feet   the 

         dimension of injury no. 1 which was 1.00cm X 1.00cm which 

         could not have been possible as there would be substantial 

         dispersal of the pellets.   The High Court has also found 

         that   one   metal   bullet   had   been   recovered   from   the   dead 

         body   which   could   not   be   a   pellet   from   a   shot   gun 

         cartridge.     The   High   Court   has   also   observed   that   the 

         recovery of a gun from one Kamlesh about one month after 

         the   incident   (which   was   the   licensed   weapon   of   the 

         deceased)   could   not   be   connected   with   murder   as   the   two 


Crl.A. No. 409  of 2005

                                                3





         empty cartridges recovered from the murder site, did not 

         match the murder weapon, more particularly, as the initial 

         prosecution   story   was   that   the   shot   gun   had   been   left 

         behind in the room by the accused when she had run away. 




          3.         No interference is thus called for.




         4.          The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. 



                                                .......................J.
                                                   (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)
                             



                                                                  
                                                    .......................J.
                                          (R.M. LODHA)
         New Delhi,
     October 07, 2010.



