
Supreme Court of India
Trimbak vs State Of Maharashtra on 4 March, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  438 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Trimbak

RESPONDENT:
State of Maharashtra

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/03/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT & P. SATHASIVAM

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 438 OF 2008
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 4974 of 2006)


Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Leave granted.

2.	Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a Division 
Bench of the Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench, dismissing 
the appeal filed before it by the appellant.  The appellant was 
convicted for allegedly having committed an offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 
(in short the 'IPC') and was sentenced to imprisonment for life 
by learned Sessions Judge Akola in Sessions Trial No. 58 of 
2001.  He was also found guilty of offence punishable under 
Section 324 IPC. Sentences of imprisonment for life and fine 
with default stipulation and sentence of 6 months and fine 
with default stipulation were imposed for the two offences.  It 
was further ordered that if the fine amount is deposited  then 
a sum of Rs.2,000/- was to be paid to the complainant as a 
compensation in terms of Section 357 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (in short the 'Cr.P.C.').

3.	Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:
Narmadabai (PW2) is the widow of Shamrao Telgote 
(hereinafter referred to as 'deceased') who was working in the 
field of one S. K. Majid, situated near village Gaigaon. 
Shamrao was living in the field in a hut and the accused was 
working in the field and living there in a hut. The house of 
owner of the field S.K. Masjid was also situated in the field and 
S.K. Majid was residing with his mother Gulabbi in the said 
house.
On 24.12.2000 at about 7.30 p.m. Narmadabai and 
Gulabbi were sitting in front of the house of Gulabbi in the 
field. The accused and deceased Shamrao were present there. 
There were verbal exchanges between the accused and 
Shamrao. Thereafter accused picked up the axe which was 
lying there and he assaulted Shamrao with the said axe on the 
head of Shamrao. When Narmadabai rushed forward to 
intervene, the accused also gave a blow with the axe on her 
head. On account of assault, Shambrao died on the spot and 
his wife sustained bleeding injuries. Thereafter, the accused 
ran away from the field. Since it was night time and as there 
was no conveyance for going to the Police Station situated at 
Ural, Narmadabai did not go to the Police Station. She lodged 
an oral report on the next day i.e. 25.12.2000 in the morning. 
On the basis of this report, F.I.R. under Sections 302 and 307 
IPC was registered by PSI Madhukar Bhoge (PW 8). The 
investigation was taken up and the accused was arrested on 
01.01.2001. After completing the investigation, charge-sheet 
was filed against the accused under Sections 302 and 307 
IPC. The case was committed to the Court of Session.  In the 
trial, the prosecution examined eight witnesses and also 
produced several documents to prove its case against the 
accused.  The defence of the accused was one of denial. After 
appreciating the evidence led by the prosecution, the trial 
court convicted the accused for the offences under Sections 
302 and 324 IPC.  The accused was acquitted of the offence 
under Section 307 IPC.
	The conviction and sentence as imposed by the trial 
Court came to be challenged by the appellant before the High 
Court.  Primary stand was that the occurrence took place in 
course of sudden quarrel and the evidence tendered does not 
inspire confidence.  The stand of the State, on the other hand, 
was that Narmadabai (PW-1) whose evidence was vital for the 
prosecution case herself had suffered injuries.  The appeal was 
dismissed.

4.	In support of the appeal, the stand taken before the High 
Court was reiterated.  Additionally, it was submitted by 
learned counsel for the appellant that the factual scenario 
clearly established that in course of sudden quarrel the attack 
was made and the deceased lost his life.

5.	Learned counsel for the State submitted that considering 
the nature of the injury the appellant has been rightly 
convicted for offence punishable under Section 302 IPC.

6.	The basic stand of the appellant appears to be that in 
course of a quarrel the occurrence took place.  This fact has 
also been accepted by Narmadabai (PW 1) stated that there 
were verbal exchanges between the accused and the deceased 
and thereafter accused picked up the axe which was lying 
there and assaulted the deceased.

7.	According to appellant background facts projected by the 
prosecution clearly show that the assault was given in the 
course of a sudden quarrel. There was no premeditation and 
the accused did not take advantage and had also not acted in 
a cruel manner. Only one blow was allegedly given after 
picking up the axe.  Prior to that he was not armed. In any 
event only one blow was given. In essence it was submitted 
that Section 302 IPC has no application and fourth exception 
of Section 300 IPC applies.

8.	The pivotal plea relates to the applicability of Exception 4 
of Section 300 IPC.

9.	For bringing in its operation it has to be established that 
the act was committed without premeditation, in a sudden 
fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel without the 
offender having taken undue advantage and not having acted 
in a cruel or unusual manner.

10.	The fourth exception to Section 300 IPC covers acts done 
in a sudden fight. The said exception deals with a case of 
prosecution not covered by the first exception, after which its 
place would have been more appropriate. The exception is 
founded upon the same principle, for in both there is absence 
of premeditation. But, while in the case of Exception 1 there is 
total deprivation of self-control, in case of Exception 4, there is 
only that heat of passion which clouds men's sober reason and 
urges them to do deeds which they would not otherwise do. 
There is provocation in Exception 4 as in Exception 1; but the 
injury done is not the direct consequence of that provocation. 
In fact Exception 4 deals with cases in which notwithstanding 
that a blow may have been struck, or some provocation given 
in the origin of the dispute or in whatever way the quarrel may 
have originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties 
puts them in respect of guilt upon equal footing. A "sudden 
fight" implies mutual provocation and blows on each side. The 
homicide committed is then clearly not traceable to unilateral 
provocation, nor in such cases could the whole blame be 
placed on one side. For if it were so, the exception more 
appropriately applicable would be Exception 1. There is no 
previous deliberation or determination to fight. A fight 
suddenly takes place, for which both parties are more or less 
to be blamed. It may be that one of them starts it, but if the 
other had not aggravated it by his own conduct it would not 
have taken the serious turn it did. There is then mutual 
provocation and aggravation, and it is difficult to apportion the 
share of blame which attaches to each fighter. The help of 
Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused (a) without 
premeditation; (b) in a sudden fight; (c) without the offender's 
having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual 
manner; and (d) the fight must have been with the person 
killed. To bring a case within Exception 4 all the ingredients 
mentioned in it must be found. It is to be noted that the "fight" 
occurring in Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC is not defined in 
IPC. It takes two to make a fight. Heat of passion requires that 
there must be no time for the passions to cool down.  In this 
case, the parties have worked themselves into a fury on 
account of the verbal altercation in the beginning. A fight is a 
combat between two and more persons whether with or 
without weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any general 
rule as to what shall be deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is a 
question of fact and whether a quarrel is sudden or not must 
necessarily depend upon the proven facts of each case. For the 
application of Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC, it is not 
sufficient to show that there was a sudden quarrel and there 
was no premeditation. It must further be shown that the 
offender has not taken undue advantage or acted in cruel or 
unusual manner. The expression "undue advantage" as used 
in the provision means "unfair advantage".

11.	It cannot be laid down as a rule of universal application 
that whenever one blow is given, Section 302 IPC is ruled out. 
It would depend upon the weapon used, the size of it in some 
cases, force with which the blow was given, part of the body on 
which it was given and several such relevant factors.

12.	Considering the factual background of the case, in our 
considered view the appropriate conviction would be under 
Section 304 (I) IPC, and custodial sentence of ten years would 
meet the ends of justice.

13.	The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.

