
Supreme Court of India
Navdeep Singh vs State Of Haryana on 9 January, 2013Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Ranjan Gogoi
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 970 OF 2011


NAVDEEP SINGH                                       APPELLANT

                                   VERSUS

STATE OF HARYANA                              RESPONDENT


                                  O R D E R

      1. This appeal is directed against the judgment and order  passed  by
         the High Court of Judicature of Punjab and Haryana  at  Chandigarh
         in Criminal Appeal No.  1041-SB/2001,  dated  10.12.2008.  By  the
         impugned judgment and order, the  High  Court  has  dismissed  the
         appeal of the appellant and confirmed the judgment  of  conviction
         and the order  of  sentence  passed  by  the  Trial  Court,  dated
         18.08.2001 and 21.08.2001, respectively.

      2. The appellant before us, in this appeal, has  been  convicted  for
         the offence punishable under Section 20 of the Narcotic Drugs  and
         Psychotropic Substances  Act,  1985  (“the  Act”  for  short)  and
         sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for  a  period  of  ten
         years with a fine of Rs. 1 lac, in default of payment of which  he
         has to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period  of  one
         year.

      3. Briefly stated, the incident  occurred  on  11.08.1999,  when  the
         Assistant  Sub-Inspector  Karan  Singh  (PW-8),  upon  receipt  of
         information regarding transaction involving narcotic drugs,  after
         recording a diary entry and intimating the  superior  officers  of
         such, held a picket alongwith other  police  officers  and  Balwan
         Singh (PW-4). The appellant, who was riding a scooter, was stopped
         on suspicion. He was  given  an  option  to  be  searched  in  the
         presence of a Gazetted Officer  or  a  Magistrate.  The  appellant
         chose the former and accordingly,  the  search  was  conducted  in
         presence of the Deputy Superintendent of  Police  (“the  DSP”  for
         short), whereupon one kilogram of Charas was  recovered  from  the
         scooter. The sample and the rest of  recovered  Charas  were  duly
         sealed in parcels and taken in possession vide  separate  recovery
         memos. Ruqa was sent to the Police Station, on the  basis  whereof
         an FIR was registered. Thereafter, the appellant was arrested  and
         the statements of witnesses were recorded. On  completion  of  the
         investigation, the appellant was challaned and charges were framed
         against him.

      4. The Trial Court and the High Court have  convicted  and  sentenced
         the appellant for being in  conscious  possession  of  one  kg  of
         Charas without any permit or licence. It  is  the  correctness  or
         otherwise of the conviction and sentence is the subject matter  of
         this appeal.

      5. We have heard learned counsel for the parties to the lis.

      6. At the outset, learned counsel appearing for the  appellant  would
         submit that, since  the  appellant  was  carrying  the  contraband
         substance in quantities lesser than the commercial  quantity,  the
         sentence awarded by the Trial Court  and  confirmed  by  the  High
         Court should be modified to the sentence already undergone by  the
         appellant. In support of his submission, he  would  bring  to  our
         notice Section 20 of the Act, as amended by Act  9  of  2001,  and
         would stress upon the fact that the quantity recovered  is  lesser
         than the commercial quantity, maximum punishment for which extends
         upto ten years of rigorous imprisonment.

      7. Per contra, learned counsel  appearing  for  the  respondent-State
         brings to our notice that the conviction and  sentence  passed  by
         the Trial Court  was  prior  to  02.10.2001  and,  therefore,  the
         amended provision would not be applicable to the instant case.

      8. We have given our  anxious  consideration  to  the  abovementioned
         issue raised by the learned counsel for  the  appellant.   In  our
         opinion, since the amended provision has  come  into  effect  from
         02.10.2001, the submission of the learned  counsel  has  no  merit
         whatsoever and, therefore, the benefit of  the  amended  provision
         cannot be extended to the appellant.

      9. The learned counsel would also contend that there is a  breach  of
         the mandatory provisions of Section 50 of the Act. In  furtherance
         of the said contention, the learned counsel would take us  through
         the evidence of the DSP (PW-3) and the Investigating Officer  (PW-
         8) in as much as to bring out that the appellant was not  apprised
         of his statutory right by PW-8 and thus, the mandatory requirement
         was not satisfied.  The learned counsel in order  to  substantiate
         his contention, relied upon the decision of  this  Court  in  Myla
         Venkateswarlu v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 2012  (5)  SCC  226  and
         further referred to the  observations  made  by  the  Constitution
         Bench in the case of  Vijaysingh  Chandubha  Jadeja  v.  State  of
         Gujarat, (2011) 1 SCC 609.

     10. We have carefully perused the provisions of the Section 50 of  the
         Act. In our opinion, it may not be necessary to extract the  whole
         provision.  The Trial Court and the High Court  have  noticed  the
         aforesaid submission made before us, at length.  On marshalling of
         facts  and  appreciation  of  evidence,  they  have  reached   the
         conclusion that what was searched  is  the  scooter  and  not  the
         person of the appellant and, therefore, the provisions of  Section
         50 of the Act would not apply to the present case.  We  have  also
         looked into the notice  issued  to  the  appellant  by  PW-3,  the
         Investigating Officer, before the search was made and we note that
         a substantial question was put across the appellant as to  whether
         he chooses to be searched by a Gazetted Officer or  a  Magistrate.
         The appellant accorded his consent to be searched  by  a  Gazetted
         Officer. In fact, the appellant and the scooter were searched by a
         Gazetted Officer as per his request.

     11. In our opinion, the provisions do not prescribed  any  set  format
         for such notice. The essence is to appraise  the  accused  of  his
         legal right of being searched either by a Gazetted  Officer  or  a
         Magistrate. Here, when the appellant was apprised of his statutory
         rights under Section 50 by PW-3 and  opts  to  be  searched  by  a
         Gazetted  Officer,  then  he  has,   by   necessary   implication,
         consciously exercised his right. In that view of  the  matter,  we
         cannot accept the  submission  of  the  learned  counsel  for  the
         appellant that the mandatory provisions of Section 50 of  the  Act
         were breached.

     12. The learned counsel  would  contend  that  we  should  extend  our
         sympathies to the plight of the appellant since the appellant is a
         young person and an engineer by profession.

     13. As per the amended provision of Section 20 of the Act, the minimum
         sentence that  can  be  awarded,  if  there  exists  an  order  of
         conviction under the Act, is ten  years  and  the  said  term  was
         rightly awarded by the Trial  Court  and  confirmed  by  the  High
         Court. We cannot modify the sentence, since the provisions do  not
         permit this  Court  to  award  a  punishment  less  than  what  is
         prescribed under  the  Act.  In  that  view  of  the  matter,  the
         aforementioned  contention  of  the  learned  counsel  cannot   be
         accepted by us.

     14. In the result, while upholding the decision rendered by the  Trial
         Court and confirmed by the High  Court,  we  dismiss  the  appeal.

                 Ordered Accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)


                                                   .......................J.
                                                              (RANJAN GOGOI)
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 09, 2013.

