
Supreme Court of India
Phiroz Ibrahim Khan vs Ismail Ibrahim Sayeed & Anr on 19 January, 2009Author: ....................J.
Bench: D.K. Jain, R.M. Lodha
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 90 OF 2009
        (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) 1505/2008)

Phiroz Ibrahim Khan                                            ...Appellant(s)

                   Versus

Ismail Ibrahim Sayeed & Anr.                                   ...Respondent(s)

                          WITH

        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 91 OF 2009
       (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 1647/2008)

State of Maharashtra               ...Appellant(s)

                    versus

Ismail Ibrahim Sayeed              ... Respondent(s)
                                      ORDER

         Leave granted.


         These two appeals have been filed by the State and by the complainant

against order, dated December 27, 2007, passed by the High Court of judicature at

Bombay in Criminal Application No. 4145 of 2007, whereby the High Court has

granted anticipatory bail to the respondent-Ismail Ibrahim Sayeed.

         Accordingly to the appellants, since there are serious allegations against the

respondent in the charge-sheet, the High Court erred in granting anticipatory bail to

him.

                                                                                   ..2/-
Crl.As.90 & 91/2009..contd..

                                            :2:
            Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, while supporting the

order passed by the High Court, has submitted that the incident had taken place due to

business rivalry and further no specific role having been attributed to the respondent,

the High Court was justified in granting anticipatory bail to the respondent. Learned

counsel has pointed out that during the pendency of these appeals, the respondent had

moved an application for grant of regular bail before the trial Court. However, the

said application was opposed by the complainant, inter alia, on the ground that the

order granting anticipatory bail to the respondent had been challenged before this

Court and the special leave petitions were pending. Taking note of the said fact, the

trial Court has declined to entertain the application filed by the respondent for grant of

bail. A copy of order dated October 17, 2008, has been placed on record.



            Bearing in mind the fact that the charge-sheet has already been filed against

the respondent and the trial Court is seized of the matter, we feel that it would be

appropriate if the respondent is permitted to file a fresh application before the trial

Court for grant of regular bail.


                                                                                      ..3/-




Crl.As. 90 & 91/2009....contd...

                                           :3:
            Accordingly, we dispose of the appeals with liberty to the respondent to

apply for regular bail before the trial Court within two weeks from the receipt of the
copy of this order. As and when such an application is preferred, the same shall be

considered on its own merits, uninfluenced by order dated December 27, 2007, passed

by the High Court, granting anticipatory bail to the said respondent. We further direct

that the order passed by the High Court, impugned in these appeals, shall remain in

force till respondent's application for grant of regular bail is disposed of. The trial

Court would do will to dispose of the bail application expeditiously, preferably within

four weeks of its presentation.


                                  ....................J.
                                                      [ D.K. JAIN ]



                                                      ...................J.
                        [ R.M. LODHA ]
New Delhi,
January 19, 2009.

