
Supreme Court of India
Dev Singh & Ors vs State Of M.P on 13 April, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 1415 of 2007

                                                    1





                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1415 of 2007



            DEV SINGH & ORS.                                   ..... APPELLANTS



                                                 VERSUS

             
            STATE OF M.P.                                   .....       RESPONDENT

                                            

                                                O R D E R

          1.          Sixteen   persons   in   all   were   sent   up   for   trial 

          for   offences   punishable   under   Sections   148,   302/149, 

          326/149 and 324/149 and were sentenced accordingly for 

          various terms of imprisonment.   The incident happened 

          at about 5:00p.m. on the 12th of November, 1997, in the 

          Grain Market at Rajgarh.   As per the allegations, the 

          16 accused who were armed with weapons such as knives, 

          swords, farsas and lathis had pursuant to their common 

          object   committed   the   murders   of   Ganga   Ram   and   Chain 

          Singh.   A First Information Report, Exhibit P-51, was 

          lodged   at   Police   Station   Rajgarh   by   PW   13   Babulal 

          himself   an   injured   witness.     As   a   consequence   of   the 

          FIR,   the   Investigating   Officer   reached   the   place   of 

          incident   and   found   that   in   addition   to   Babulal   there 

          were several other injured persons as well they being 

          Gore Lal PW 14,   Prem Singh PW 20, Kalabai PW-15, the 


Crl.A. No. 1415 of 2007

                                                 2





          wife   of   PW   4,   and   Lalita   Bai,   sister   of   PW   1.     The 

          motive for the incident was that Kalabai had been raped 

          by some of the appellants and Ratanlal which had led to 

          the   incident.     The   trial   court   examined   the   entire 

          evidence   and   came   to   the   conclusion   that   the 

          participation   of   nine   of   the   accused   was   somewhat 

          uncertain and their involvement could not be spelt out 

          beyond reasonable doubt.  The trial court, accordingly, 

          acquitted   nine   of   the   accused.     The   matter   was 

          thereafter   taken   in   appeal   by   the   accused.     The   High 

          Court,   has,   by   the   impugned   judgment,   allowed   the 

          appeal   qua   Hari   Singh   and   Raghunath   Singh   sons   of 

          Girdhari Lal, and has ordered their acquittal as well 

          whereas the appeals of Dev Singh, Bansilal, Ratan Lal, 

          Kailash, Kamal Singh and Devi Singh aforesaid have been 

          dismissed.   Mr. Javed Mahmud Rao, the learned counsel 

          for the appellants was not present when these appeals 

          last   came   up.     We   had   then   requested   Ms.   V.   Mohana, 

          Advocate to assist us as an Amicus Curiae. 

          2.          We   have   heard   the   learned   Amicus   Curiae   on 

          behalf   of   the   appellants   and   Ms.   Aishwarya   Bhati   the 

          learned   counsel   for   the   respondent-State   of   Madhya 

          Pradesh.     We   see   from   the   evidence   that   it   is   based 

          primarily   on   the   statement   of   the   three   injured 

          witnesses.     It   is   also   apparent   from   the   record   that 


Crl.A. No. 1415 of 2007

                                               3





          three   of   the   accused   i.e.   Dev   Singh,   Bansilal   and 

          Kailash also sustained injuries.  Their presence cannot 

          be doubted under any circumstances.  Their plea that as 

          their injuries had not been explained a doubt was cast 

          on the prosecution story has been rejected by the High 

          Court   by   holding   that   the   injuries   suffered   by   them 

          were   so   miniscule   and   so   insignificant     that   the 

          prosecution   was   not   called   upon   to   explain   as   to   how 

          they had been caused.     We also see that all the eye 

          witnesses   have   supported   the   involvement   not   only   of 

          the   three   appellants   mentioned   above   but   even   of 

          Kailash   and   Kamal   Singh.     The   medical   evidence   also 

          suggests that the weapons that they were carrying i.e. 

          swords and farsas had been used to cause the injuries 

          on the deceased.   As a matter of fact Hari Singh and 

          Raghunath   Singh   have   both   been   acquitted   by   the   High 

          Court   as   they   were   said   to   have   been   carrying   lathis 

          and no lathi injury had been found on the dead body. 

          Ms. V. Mohana, the learned counsel for the appellants 

          has,   however,   argued   that   the   appellants   herein   were 

          placed in the same situation as the ones who had been 

          acquitted by the trial court and by the High Court and 

          as   such   the   appellants   ought   to   have   been   given   the 

          same benefit of doubt.   We are unable to accept this 

          submission for the reason that the presence of three of 


Crl.A. No. 1415 of 2007

                                              4





          the appellants is admitted and all five eye witnesses 

          had clearly supported the prosecution version qua them. 

          We   also   see   that   the   medical   evidence   fully   supports 

          the ocular testimony.  Deceased Ganga Ram had suffered 

          as many as seven injuries and Chain Singh ten injuries 

          and all of them were incised cutting wounds.

         3.          We   are   therefore   of   the   opinion   that   no 

         interference   is   called   for   in   this   appeal.     It   is, 

         accordingly, dismissed.

         4.          The fee of the Amicus is fixed at ` 7,000/-.





                                              .........................J
                                              [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                              ........................J
                                              [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

         NEW DELHI
         APRIL 13, 2011.



