
Supreme Court of India
Om Prakash Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 11 July, 2018Author: J Mohan Shantanagoudar
                                                    1


                                                                       Non­Reportable



                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.857 OF 2018
                                 (Arising from SLP(Crl.) No.387/2018)


          OM PRAKASH SINGH                                             ...APPELLANT

                                                VERSUS



          THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                                       ..RESPONDENTS
                                             J U D G M E N T




          MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.


          1.             Leave granted.


          2.
Signature Not Verified   This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 16.10.2017
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2018.07.11

          passed   by   the   High   Court   of   Judicature   at   Patna   in   Criminal
16:30:31 IST
Reason:


          Miscellaneous   No.   52088/2013   allowing   the   petition   filed   by
                                       2


respondent nos. 2 and 3 herein under Section 482 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure.   By the impugned judgment, the High Court

has   set   aside   the   order   dated   10.09.2013   passed   by   the   Chief

Judicial   Magistrate,   Siwan,   Bihar   in   Siwan   (M)   P.S.   Case   No.

288/2012,   taking   cognizance   of   the   offence   under   Section

420/406/379/448/307/427 and 506 read with Section 34 of the

Indian   Penal   Code   against   the   accused­respondent   nos.   2   and   3

herein.  


3.    Brief facts leading to this appeal are that on 30.05.2006, Dr.

Ira Sinha purchased fully automatic Biochemistry Analyser model

“Echo   Plus”   along   with   standard   accessories   from   M/s   Logotech

(India) Private  Limited (hereinafter called ‘the Logotech’), of which

respondent   nos.   2   and   3   are   Director   and   Technical   Director

respectively.   The sale consideration of the said machine was Rs.7

lakhs.     The   machine   was   supposed   to   be   fully   automatic

Biochemistry Analyser with free warranty maintenance for a period

of three years.  However, a maintenance of Rs.20,000/­ per annum

was to be paid by the purchaser after expiry of three years.   The

appellant is the husband of Dr. Ira Sinha.  It was found out by the
                                        3


appellant and his wife that the Biochemistry Analyser purchased by

them   was   not   functioning   properly   and   was   showing   inaccurate

results due to manufacturing defect.   Though, several visits were

made by the maintenance agents of the Logotech for repairing the

machine, the same was not successful.  Thereafter, as suggested by

the   officials   of   the   Logotech,   Dr.   Ira   Sinha   relying   upon   the

assurance   and   recommendation   of   the   officials   of   the   Logotech,

purchased a random access fully automatic analyser model “Miura­

200”   along   with   standard   accessories   from   the   Logotech   in

exchange of the earlier model “Echo Plus” on 25.07.2007.  The sale

price of “Miura­200” was Rs.11 lakhs.  Thus, Dr. Ira Sinha had to

pay   balance   amount   of   Rs.4  lakhs   extra  (i.e.  over   and   above  Rs.

Seven lakhs).  On payment, as mentioned supra, “Miura­200” model

was   installed   in   Prachi   Pathological   Clinic   of   Dr.   Ira   Sinha.

However, annual maintenance costs of Rs.40,000/­ was to be paid

by the purchaser after expiry of free warranty period. 


4.    Unfortunately,   “Miura­200”   model   was   also   not   functioning

properly and regular problems were being faced in the use of the

said   machine   at   the   pathological   clinic   of   Dr.   Ira   Sinha.     The
                                        4


officials of the Logotech were not paying proper attention and care,

though several repeated complaints were made by the purchaser.

Being aggrieved, Dr. Ira Sinha lodged an FIR in Siwan Police Station

on   24.03.2008,   which   came   to   be   registered   as   case   no.61/2008

under   Sections   420/406/384/386   read   with   Section   34   of   the

Indian Penal Code, at Police Station, Siwan.  The charge sheet was

submitted by the said police station before the Magistrate, who took

cognizance of the offences.  However, the High Court of Judicature

at Patna in Criminal Miscellaneous No. 36923/2008 quashed the

cognizance order passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Siwan.  


5.    Despite receipt of annual comprehensive maintenance cost of

Rs.40,000/­,   the   officials   of   the   Logotech   were   not   resolving   the

issues  faced  in  the  functioning of “Miura­200” model.   Therefore,

Dr.   Ira   Sinha   contacted   the   manufacturer   of   “Miura­200”   model,

Logotech,   Rome,   Italy   with   her   grievances.     The   manufacturer

directed the third­party service provider, i.e., “Key Pharma Limited,

Delhi”, to look after and solve the problems of “Miura­200” machine

purchased   by   Dr.   Ira   Sinha.     Service   engineer/   technical

representative of Key Pharma Limited visited the pathological clinic
                                           5


of   Dr.   Ira   Sinha   to   check   the   machine   in   question.     After   an   in

depth   verification   of   the   machine,   it   was   found   that   the   original

parts of the machine have been replaced by duplicate parts, causing

inaccurate   results.     Hence, the technical expert changed some of

the duplicate parts with original parts as they were readily available

with him at that time.   He promised that he would inform the top

officials of the manufacturer about the fiddle play of the Logotech.

The   said   engineer/   technical   service   expert,   issued   a   report   (i.e.

Service   Report)   dated   17.04.2012   under   his   signature   evidencing

fitting   of   duplicate   parts   of   the   machine   in   place   of   the   original

ones.     The   copy   of   the   report   is   also   furnished   along   with   the

appeal.     Having   come   to   know   about   such   service   report   against

respondent nos. 2 and 3, they started threatening the purchaser to

return back the copy of the service report to them, for which the

appellant   and   his   wife   refused.     They   even   threatened   with   dire

consequences of taking away their life.  According to the appellant,

respondent   nos.   2   and   3   even   tried   to   shoot   them   and   allegedly

tried to take back the service report dated 17.04.2012 from their

possession.   Having no other go, the appellant lodged an FIR before
                                            6


Siwan Police Station, which came to be registered as Siwan (M) P.S.

Case   No.   288/2012   for   the   offences   under   Sections

420/406/374/448/307/ 427 and 506 read with 34 of the Indian

Penal Code.  In the said matter, the charge sheet came to be filed by

the police station after due investigation before the Chief Judicial

Magistrate,   Siwan,   Bihar.     The   Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   Siwan,

took cognizance of the offences.   The said order of cognizance was

questioned   by   respondent nos.  2 and 3 before the  High Court of

Judicature at Patna by filing petition under Section 482 of the Code

of   Criminal   Procedure.     The   said   petition   was   allowed   by   the

impugned judgment.  Hence, this appeal.  


6.     Having heard the learned Advocates from both the sides, we

find   that   the   High   Court   is   at   fault   in   allowing   the   petition   filed

under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure without duly

appreciating the facts and circumstances of the case and without

effectively   considering   the   allegations   made   in   the   complaint   and

materials   found   in   the   charge   sheet.     The   High   Court   is   mainly

influenced by the factum that the earlier order of taking cognizance

was quashed while deciding the present matter.  In our considered
                                         7


opinion,   it   is   an   error   to   conceive   that   the   present   proceedings

based on the subsequent complaint are liable to be quashed merely

because the earlier criminal proceedings were quashed.   The High

Court   rather   advanced   erroneously   on   the   basis   of  presumptions

and conjectures, without considering the merits of the matter.  


7.    It   is   pertinent   to   note   that   the   subsequent   FIR   dated

05.08.2012   from   which   the   present  proceedings   emerge  is   thrust

upon discovery of a new fact of replacing the original parts with the

duplicate ones.  The subject matter of the complaint is in relation to

the   superior   model   “Miura­200”,   upgraded   on   the   advice   of   the

respondent­company.     Though, the appellant and his wife agreed

and   got   their   machine   upgraded   to   “Miura­200”   by   paying   Rs.4

lakhs   extra,   it   is   found   by   the  technical  expert  appointed  by  the

manufacturer that the “Miura­200” supplied by respondent nos. 2

and 3 was containing duplicate parts.  In other words, the original

parts were replaced by the duplicate parts at the time of supply of

machine to the appellant, and subsequently the machine was not

working properly resulting in inaccurate results.   Thus, it is clear

that the subsequent complaint dated 05.08.2012 is based on new
                                        8


set of facts and new set of allegations and not based on old set of

allegations as have been made in the FIR dated 24.03.2008. It is

needless to repeat that the FIR dated 24.03.2008 was based on the

allegations of non­functioning of the machine in addition to delay

and carelessness of respondent nos. 2 and 3 in getting the machine

repaired.   At that time, the appellant and his wife were not aware

about   replacement   of   the   original   parts   with   the   duplicate   ones.

The Service report of “Key Pharma Limited” was not in existence at

that   time.   Therefore,   the   Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   Siwan   was

justified in taking the cognizance, since prima facie case is found

against respondent nos. 2 and 3.  


8.    This Court in the case of Udai Shankar Awasthy v. the State of

U.P.  [(2013) 2 SCC 435, para 30] has observed that “the law does

not prohibit filing or entertaining of the second complaint even on

the same facts provided the earlier complaint has been decided on

the   basis   of   insufficient   material   or   the   order   has   been   passed

without understanding the nature of the complaint or the complete

facts   could   not   be   placed   before   the   Court,   or   where   the

complainant came to know certain facts after disposal of the first
                                         9


complaint   which   could   have   tilted   the   balance   in   his   favour.

However, the second complaint would not be maintainable wherein

the earlier complaint has been disposed on full consideration of the

case   of   the   complainant   on   merit”.     In   the   matter   on   hand,   the

complainant/appellant  came to know certain facts relating  to the

replacement of parts of the machine after the disposal of the first

complaint, that too after getting a service report from “Key Pharma

Limited, Delhi”, and, therefore, there is no bar for the appellant to

lodge second complaint.  


9.    Looking to the complaint and the charge­sheet, it is clear that

the complainant has made host of allegations.  The police after due

investigation filed the charge­sheet.  On going through the available

material, we find a prima facie case against respondent nos. 2 and

3.   Since the case has to be tried, we desist ourselves to comment

any further on the merits of the matter.  We make it clear that the

observations made by us are only for disposal of this appeal.  That

these  observations of  ours will not influence the trial court while

deciding   the   case.   Since,   we   find   prima   facie   material   against

respondent nos. 2 and 3, the High Court is not justified in quashing
                                     10


the proceedings.   Accordingly, the impugned judgment of the High

Court is set aside.   The order of taking cognizance passed by the

Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   Siwan,   in   Siwan   (M)   P.S.   Case   No.

288/2012 stands restored.  


                                          ..…………………………………….J.
                                                 [N.V. RAMANA]


                                           ……………………………………….J.
                                          [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]
NEW DELHI;
JULY 11, 2018.

