
Supreme Court of India
Mubin Shaikh vs The State Of Maharashtra on 8 February, 2018Author: ..................J.
Bench: [ L ], [ S ]
                       1


                                    REPORTABLE

       IN THE    SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
     CRIMINAL    APPELLATE JURISDICTION

  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 245   OF 2018
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 1498/2017)


MUBIN SHAIKH                     APPELLANT(S)

                       VERSUS

THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.RESPONDENT(S)
          WITH

      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 246    OF 2018
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 1499/2017)


  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 247    OF 2018
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 2058/2017)


    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 248     OF 2018
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 5834/2017)


  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 249   OF 2018
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 5835/2017)


   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 250 OF 2018
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 5836/2017)


                 O R D E R

1.    Leave granted.
                               2
2.      On 02.06.2014 at about 9.00 P.M., the

deceased      Shaikh    Mohsin       was    proceeding         for

dinner with another friend Riyaz.                        He was

wearing a pastel green colour shirt and had

a beard.      According to the prosecution, the

accused respondents before us, targeted them

because they belonged to a certain community

and    started    assaulting         Shaikh       Mohsin      with

hockey     sticks,      bats       and     stones.            This

resulted in his death.


 Apparently, the accused were said to have

been highly motivated to do the act because

they had attended a meeting of a body called

Hindu    Rashtra       Sena    about        half       and    hour

before the incident.


3.      The   accused     applied          for    bail       before

the    Sessions    Court,          Pune.         The    Sessions

Court, Pune rejected the bail applications

of the accused.         The Sessions Court observed

that     23   persons     in        all     (including         two
                               3


juveniles in conflict with law) appeared to

have assaulted the deceased and the other

injured person.         The deceased was assaulted

because he looked like a Muslim and that the

deceased prima facie had no concerned with

disgracing       Shivaji      Maharaj.       The   Sessions

Court found that prima facie, the accused

were     said    to   have     been    present      in   the

meeting which was held at about 8.30 p.m. in

which a conspiracy to kill the members of a

certain community was hatched. The Sessions

Court     rejected      the    bail.     The    respondent

applied    for     bail     before     the     Bombay    High

Court.     The Learned Single Judge of the High

Court has, in a cryptic order directed the

release     of    the      accused     mainly      for    the

following reason;

         "The meeting was held half an
         (sic)prior to the incident of
         assault.    The applicants/accused
         otherwise had no other motive such
         as any personal enmity against the
         innocent deceased Mohsin.      The
         fault of the deceased was only
                              4


         that   he    belonged   to    another
         religion.   I consider this factor
         in        favour        of        the
         applicants/accused. Moreover, the
         applicants/accused do not have
         criminal record and it appears
         that in the name of the religion,
         they   were    provoked    and   have
         committed the murder."

 This     observation     is      made    following     the

observation that the accused had no personal

animus against the deceased.


4.      We have carefully perused the impugned

order(s)       granting   bail     and    we    find   that

there is little reference to/or discussion

on the merits of the bail applications but

we are satisfied that the significant reason

for release is mainly the one stated above.

We find that the aforesaid reason can, on a

fair reading, be understood or misunderstood

almost    as    a   mitigating      circumstance       or   a

kind of a justification for the murder and

it   is    obvious     that       the    fact   that    the
                               5


deceased    belonged     to        a    certain        community

cannot be a justification for any assault

much less a murder. While it may be possible

to understand a reference to the community

of the parties involved in an assault, it is

difficult to understand why it was said that

"the fault of the deceased was only that he

belonged to another religion" and further "I

consider     this    factor            in    favour     of      the

applicants/accused." We have no doubt that a

Court    fully      conscious               of   the         plural

composition of the Country while called upon

to deal with rights of various communities,

cannot     make   such    observations                which     may

appear to be coloured with a bias for or

against a community. It is possible that the

learned Judge wanted to rule out a personal

motive     against       the           victim,        but      only

emphasize    communal      hatred.               It     is     also

possible that the learned Single Judge may

not have intended to hurt the feelings of
                                6


any    particular         community        or    support     the

feelings of another community but the words

are    clearly       vulnerable       to    such      criticism.

The direction cannot be sustained.


5.      Since, as observed earlier, there is

little        discussion      on     the     other      relevant

factors relating to granting or withholding

bail     in     a    murder     case,      we    consider     it

appropriate          to   set       aside       the     impugned

order(s).


6.      Pursuant to order of this Court, the

accused Ganesh @ Ranjeet Shankar Yadav is in

custody.        The respondents/accused Ajay Dilip

Lalge and Vijay Rajendra Gambhire shall be

taken into custody, if they do not surrender

within a period of one week from today.                     The

bail applications are restored to the file

of the High Court.                  The High Court shall

hear     the        matter(s)       afresh      after     giving

liberty to the parties to file additional
                            7


affidavits.


7.   The    parties       are    directed    to    appear

before    the     High     Court     on     16.02.2018.

 Having regard to the circumstances of the

case, the bail applications may be decided

at the earliest in any case, not later than

6 weeks from the parties appear before the

High Court.


8.   We     may    note    that     our   observations

shall not       be construed as comments on the

merits of the case.


9.   The      appeals     are     disposed    of    with

afore-mentioned observations and directions.



                                ..................J.
                                      [ S.A. BOBDE ]

                                ...................J.
                                 [ L. NAGESWARA RAO ]
NEW DELHI,
FEBRUARY 08,2018.

