
Supreme Court of India
Kishanrao Narayanrao Ghuge & Ors vs State Of Maharashtra on 6 August, 2003Bench: K.G. Balakrishnan, B.N. Srikrishna.
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  173 of 2003

PETITIONER:
Kishanrao Narayanrao Ghuge & Ors.	


RESPONDENT:
Vs.

State of Maharashtra				


DATE OF JUDGMENT: 06/08/2003

BENCH:
K.G. Balakrishnan & B.N. Srikrishna.


JUDGMENT:
O R D E R



WITH



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 187  OF 2003





	Five accused were tried by the Sessions Judge, Hingoli, for the offences 

punishable under Sections 302, 307, 147, 148 read with Section 149 of the 

Indian Penal Code.   All the five accused were found guilty of offences 

punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC and also other allied 

offences by the Sessions Judge.   The accused filed appeal and  by the impugned 

judgment, the second accused Shivaji  Kishanrao Ghuge alone was found guilty of 

offences under Section 302 IPC and A-1 and A-3 to A-5 were found guilty of 

offences under Section 326 read with Section 149 and offences under Section 147 

and 148 IPC.   These accused have filed Criminal Appeal No. 173 of 2003 and 

second accused Shivaji Kishanrao Ghuge has filed a separate appeal, viz. 

Criminal Appeal No. 187 of 2003.



	The incident happened on 25.6.1995 at about 1.30 p.m. in the agricultural 

field belonging to PW-1 Tukaram.  Tukaram and his deceased son, Gorakhnath 

Ghuge  were in the agricultural field and the latter was engaged in sowing 

'moong' seeds.   These appellants came there and asked PW-1 as to why  he had 

purchased that agricultural land from Balaji.   The appellants claimed  that 

they had a right over that property.   The second accused Shivaji Kishanrao 

Ghuge started assaulting Tukaram.    Tukaram pleaded with the accused that the 

matter could be settled amicably and that he was prepared to return the land, 

but the quarrel did not end and the second accused and accused 3 to 5 mounted 

an attack on  PW-1 Tukaram and deceased Gorakhnath.  The second accused Shivaji 

Kishanrao Ghuge picked up an axe which was lying the field and inflicted three 

blows on the head of Gorakhnath.   The other appellants (accused 3 to 5) also 

assaulted deceased Gorakhnath with 'lathis'.  Gorakhnath died on the  spot and 

PW-1 Tukaram fell down on the ground.  PW-1's grand daughter, Baby, came 

rushing to the field and she was sent to fetch Tukaram's other son, Haribhau, 

from Hingoli.   PW-13 Haribhau came in the evening and sprinkled water on the 

face of PW-1, who then got up.   PW-13 took PW-1 and the dead body of 

Gorakhnath to his house.   On the next day, PW-1 went to the Police Station and 

lodged the First Information Report and PW-14 took over the charge of 

investigation.   PW-1 was examined by a Doctor,  who found seven injuries on 

his body.   Except injury No. 3, all other injuries were contusions.   PW-7 

conducted the post-mortem on the body of the  deceased Gorakhnath, who was 

found to have sufered multiple head injuries with fracture of skull.   He had  

many other incised injuries also on his body.   



PW-1 Tukaram is the only eye witness to the incident.   Though 

prosecution examined one Shantabai, who was  allegedly working in the field, 

she turned hostile to the prosecution.   PW-1 in his evidence stated that the 

accused came and attacked PW-1 and his deceased son, Gorakhnath.   The evidence 

of PW-1 was discussed in detail both by the Sessions Judge and the High Court.  

The High Court held that as the second accused Shivaji Kishanrao Ghuge found an 

axe lying in the field, he picked it up and suddenly attacked Gorakhnath and 

that it was difficult to assume  that there was unlawful assembly consisting of 

all the accused with the common object of causing death of Gorakhnath.   The 

High Court rightly came to that conclusion.    We do not find any error with 

the finding.



The counsel for the appellants contended before us that the conviction of 

the appellants (accused 1 and  accused 3 to 5) under Section 326 read with 

Section 149 is not sustainable as these  accused did not cause any injuries 

either to PW-1 or deceased Gorakhnath.   This contention is not correct.   

Accused  3 to   5 were armed with 'lathis'.   The injuries found on the body of 

the deceased Gorakhnath and the injuries found on the body of the PW-1 were  

grievous in nature and must have been caused with a weapon like 'lathi'.  

However, we find from the evidence of PW-1 that the first accused Kishanrao 

Narayanarao Ghuge was not armed with any weapon.   Though his presence there is 

not denied, but evidently he had not  caused any injury either on PW-1 or to 

deceased Gorakhnath.   Of course, all the accused came to the field, but as 

observed by the High Court, it seems that the incident  must have happened all 

of a sudden because of the dispute regarding the land in question,  between 

these accused on the one hand and the PW-1 and his son on the other.  Having 

regard to the circumstances of the case, it is proved that accused 3 to 5  

caused grievous hurt and they had common  intention to commit such offence, but 

the first accused Kishanrao Narayanrao Ghuge did no participate in this 

venture.  It is also pertinent to note that at the relevant time, he was 70 

years of age and  he must have accompanied the  accused when the dispute 

regarding the property arose.



Therefore, we confirm the conviction and sentence of the second accused  

Shivaji Kishanrao Ghuge for the offence under Section 302.  As regards accused 

3 to 5, we uphold the punishment imposed on them for offences under Section 326 

read with Section 34 IPC.   Accused 3 to 5 are not guilty of offences under 

Section 147 and 148.  They are acquitted of the charges under Section 147 and 

148.   We do not find any reason to interfere with the sentences imposed on any 

of these accused.   Accused 3, 4 and 5 are directed to surrender to their bail 

bonds to undergo the remaining part of the sentence.   The first accused 

Kishanrao Naarayanrao Ghuge is acquitted of all the charges and his bail bond 

shall stand cancelled.



The Criminal Appeals are diposed of  accordingly.



