
Supreme Court of India
Bilal Hajar @ Abdul Hameed vs State Rep. By The Inspector Of ... on 10 October, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                     1

                                                                   REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL No.1305 OF 2008


                         Bilal Hajar @ Abdul Hameed                   ….Appellant(s)


                                                VERSUS


                         State Rep. by the 
                         Inspector of Police                        …Respondent(s)
                                          J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.

                         1.    This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   final

                         judgment   and   order   dated   08.11.2006   passed   by

                         the   High   Court   of   Madras   in   Criminal   Appeal

                         No.1200 of 2003 whereby the High Court dismissed

Signature Not Verified
                         the appeal filed by appellant herein.
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.10.10
16:45:45 IST
Reason:
                              2
2.    In   order   to   appreciate   the   issues   involved   in

this appeal, it is necessary to set out the facts of the

case in detail hereinbelow.

3.    The   case   of   the   prosecution   may   be   briefly

stated as follows.

4.    In all nine persons were tried for commission

of various offences in Session Trial No.239 of 2000

by   the   Additional   Court   of   Sessions   (Fast   Track

No.111) Coimbatore. 

5.    The   details   of   the   offences   under   the   Indian

Penal Code (for short “IPC”) for which the accused

were tried are set out herein below: 


      (1)    A ­ 1 to A­ 9            Section 120­B, IPC

      (2)    A­1 to A­ 5              Section 148, IPC 

      (3)    A­ 1 to A­ 5             Section 302, IPC

      (4)    A­1                      Section 332, IPC
                             3
6.    On   19th   August   1991,   some   posters   were

found  pasted  on the walls of public streets in the

city of Coimbatore. These posters contained threats

that   seven   persons   belonging   to   a   particular

community would be killed.  One person, out of the

seven named person, was “Siva Kumar @ Siva”. 

7.    Siva   on   coming   to   know   of   his   name   being

published   in   the   poster   scolded   in   filthy   language

the members of a particular community in a public

meeting  held  on  30.08.1991, as according  to him,

the   members   of   that   community   had   pasted   such

posters   wherein   he   and   six   others   named   therein

were given threat of murder. 

8.    On   01.09.1991   between   2.30   p.m.   to   3.30

p.m., all the nine accused (A­1 to A­9) assembled in

the house of the appellant (A­6) and they hatched a

criminal conspiracy to murder Siva.  In furtherance

of the criminal conspiracy, on 05.09.1991, around
                                4

7.45   a.m.   accused   (A­1   to   A­5)   along   with   one

absconded   accused   armed   with   deadly   weapons

assembled   at   Kovai   Mill   Road,   Coimbatore   and

accused (A­1 and A­3) attacked Siva with knife, who

was passing through the road.   Accused (A­1) also

stabbed   one   Constable   Chinnathambi   (PW­1)   with

knife, who had come to the spot.  Injured Siva was

taken to the nearest hospital where he succumbed

to injuries and was declared dead. 

9.    This   incident   led   to   arrests   of   nine   accused.

Investigation  was   carried out and after  completing

it,   the   charge­sheet   was   filed   against   the   nine

accused and they were put to trial for commission of

various offences as detailed above. By order dated

29.07.2003,   the   Sessions   Judge   convicted   the

accused persons as under:

      “The   punishment   of   life   imprisonment   to
      accused   Nos.1   to   9   under   Section   120(b)(1)
      and   a   fine   of   Rs.10,00/­   is   imposed,   failing
      which   1   year   RI   have   to   undergo.     For
      accused Nos. 1 to 4, life imprisonment under
      Section 302 of IPC and a fine of Rs.25,000/­
                                 5

      as   fine,   failing   which   1   year   RI   under
      Sections   148   of   IPC   to   accused   Nos.1   to   4
      should   undergo   the   RI   in   the   same   period.
      Under   Section   428   of   Criminal   Procedure
      Code,   the   period   of   jail   while   in   the   trail
      period may be deducted.  Rs.1,00,000/­ is to
      be   given   to   the   ward   of   the   Siva   as
      compensation   from   the   total   fine   of
      Rs.1,90,000/­ under Section 357 of Cr.P.C.”



10.   The convicted accused felt aggrieved and filed

their respective criminal appeals, some jointly and

some   separately   in   the   High   Court   of   Madras

questioning   therein   the   legality   and  correctness  of

their respective convictions and sentences awarded

to them. 

11.   By a common impugned order, the High Court

dismissed the appeals of the accused, except that of

accused (A­9) who was acquitted.  The conviction of

accused (A­2) under Section 120B was set aside.

12.   The   accused   (A­6)  alone   felt   aggrieved   by   his

conviction and award of sentences and he has filed

the present appeal by way of special leave to appeal

in   this   Court.   So   far   as   other   accused   are
                             6

concerned, they did not file any appeal in this Court

against their respective conviction/sentences. Their

conviction   and   sentences   have,   therefore,   become

final.   They   are   undergoing   their   jail   sentences   as

awarded to each of them.

13.    So the only question involved in this appeal is

whether the Courts below were justified in holding

the appellant (A­6) guilty for commission of only the

offence under Section 120­B IPC. 

14.   It is pertinent to mention here that so far as

the appellant (A­6) is concerned, he was prosecuted

and eventually convicted for an offence punishable

under   Section   120­B,   IPC   and   was   accordingly

awarded life sentence.  In other words, the appellant

(A­6)   was   charged   with   the   offence   punishable

under   Section   120­B,   IPC   and   was   convicted   as

such.
                             7
15.   Heard Mr. K.K. Mani, learned counsel for the

appellant   and   Mr.   M.   Yogesh   Kanna,   learned

counsel for the respondent­State.

16.   Learned counsel Mr. K.K. Mani appearing for

the   appellant   while   assailing   the   legality   and

correctness   of   the   impugned  order   contended  that

the   appellant's   conviction   is   based   only   on   the

testimony of two witnesses, namely PW­3 and PW­4.

17.   According   to   learned   counsel,   these   two

witnesses   are   the   chance   witnesses   set  up   by   the

prosecution   and   therefore   the   two   Courts   below

erred in placing reliance on their testimony. In his

submission, both these witnesses should have been

disbelieved.

18.       Learned   counsel   then   elaborated   his

submission by reading their testimony and pointed

out   inconsistencies   and   contradictions   in   their

statements   on   certain   issues,   which   according   to

him, render their statement wholly unreliable.
                             8
19.   It   is   basically   these   submissions   the   learned

counsel   urged   by   appreciating   their   evidence   and

contended   that   so   far   as   appellant   (A­6)   is

concerned, once it is established that he was not a

part   of   the   criminal   conspiracy   to   kill   Siva   on

05.09.1991, which according to the prosecution was

hatched on 01.09.1991 in his house, the appellant

was entitled for a clean acquittal. 

20.   It was urged that it is an admitted case set up

by the prosecution which found proved also that the

appellant   was   neither  present  and  nor  involved in

actual commission of crime on 05.09.1991 in killing

Siva   but   it   was   accused   (A­1   to   A­5)   who   were

involved in murder of Siva on 05.09.1991. It is for

this   reason,   the   appellant   cannot   be   held

responsible   for   commission   of   murder   of   Siva,   he

being not a member of any criminal conspiracy to

kill him.
                              9
21.   In   reply,   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent

(State),   supported   the   impugned   order,   which,

according   to   him,   rightly   upheld   the   order   of   the

Session court and supported the reasoning and the

conclusion contained therein and contended that no

case is made out to reverse the concurrent finding

of   the   two   courts   below.     It   was   urged   that

reasoning   and   the   conclusion   is   based   on   proper

appreciation of  evidence and does not call for  any

interference in this appeal.

22.   Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

find   no   force   in   the   submissions   of   the   learned

counsel for the appellant (A­6).

23.   At the out set, we consider it apposite to state

that when the two Courts below in their respective

jurisdiction   has   appreciated   the   entire   ocular

evidence,   then   this   Court   would   be   very   slow   in

exercise   of   its   appellate   jurisdiction   under   Article
                               10

136 of the Constitution to appreciate the evidence

afresh unless the appellant is able to point out that

the concurrent finding of two courts below is wholly

perverse or is recorded without any evidence or is

recorded   by   misreading   or   ignoring   the   material

evidence. 

24.   We consider it apposite to recall the apt words

of Justice Fazal Ali­a learned Judge while speaking

for   the   Bench   in   the   case   of  Lachman   Singh  vs.

State  (AIR   1952   SC   167   at   page   169)   when   his

Lordship observed “It is sufficient to say that it is not

the   function   of   this   Court   to   reassess   the   evidence

and   an   argument   on   a   point   of   fact   which   did   not

prevail   with   the   Courts   below   cannot   avail   the

appellants in this Court.”   

25.   Despite   this,   we  felt  that  since  the  leave has

been granted to the appellant to file this appeal, it is

just   and   proper   to   peruse   the   evidence   and
                               11

particularly that of PW­3 and PW­4 with a view to

find out as to whether the courts below were right in

placing   reliance   on   their   testimony   to   sustain   the

appellant's conviction under Section 120­B, IPC.

26.   Before  we  examine the evidence of PW­3 and

PW­4,   it   is   apposite   to   take   note   of   the   essential

ingredients   of   Section   120   ­A   and   Section   120­B,

IPC under which the appellant (A­6) was prosecuted

and eventually convicted.

27.   The expression “criminal conspiracy” is defined

in Section 120­A, IPC. It says that when two or more

persons agree or cause to be done an illegal act or

an act, which is not illegal by illegal means, such an

agreement is designated a “criminal conspiracy”. It

then   provides   an   exception   to   the   effect   that   no

agreement   except   an   agreement   to   commit   an

offence   shall   amount   to   a   criminal   conspiracy

unless some act besides the agreement is done by

one or more parties to such agreement in pursuance
                            12

thereof.     The  explanation appended to the Section

clarifies that it is immaterial whether the illegal act

is the ultimate object of such agreement or is merely

incidental to that object.

28.   Section 120­B, IPC provides a punishment for

committing   an   offence   of   criminal   conspiracy.   It

says   that   whoever   is   a   party   to   a   criminal

conspiracy   to   commit   an   offence   punishable   with

death,   imprisonment   for   life,   or   rigorous

imprisonment   for   a  term  of   two   years   or   upwards

shall be punished in the same manner as if he had

abetted   such   offence   provided   there   is   no   express

provision made in the Code for punishment of such

conspiracy. 

29.   Sub­section (2) of Section 120­B, IPC, however,

provides that a person who is a party to a criminal

conspiracy   other   than   a   criminal   conspiracy   to

commit an offence punishable as aforesaid shall be
                            13

punished with an imprisonment of either for a term

not exceeding six months or with fine or both.  

30.   Reading of Section 120­A and Section 120­B,

IPC   makes   it   clear   that   an   offence   of   “criminal

conspiracy”   is   a   separate   and   distinct   offence.

Therefore,   in   order   to   constitute   a   criminal

conspiracy and to attract its rigor, two factors must

be present in the case on facts:  first, involvement of

more   than   one   person   and   second,   an   agreement

between/among such persons to do or causing to be

done an illegal act or an act which is not illegal but

is done or causing to be done by illegal means.

31.   The expression “criminal conspiracy” was aptly

explained by this Court in a case reported in Major

E.G.   Barsay  vs.  State   of   Bombay  (1962)   2   SCR

195.   Learned   Judge   Subba   Rao   (as   His   Lordship

then   was   and   later   became   CJI)   speaking   for   the

Bench in his distinctive style of writing said:
                              14
      “31……..   The   gist   of   the   offence   is   an
      agreement to break the law.   The parties to
      such an agreement will be guilty of criminal
      conspiracy,   though   the   illegal   act   agreed   to
      be done has not been done.  So too, it is not
      an   ingredient   of   the   offence   that   all   the
      parties should agree to do a single illegal act.
      It may comprise the commission of a number
      of acts.”



32.   Therefore, in order to constitute a conspiracy,

meeting   of   mind   of  two or  more persons  to do an

illegal act or an act by illegal means is a must.   In

other words, it is sine qua non for invoking the plea

of   conspiracy   against  the  accused.    However, it  is

not necessary that all the conspirators must know

each   and   every   detail   of   the   conspiracy,   which   is

being hatched and nor it is necessary to prove their

active part/role in such meeting. 

33.   In   other   words,   their   presence   and

participation in such meeting alone is sufficient. It

is well known that a criminal conspiracy is always
                              15

hatched   in   secrecy   and  is   never  an   open   affair   to

anyone much less to public at large. 

34.   It is for this reason, its existence coupled with

the   object   for   which   it   was   hatched   has   to   be

gathered   on   the   basis   of   circumstantial   evidence,

such   as   conduct   of   the   conspirators,   the   chain   of

circumstances   leading   to   holding   of   such   meeting

till   the   commission   of   offence   by   applying   the

principle   applicable   for   appreciating   the

circumstantial   evidence   for   holding   the   accused

guilty   for   commission   of   an   offence.     (See   also

Baldev   Singh  vs.  State   of   Punjab  [2009   (6)   SCC

564].         

35.     Keeping in view the aforesaid principle of law

which is consistently followed and reiterated by this

Court   in   several   cases,   the   issue   involved   in   this

case is required to be examined with a view to find

out as to whether appellant (A­6) was a member of a

criminal   conspiracy   which   was   hatched   on
                               16

01.09.1991   to   kill  Siva   on   05.09.1991   or   in   other

words   whether   there   is   any   evidence   to   sustain

appellant's   conviction   under   Section   120­B,   IPC

and,   if   so,   whether   the   evidence   adduced   by   the

prosecution   is   in   conformity   with   the   parameters

laid   down   by   this   Court   to   prove   the   guilt   of   the

appellant beyond reasonable doubt.

36.   It has come in evidence that starting point of

the   incident   leading   to   the   death   of   Siva   gained

momentum due to pasting of posters on public walls

in   the   city   by   the   members   of   one   community

mentioning   therein   the   name   of   “Siva”   with   six

others   that   these   seven   named   persons   would   be

killed. This prima facie indicated that Siva and six

others could be a soft target for their elimination by

the members of a particular community in coming

days.     Another   factor,   which   added   to   the

occurrence           in        question           was         filthy

language/utterances of Siva in one public meeting
                             17

held by some workers of one party soon thereafter

on 30.08.1991.

37.   Perusal of evidence of PW­3 and PW­4 would

go   to   show   that   PW­4   was   running   his   small   tea

stall   under   a   tree   near   appellant's   house.   It   was

around 70 feet away from the house and one could

see the  appellant's house from the tea stall. PW­3

was working as a tea boy in PW­4's tea stall on daily

wages during the relevant time. 

38.   PW­3   said   in   his   deposition   that   on

01.09.1991 around 2.30 p.m., he saw appellant (A­

6), Basha (A­8) and Sbeyar (A­9) getting down from

the   car   (van)   and   entering   in   appellant's   house.

After some time, (A­8­Basha) came to the tea stall

and asked him (PW­3) to bring 10 cups of tea to the

appellant's house.  PW­3 on his part then told PW­4

to prepare and give him 10 cups of tea, which PW­3

brought   to   the   appellant's   house   and   served

everyone   sitting   in   the   room.   He   then   waited   for
                                18

some   time   to   collect   the   empty   teacups   when   he

heard appellant (A­6) saying to others present there

that: “whatever might be the cost, we should kill Siva

within  10  days”.  He said that on appellant saying

this, another person­Basha (A­8) who had come to

the   tea   stall   for   ordering   tea   said   “in   no   case   we

should   go   back   after   taking   the   initial   step   and

finishing   Siva”.     On   this   A­7   (Subahier)   said

touching A­1 (Jahir Husain) sitting next to him that

he i.e. (A­1) would be the fittest one to do the job.

At   this   time,   (A­8   Basha)   saw   PW­3   who   was

standing there and asked him as to why he (PW­3)

is   standing   here   and   asked   him   to   go   out   of   the

room. When PW­3 was leaving the place, he heard

the   appellant   asking   others   as   to   whether   they

would murder Siva.  All in reply to appellant's query

said   in   a  loud   voice,  as if, they  were taking  some

kind of oath that they would kill Siva.   PW­3 then

said that on return to tea stall, he told to his boss
                              19

(PW­4) what he saw and heard in appellant's house

to which (PW­4) said to him that he should ignore.

PW­4 then asked him to go back after some time to

collect the empty cups and bring sale money for 10

cups   of   tea.   PW­3   then   went   to   the   appellant’s

house after ten to fifteen minutes when the persons

assembled   there   paid him  Rs.8 and  said to  retain

the balance by way of tip for him. He then said that

after   about   4/5   days  or  so,  he  heard  that  Siva   is

murdered by stab injuries so he went to see him in

Government hospital.

39.   More or less on the same lines of (PW­3), PW­4

has   also   deposed   about   the   incident   in   his

deposition. In other words, PW­4 has corroborated

the   testimony   of   PW­3   on   all   material   events   and

hence   we   do   not   wish   to   repeat   his   deposition   in

detail.
                            20
40.   Having   scanned   the   testimony   of   PW­3   and

PW­4,   we   find   no   good   ground   to   discard   their

testimony.  In our opinion, their testimony is found

natural,   consistent   and   does   not   suffer   from   any

contradictions much less major contradictions so as

to brush aside as being wholly unreliable. The two

courts below, in our view, therefore rightly relied on

their   testimony   to   sustain   appellant’s   conviction

under Section 120­B, IPC.

41.   In our considered opinion, the test laid down

by this Court as to how a case under Section 120­A,

IPC read with Section 120­B, IPC is required to be

made   out   by   the   prosecution   with   the   aid   of

evidence is found proved by the prosecution beyond

reasonable  doubt in this case and this we say  for

following reasons.

42.   First,   there   was   adequate   foundation   laid   for

holding   a   meeting   on   01.09.1991   by   the   accused
                             21

and the said foundation was an incident of pasting

of   posters   on   19.08.1991  in public places all  over

the   city   and   second,   a   public   meeting   held   on

30.08.1991  in   which  Siva  (deceased) uttered filthy

language against the members of the community to

which   the   accused   belonged.   These   two   facts   did

constitute   a   foundation   for   the   commission   of

offence in question and they were duly proved with

adequate evidence by the prosecution.

43.   Second,   the   evidence   of   PW­3   and   PW­4   has

proved   the   factum   of   holding   a   meeting   in

appellant’s house on 01.09.1991 with other accused

wherein a decision was taken to kill/eliminate Siva

within 10 days.

44.   Third,   the   presence   of   PW­3   in   appellant's

house   while   serving   a   tea   to   all   the   accused   is

proved by the evidence of PW­3 and PW­4.  Similarly

the evidence of PW­3 and PW­4 further proved the

exchange   of   talk   between   the   accused   confirming
                              22

that they will kill/eliminate Siva, the fact that Siva

was   killed/eliminated   after   five   days   after   the

meeting was held and lastly, his death was proved

as homicidal 

45.   In   our   considered   opinion,   the   complicity   of

the appellant in conceiving a plan to kill/eliminate

Siva   was   therefore   duly   proved   with   the   evidence

adduced   by   the   prosecution.   Indeed,   it   was   the

appellant   who   took   the   lead   to   kill/eliminate   Siva

and with that end in view first he held a meeting in

his house with all the other accused on 01.09.1991

and   pursuant  thereto got it accomplished through

accused (A­1 to A­5) on 05.09.1991 when accused

(A­1   &   A­3)   caused   fatal  stab   injury   with  knife   to

Siva resulting in his homicidal death.

46.   In   our   opinion,   it   was   not   necessary   for   the

appellant   to   remain   present   at   the   time   of   actual

commission   of   the   offence   on   05.09.1991   with

accused   (A­1   to   A­5)   for   killing/eliminating   Siva.
                               23

The appellant could be held guilty for commission of

the same offence and sentence, which was awarded

to   accused   (A­1   to   A­5)   as   if,   he   had   abetted   the

commission   of   the   offence   of   murder   as   provided

under Section 120­B, IPC.

47.    We are not impressed by the submission of the

learned   counsel   for   the   appellant   (A­6)   when   he

tried   to   point   out   three   statements   from   the

evidence of PW­3 and PW­4 which according to him

were   contradictory   to   each   other   rendering   their

testimony unreliable.

48.    The   first   one   was   that   PW­3   said   that   “he

alone” went to the hospital to see the dead body of

Siva   whereas   PW­4   said   that   “We”   went   to   the

hospital to see the dead body of Siva. 

49.    In   our   opinion,   there   is   no   contradiction   in

their   version   on   the   issue   of   visit   to   the   hospital.

Whether   both   went   together   or   went   individually

with some time gap between their visits is hardly of
                           24

any   significance   so   as   to   discard   their   entire

testimony.

50.   The second instance which was pointed out by

the learned counsel for the appellant was that why

should PW­3 go to see the dead body of Siva in the

hospital when he was in no way connected with him

and   nor   was  he   connected with the accused. This

fact according to learned counsel appears unnatural

and thus renders PW­3 testimony unreliable.

51.   In our view, the second instance also has no

substance. It is for the reason that the appellant (A­

6) had an opportunity to cross­examine PW­3 and

PW­4 on all the so­called contradictions to the two

witnesses but he failed to avail of this opportunity

by   not   cross­examining   PW­3   and   PW­4.     On   the

other   hand,   the   appellant   adopted   the   cross

examination   done   by   other   accused   on   PW­3   and

PW­4 and gave up his right of cross­examination to

these two witnesses. In this view of the matter; he
                              25

cannot   now   be   permitted   to   find   fault   in   the

evidence   of   PW­3   and   PW­4   and   rely   upon   some

contradictions   which   otherwise   do   not   show   any

contradiction   much   less   major   one   affecting   their

testimony. 

52.   In   any   event,   the   second   instance   even

otherwise   has   no   substance  for  the   simple   reason

that   PW­3   and   PW­4   were   the   only   persons   who

were   aware   of   the   meeting   held   on   01.09.1991   at

the   appellant’s   house   where   PW­3   had   heard   the

plan for elimination of Siva and on his return from

appellant's   house,   he   told   to   PW­4   of   the   said

incident.   In   these   circumstances   and   with   this

background,   if   PW­3   went   to   the   hospital,   which

was   very   near   to   the   tea   stall,   there   is   nothing

unnatural in his visit.

53.   Yet, another last circumstance pointed out by

the learned counsel for the appellant was that PW­3

joined the services of PW­4 on 01.05.1991 and left
                             26

within five days. This according to learned counsel

shows   that   he   was   a   chance   witness.   We   do   not

agree.

54.   PW­3   was   working   as   a   daily   wager   on

payment   of   Rs.7/­   per   day   with   PW­4.   In   these

circumstances, if PW­3 worked for one week or so

and discontinued thereafter would not mean that he

did not work at all with PW­4.   After all, this was

not an appointment in some systematic organization

but was with one individual in his tea stall running

under a tree. There is, therefore, nothing by which

one  could   conclude that PW­3 did not work at all

with  PW­4   during  those five days. There might be

myriad reasons for PW­3 to leave this job.  It is more

so when it was proved that PW­4 was running his

teashop   on   that   spot   for   quite   a   long   time   and

therefore   was   conversant   with   the   locality   and

passersby.
                              27
55.   It is also not the case of appellant that PW­3

had   any   previous   enmity   with   any   of   the   accused

and   with   that   end   in   view,   he   stepped   in   witness

box to speak against them.  PW­3 was a young boy

aged around 17 years with no criminal background.

As mentioned above, all this could be put to PW­3

and   PW­4   in   their   cross   examination   by   the

appellant but he did not choose to do so and gave

up his right to cross examine these witnesses.

56.   In the light of detailed foregoing discussion, we

are of the considered opinion that the prosecution

was able to prove beyond all reasonable doubt with

the aid of evidence that the appellant (A­6) was one

of   the   active   members   of   the   criminal   conspiracy

along with other accused and hatched the plan in

his   house   in   the   meeting   which   was   held   on

01.09.1991 to kill/eliminate Siva and in furtherance

thereof   accused   (A­1   to   A­5)   successfully

killed/eliminated   Siva   on   05.09.1991   by   causing
                               28

Siva stab injuries with the aid of knife resulting in

his homicidal death.  The appellant's conviction and

award of life sentence as prescribed under Section

302   read   with   Section   120­B,   IPC   was,   therefore,

rightly   held   made   out   along   with   other   accused

persons   by   the   two   courts   below.     We,   therefore,

concur with their view and accordingly uphold it.

57.   We may only mention that it was not the case

of   the   appellant   and   nor   was   urged   also   that   his

case falls under Section 120­B (2), IPC and therefore

he be awarded less sentence as prescribed therein.  

58.   In view of the foregoing discussion, we find no

merit   in   this   appeal.   The   appeal   thus   fails   and   is

accordingly dismissed.      

                           …...……..................................J.
                             [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                          ………...................................J.
                           [INDU MALHOTRA]
New Delhi;
October 10, 2018 

