
Supreme Court of India
Mahesh & Anr vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 September, 2011Bench: Mukundakam Sharma, Anil R. Dave
                                                                           REPORTABLE


                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 503 OF 2008




 MAHESH & ANR.                                          ..... Appellant (s)




                                    VERSUS




 STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                           ..... Respondent(s)




                                      O R D E R 

1. This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   judgment   and   order   dated 


   16.11.2007   passed   by   the   Madhya   Pradesh   High   Court, 


   Jabalpur Bench at Gwalior in Criminal Appeal No. 388 of 2001. 

   By the aforesaid judgment and order, the Division Bench of the 


   High Court has not only confirmed the order of conviction and 


   sentence of Shri Ramdutt, who was convicted by the Trial Court 


   under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him 


   to   undergo   imprisonment   for   life   and   for   3   years   rigorous 


   imprisonment under the Arms Act but also set aside the order of 


   acquittal passed by the Trial Court in the cases of Mahesh and 


   Kanhaiyalal.

2. The   High   Court   by   passing   the   impugned   judgment   and   order 



                                   Page 1 of 12


   has convicted both the aforesaid accused persons under Section 


   302   read   with   Section   34   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   and 


   sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.   The 


   sum   and   substance   of   the   aforesaid   order   of   conviction   and 


   sentence   is   that   all   the   three   accused   persons   have   now   been 


   convicted under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian 


   Penal   Code   and,   therefore,   all  of   them   have   been   sentenced   to 


   undergo rigorous imprisonment for life.  

3. The   prosecution   story   in   brief   is   that   on   1.11.1993,   the 


   complainant Badri Lal(PW 1) along with Rambabu (PW 3), son of 


   deceased Kirori, went to their chilly field to water the same.  The 


   said field was adjacent to the field of Mahesh and Ramdutt who, 


   at that point of time, were watering their field.   When asked by 


   the   complainant   and   Rambabu   about   watering   their   field, 


   Mahesh and Ramdutt told them that they can water their field 


   only after watering of their field is completed by them.

4. It is alleged that on hearing this, PW 1 and PW 3 came back to 


   their village to go back again in the afternoon, when while trying 


   to  release  water  to  their  field, they  were assaulted by Ramdutt 


   and Mahesh.   It is alleged that after the said incident, Ramdutt 


   and Mahesh came back running to the village and PW 1 and PW 


   3   also   came   behind   them.   When   PW   1   and   PW   3   reached   the 



                                    Page 2 of 12


   door,   they   heard   the   sound   of   gunshot   fire.     On   hearing   the 


   sound, they ran towards the said direction, when on way, they 


   saw Ramdutt and Mahesh running with guns in their hands. It 


   is   alleged  that  when   Ramdutt   and  Mahesh   saw  PW  3,   Mahesh 


   fired a gunshot at Rambabu (PW 3) who saved himself by lying 


   down.   Thereafter, PW 1 and PW 3 reached in front of the door 


   of Ramnarayan and Devi Prasad when PW 1 saw the body of his 


   younger brother Kirori, lying dead on the ground, being hit by a 


   gunshot   which   had   hit   him   on   chest   and   stomach.   The   body 


   was   surrounded   by   Deviprasad,   Ramnath,   Kirori's   wife   Malti, 


   Rambabu's   wife   Sunita   and   other   members,   daughters-in-law 


   and daughters.

5. At   that   stage,   Malti   told   PW   1   that   on   hearing   the   news   of 


   altercation at the field, Kirori was going towards the field when 


   Ramdutt,   Mahesh   and   Kanhaiya   who   were   standing   at   their 


   door   and   that   Ramdutt,   with   the   licenced   single   barrel   gun   of 


   his   father   Kanhaiya,   fired   a   shot   at   Kirori   which   had   hit   him 


   near the abdomen as a result of which Kirori fell down and died. 

6. The   First   Information   Report   was   filed   by   PW   1   at   about   3.15 


   p.m.   at   the   Police   Station   which   is   14   kms   away   from   the 


   village.     On   receipt   of   the   First   Information   Report,   a   criminal 


   case was registered and the police started investigation, during 



                                     Page 3 of 12


  the course of which all the three accused persons were arrested. 

  Charge-sheet was filed as against all the three accused persons. 

  Pursuant   to   filing   of   chargesheet,   trial   was   held   during   the 


  course   of   which   several   witnesses   were   examined   by   the 


  prosecution. The defence also examined one witness in support 


  of   their   defence.     The   statements   of   all   the   three   accused 


  persons   were   recorded   under   Section   313   of   the   Cr   P.C.   and 


  thereafter,   the   learned   Trial   Court,   by   the   judgment   and   order 


  passed on 9.8.1999, convicted Ramdutt under Section 302 IPC 


  and passed an order sentencing him to life imprisonment and 3 


  years  rigorous  imprisonment under  Arms Act, respectively.   So 


  far as the other two persons are concerned, namely Mahesh and 


  Kanhaiya Lal, the present appellants, the Trial Court acquitted 


  them on the ground that there had been some embellishment in 


  the   prosecution   case   like   the   allegation   that   the   said   accused 


  persons   holding   the   hand   of   the   deceased   at   the   time   of   firing 


  upon them by Ramdutt.   

7. Ramdutt (A1) and the State filed appeals before the High Court. 

  Both   the   said   appeals   were   taken   up   together   and   the   same 


  were   disposed   of   by   the   common   order   by   the   High   Court 


  whereby the High Court not only upheld the order of conviction 


  passed   against   Ramdutt   but   also   passed   a   similar   order   of 





                                     Page 4 of 12


  conviction   and   sentence   as   against   Mahesh   and   Kanhaiya   Lal 


  who were acquitted by the trial court.  

8. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order of conviction by the High 


  Court, Mahesh and Kanhaiya Lal, appellants herein, have  filed 


  the   present   appeal   in   which   notice   was   issued.   So   far   as   the 


  Ramdutt   -   first   accused   is   concerned,   he   has   not   filed   any 


  appeal and, therefore, it appears that he has accepted the order 


  of  conviction  and   sentence   passed  by   the   trial   court  and   then, 


  affirmed   by   the   High   Court.   The   present   appeal,   therefore, 


  relates   to   the   order   of   conviction   and   sentence   passed   against 


  Mahesh and Kanhaiya Lal who are appellants before us.

9. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties on 


  this   appeal   who   have   taken   us  through   the   entire   evidence   on 


  record as also the contents of the two judgments passed by the 


  Trial Court and also by the High Court.

10.The contention that is raised by the learned counsel appearing 


  for the appellants is that in the First Information Report which 


  was filed by PW 1 at the earliest point of time after the incident, 


  the   role   now   attributed   to   the   appellants   herein   were   not 


  mentioned   at   all   and,   therefore,   there   could   not   have   been   an 


  order of conviction and sentence as against the two appellants. 

                                    Page 5 of 12
  It was also submitted by him that the statements of the alleged 


  eye-witnesses were recorded by the police after about 8 days of 


  the occurrence and, therefore, there was enough scope to make 


  out   a   make   believe   story   and   also   to   put   in   an   embellishment 


  and improvement relying on which the appellants are sought to 


  be convicted.  

11.According to the learned  counsel appearing for the appellants, 


  there were number of independent witnesses who were allegedly 


  present   at   the   time   of   occurrence   of   the   incident,   but   none   of 


  them was examined and, therefore, the High Court should have 


  doubted the manner in which a specific role is being attributed 


  to   the   appellants   herein.     The   learned   counsel   submits   that 


  there   was   no   enmity   between   the   parties   and,   therefore,   there 


  was   no   motive   for   commission   of   the   crime,   at   least   by   the 


  present   appellants.     He   has   also   submitted   that   there   are   two 


  versions   which   are   sought   to   be   raised   and,   therefore,   the 


  benefit of the same should go to the appellants herein.  

12.We   have   considered   the   aforesaid   submissions   which   were 


  refuted   by   the   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   respondent. 

  She   has   drawn   our   attention   to   the   evidence   on   record   to 


  submit   that   some   of   the   translation   of   the   deposition   included 


  in   the   paper   book   prepared   by   the   appellants   is   not   truly 



                                     Page 6 of 12


   reflecting   the   accurate   statement   made   by   the   persons   in   the 


   Court.

13.In   order   to   appreciate   the   aforesaid   contentions,   we   have   also 


   examined the original records and on such perusal, we find that 


   some of the English translations which have been placed before 


   us   by   filing   an   additional   paper   book   are   indeed   not   the   true 


   reflection   of   the   statements   made   by   the   witnesses   before   the 


   Court.  

14.Be   that   as   it   may,   we   would   like   to   examine   each   of   the 


   contentions   raised   by   the   learned   Counsel   appearing   for   the 


   appellants   in   the   light   of   the   records.     So   far   as   the   first 


   contention   regarding   informant   not   stating   anything   about   the 


   role   of   the   appellants   in   the   First   Information   Report   is 


   concerned,   we   find   that   the   aforesaid   First   Information   Report 


   was   submitted   by   PW   1   who   was   not   an   eye-witness   to   the 


   incident.     Although   it   has   come   in   evidence   that   he   was 


   informed   about   the   incident   by   PW   2,   PW   4   and   PW   5 


   immediately   on   his   reaching   the   place   of   occurrence   of   the 


   incident, yet since he was not the eye-witness to the incident, he 


   may not have stated the said fact in the First Information Report 


   for   which   it   cannot   be   said   that   the   entire   prosecution   case 


   should falter.  Besides, it is an established law that so far as the 



                                     Page 7 of 12


  First   Information   Report   is   concerned,   it   is   only   a   report 


  submitted   informing   the   police   about   the   commission   of   the 


  crime.   It  is   not required  that  the  said   First   Information   Report 


  should   contain   a   detailed   and   vivid   description   of   the   entire 


  incident.   Further,   it   cannot   be   expected   from   the   informant, 


  especially,   when   the   informant   is   a   relative   of   the 


  injured/deceased   to   give   each   and   ever   minute   detail   of   the 


  incident   in   the   First   Information   Report.   Therefore,   PW   1   who 


  had   filed   the   information   with   the   police   not   being   an   eye-

  witness,   it   cannot   be   said   that   non   mentioning   about   the   role 


  played by the present appellants in the First Information Report 


  would be in any manner fatal to the case of the prosecution.

15.So far as the contention regarding recording of the statements 


  by   the   police   after   8   days   of   occurrence   of   the   incident   is 


  concerned, a proper and appropriate explanation has been given 


  by the Police Officer, who recorded the statements, stating that 


  he   had   recorded   the     statements   after   about   8   days   of   the 


  occurrence   of   the   incident   because   religious   rituals   were   going 


  on. Due to the aforesaid reason, their statements could not have 


  been   recorded   on   4.11.1993   which   is   also   written   in   the   case 


  diary. In that view of the matter and there being a plausible and 


  possible   explanation   given   for   recording   the   statements   of   eye-

                                   Page 8 of 12
   witnesses   after   8   days,   the   same   cannot,   in   any   manner, 


   demolish or vitiate the prosecution case.  

16.It is also submitted by the counsel appearing for the appellants 


   that   there   was   no   enmity   between   the   parties   which   could 


   establish   the   motive   for   the   commission   of   crime.     The   said 


   contention,   on   the   face   of   it,   is   not   acceptable   for   we   find   on 


   records   that   the   present   appellants   and   the   informant   had   an 


   altercation  in the field and  because of the said  altercation,  the 


   deceased   came   out   of   his   house   and   was   going   to   the   field 


   during the process of which the aforesaid incident had occurred 


   wherein   he   was   shot   dead   as   alleged   by   the   prosecution. 

   Therefore,   the   motive   for   the   offence   is   established.   There   was 


   an   enmity   between   the   complainant   party   and   the   accused 


   persons and, therefore, the aforesaid submission is found to be 


   baseless.  

17.The   prosecution   has   examined   at   least   three   eye-witnesses   to 


   the   occurrence   of   the   incident   who   have   stated   as   to   how   the 


   incident had happened. They have also stated the different and 


   various role played by the accused persons.  Since eye witnesses 


   were   available   and   examined,   there   was   no   necessity   of 


   examining any other witness, inasmuch as, there is no necessity 


   for the prosecution to multiply witnesses to prove and establish 



                                       Page 9 of 12


   the   prosecution   case.     There   is   no   requirement   in   the   law   of 


   evidence   that   any   particular   number   of   witnesses   is   to   be 


   examined   to   prove   something.   The   evidence   has   to   be   weighed 


   and not to be counted. The witnesses who were examined were 


   relatives of the deceased and, therefore, there is no ground and 


   reason why they should be disbelieved. There is also no reason 


   why they would not speak the truth so as to see that the actual 


   guilty persons are convicted.

18.It   is   also   submitted   that   there   has   been   an   improvement   and 


   embellishment   in   the   prosecution   case   and   the   role   of   the 


   appellants   have   been   exaggerated   so   as   to   see   that   all   the 


   members of the family are punished and are sent to jail.  

19.In order to appreciate the said contention, we have looked into 


   the   records.     In   fact,   we   find   that   the   English   translation 


   provided   by   the   appellants   in   the   additional   paper   book   of  the 


   evidence   of   PW-2   on   the   role   of   the   appellants   in   the   incident 


   alleged   appears   to   be   incorrect.     Same   is   the   case   with   the 


   deposition of PW-4. The statements made by the said witnesses 


   regarding   the   alleged   role   of   the   present   appellants   in   the 


   incident  the  English  translation   provided  appears  to  be  wrong. 

   In that view of the matter, we perused the original depositions of 


   the two witnesses which have been recorded in Hindi.  On going 



                                     Page 10 of 12


  through the same, we find that PW2 and PW4 have specifically 


  stated that the present appellants were holding the deceased by 


  his   hands   and  also  exhorted   Ramdutt   to   bring   the   gun   and   to 


  shoot   at   the   deceased.     The   aforesaid   statements   of   giving 


  exhortion   and   holding   the   hand   of   the   deceased   and   Ramdutt 


  coming with the gun and fired at him are corroborated. It clearly 


  proves   and   establishes   from   the   said   fact   that   the   present 


  appellants   also   had   the   common   intention   of   killing   the 


  deceased.     It   is   established   from   the   records   that   they   had 


  intentionally   become   a   party   to   commit   the   murder   of   the 


  deceased.   

20.Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code provides that if two or more 


  persons intentionally do an act jointly, the position in law would 


  be   just   the   same   as   if   each   of   them   has   done   the   offence 


  individually   by   himself.   This   doctrine   of   constructive   criminal 


  liability   is   well-established   in   law.   The   very   fact   that   the 


  appellants   were   holding   the   hand   of   the   deceased   and   also   at 


  the   same   time   exhorting   Ramdutt   to   bring   the   gun   and   to   fire 


  upon   the   deceased   so   as   to   kill   him   speaks   volume   and   also 


  prove and establish that they have done the act intentionally so 


  as to see that the deceased is fired upon and shot dead. 

21.In that view of the matter, we find no infirmity in the judgment 



                                   Page 11 of 12


   and   order   passed   by   the   High   Court   setting   aside   the   order   of 


   acquittal   so   far   the   present   appellants   are   concerned.     We 


   uphold   the   order   of   conviction   and   sentence   passed   against 


   them and dismiss the appeal. 

22.The   applications   which   are   pending,   are   also   disposed   of   in 


   terms of the aforesaid order. 

                                                  ...............

 .............................J.

                                                  (DR.           MUKUNDAKAM 

 SHARMA)





                                                  ...............

 .............................J.

                                                  (ANIL R. DAVE)

 NEW DELHI

 SEPTEMBER 13, 2011.





                                     Page 12 of 12



