
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Chhaakkilal . on 26 September, 2018Author: R Banumathi
                                                                               REPORTABLE
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.21-22 OF 2011


                         STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                  …Appellant

                                                         VERSUS

                         CHHAAKKI LAL AND ANOTHER                             …Respondents
                                                          WITH
                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.23-24 OF 2011
                         RAMVEER                                                  …Appellant

                                                         VERSUS

                         CHHAAKKI LAL AND ANOTHER                             …Respondents


                                                     JUDGMENT

                         R. BANUMATHI, J.

                                  These appeals arise out of the judgment of the High court of

                         Madhya Pradesh in Criminal Death Reference No.2 of 2008 in and by

                         which the High Court has allowed the appeal filed by the

                         respondents-accused thereby acquitting the respondents-accused

Signature Not Verified
                         under Section 302 IPC and setting aside the death penalty awarded to
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.09.26

                         the respondents/accused and his son accused Akhilesh by the trial
14:28:43 IST
Reason:


                         court.
                                                                                             1
2.   During the pendency of these appeals, respondent No.2-

Akhilesh had died and by the order dated 28.02.2017, the appeal

against respondent No.2 was dismissed as abated.

3.   Briefly stated case of the prosecution is that on 20.02.2006 at

about 12.00-12.30 p.m., Kesar Bai (PW-1), her daughter-in-law

deceased Phoolwati and grandson Rinku aged three years were going

towards the field to cut the mustard crop. Deceased Ganeshi Bai who

was the daughter of Kesar Bai (PW-1) and deceased Ganga Singh

who was the son of the jeth of Ganeshi Bai were little ahead to them.

As soon as Kesar Bai reached near Madhawala Danda on the public

way, she heard the sound of four to five gun-shots fired and saw the

accused firing at Ganga Singh and Ganeshi Bai. Thereafter, accused

Chhaakki Lal and his son Akhilesh carrying the guns came towards

them from the front side. Chhaakki Lal told Kesar Bai (PW-1) that they

have already killed her daughter, Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh and

now the turn is hers. Chhaakki Lal-accused No.1 then fired at

Phoolwati in her abdomen, the second fire was fired by Akhilesh-

accused No.2 at Rinku. Then accused-Chhaakki Lal jumped on the

child Rinku due to which the intestines of Rinku tossed out because of

                                                                     2
the impact and as a result, he died on the spot. Kesar Bai (PW-1)

challenged the accused persons and said ‘what are you waiting for, kill

me now’. Chhaakki Lal is said to have replied that he would not kill her

as she will die automatically after looking at these incidents. Complaint

- Dehati Nalishi (Ex. P-1) was recorded on 20.02.2006 and after initial

investigation, FIR was registered under Section 302 IPC read with

Section 34 IPC and Sections 25, 27, 29 and 30 of the Arms Act against

both the accused persons (Ex. P-25-26).

4.   Dr. S.K. Singh Niranjan (PW-6) conducted post-mortem on the

dead bodies of all the four deceased namely Phoolwati, Rinku Singh,

Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh and noted the injuries and issued

post-mortem certificates. Accused Chhaakki Lal and Akhilesh were

arrested on 26.02.2006. Based on the disclosure statement of

Chhaakki Lal-accused No.1, a katta had been seized vide seizure

memo                 Ex. P-20. Based on the disclosure statement of

Akhilesh-accused No.2, a 12 bore gun along with two live cartridges of

12 bore was seized from Akhilesh. Also a gun licence of accused-

Chhaakki Lal had been seized from Akhilesh vide seizure memo Ex. P-

21. According to the FSL reports (Exts. P-31, P-32 and P-33), the fired

kartoos Ex.EC-1 to Ex.EC-4 had been fired by pistol Ex. A-4, the two

                                                                        3
live kartoos Ex. LR-1 and LR-2 could be fired by 12 bore gun/bandook

(Ex. A-3), Exs. EB-1 and EB-2 was fired by rifle weapon. Ex.-EB-3 can

be part of Ex.-EB-2.

5.      To bring home the guilt of the accused, prosecution has

examined                   PW-1 to PW-13 and exhibited number of

documents. The accused were questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.

about the incriminating evidence and circumstances and the accused

denied all of them. Accused in their defence stated that deceased

Ganga Singh was a person of criminal character who was also in

collusion with dacoits and engaged in theft and snatching. The

accused persons have stated that due to previous enmity, they have

been falsely implicated. Upon consideration of evidence of Kesar Bai

(PW-1) and other evidence adduced by the prosecution, the trial court

held accused Nos.1 and 2 guilty under      Section 302 IPC read with

Section 34 IPC. The trial court held that the case would come under

the category of ‘rarest of rare cases’ and awarded death penalty to

both the accused persons apart from imposing a fine of Rs.5,000/-

each.    In appeal, the High court allowed the appeal preferred by the

accused. The High Court found that the evidence of sole eye witness

Kesar Bai (PW-1) is not reliable and that the same is full of

                                                                     4
contradictions and omissions. The High Court held that Kesar Bai

(PW-1) is not a reliable witness and on those findings reversed the

verdict of conviction and acquitted the accused persons.

6.   Heard learned counsel for the State of Madhya Pradesh and

learned counsel for the respondents/accused.      Learned counsel for

the State of Madhya Pradesh submitted that the evidence of Kesar Bai

(PW-1) was credible and acceptable and the same was supported by

other evidence and circumstances and the High Court erred in

disbelieving the evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1).             It was further

contended that the delay in sending the weapons for examination to

Forensic Science Laboratory on 19.04.2006 which were recovered on

01.03.2006 was a mistake/omission on the part of B.L. Dhanele -

Investigating Officer (PW-13) and the benefit of such omission cannot

be given to the accused. It was urged that the High court was wrong

in believing the story of the defence to the effect that all the four

deceased were killed by the dacoits as the deceased Ganga Singh

had illegal relations with the dacoits and the High court has failed to

see that the story of the defence was without any basis.

7.   Contention of the respondent/accused is that Kesar Bai (PW-1)

is not an honest and trustworthy witness because there are lot of

                                                                        5
improvements on important aspects in her court depositions on vital

aspects. Assailing the evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1), the learned

counsel inter alia made the following submissions:-

      In her court deposition, Kesar Bai (PW-1) claimed that she

       had witnessed the murder of Ganga Singh and Ganeshi Bai

       whereas in the police complaint, she stated that she heard

       four to five gun shots and thereafter when she reached there,

       she saw the respondents/accused Chhaakki Lal and Akhilesh

       proceeding towards them;

      Improved version of Kesar Bai (PW-1) as to the overt act

       attributed to Chhaakki Lal that he threw Rinku on the ground

       and jumped upon his abdomen region as a result of which his

       intestines came out did not find place in the FIR.

8.     The learned counsel appearing for the respondents-accused

submitted that the evidence of sole witness Kesar Bai (PW-1) could

not have formed the basis for conviction and the High Court has rightly

discarded the evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1) and has rightly set aside

the conviction and acquitted the accused.

9.     We have carefully considered the rival contentions and perused

the impugned judgment, evidence and materials placed on record. The

point falling for consideration is whether the High court was right in
                                                                       6
reversing the verdict of conviction of the respondents-accused and

acquitting them from the charges under Section 302 IPC.

10.   It is the case where four people were murdered in the broad day

light. One of the deceased - Rinku was a child of three years of age.

Case of the prosecution is based upon the sole testimony of Kesar Bai

(PW-1).    In her evidence, Kesar Bai (PW-1) has stated that Ganga

Singh and Ganeshi Bai had gone ahead for cutting the neem tree and

that she (PW-1), her daughter-in-law Phoolwati and grandson Rinku

were following them. Kesar Bai (PW-1) stated that when they reached

at Madhawala Danda, Ganga Singh was at a distance of 10-15 feet

and that she saw accused Chhaakki Lal and Akhilesh firing gun-shot at

Ganga Singh and thereafter firing gun-shot at Ganeshi Bai.          Then

accused-Chhaakki Lal and Akhilesh came towards Phoolwati and

Chhaakki Lal fired the bullet in the abdomen of Phoolwati. Akhilesh

also fired at Phoolwati. Akhilesh fired at Rinku and Chhaakki Lal had

thrown Rinku on the ground. Chhaakki Lal also fired at Rinku.

Chhaakki Lal climbed over Rinku and jumped, due to which, his

intestines came out. When Kesar Bai (PW-1) told them to kill her also

by firing, Chhaakki Lal replied that they would not kill her and that she

had to see all these things and then she would die automatically.

                                                                        7
11.   Thakurdas (PW-2) who is Village Chowkidar stated that he had

heard about the incident from Kesar Bai (PW-1) and gone to the place

of the incident and saw the dead bodies of Ganga Singh, Ganeshi Bai,

Phoolwati and Rinku. Thakurdas (PW-2) stated that when he reached

the village, Kesar Bai (PW-1) was weeping and she told him that

Chhaakki Lal and his son Akhilesh had committed all the four murders

when they were going towards the field.

12.   The prosecution case revolves around the solitary testimony of

eye-witness Kesar Bai (PW-1) which was accepted by the trial court as

trustworthy. While reversing the verdict of conviction, the High Court

held that the evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1) is fraught with

inconsistencies and hence, her evidence is not reliable. The High court

pointed out that the evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1) is exaggerated and

that accused-Chhaakki Lal fired at Rinku is totally missing in her

statement (Ex.-P1). The High Court also pointed out further

inconsistencies.

13.   In her evidence before the court, Kesar Bai (PW-1) stated that

when she and her daughter-in-law Phoolwati and grandson Rinku

reached near Madhawala Danda, other deceased persons namely

Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh were only ten paces away from them

                                                                      8
and that she saw both the accused firing at Ganga Singh and Ganeshi

Bai and thereafter the accused came towards her. In Dehati Nalishi-

complaint (Ex.-P1), Kesar Bai (PW-1) stated that she heard four-five

gun shots and then saw the accused coming towards her telling that

they have killed Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh and then fired at

Phoolwati and child Rinku. The High Court held that in the version of

Kesar Bai (PW-1) before the court, there is a material improvement

and that the evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1) is not reliable.

14.   Of course, there is a slight improvement in the version of Kesar

Bai (PW-1) before the court but the circumstance under which Dehati

Nalishi-complaint (Ex.-P1) was recorded has to be seen. Kesar Bai

(PW-1) has lost her four kith and kin. At the time when Dehati Nalishi-

complaint (Ex.-P1) was recorded, Kesar Bai (PW-1) must have been

grief-stricken and under mental trauma and she might have stated that

she heard four-five gun shots and then saw the dead bodies of Ganga

Singh and Ganeshi Bai and then the accused came near Phoolwati

and child Rinku and fired at them.

15.   Learned counsel for the respondent/accused submitted that in

her cross-examination, Kesar Bai (PW-1) stated about one assailant

Kailash and also named in Dehati Nalishi and the said Kailash was

                                                                      9
detained by the police for one or two days after the incident but later

let off by the police because of the pressure. It was submitted that

mention of another assailant Kailash by Kesar Bai (PW-1) raises

serious doubts about the prosecution case. Ex.-P1-Dehati Nalishi was

an earliest one lodged on the date of incident on 20.02.2006 at 05.15

pm. Name of Kailash is not mentioned in Ex.-P1-Dehati Nalishi. FIR

(Ex.-P25-26) also does not contain the name of alleged assailant

Kailash.   Since name of Kailash was not mentioned either in the

Dehati Nalishi or FIR, the answers elicited from Kesar Bai (PW-1) in

the cross-examination regarding Kailash does not affect her credibility.

It is also pertinent to point out that in her cross-examination, though

Kesar Bai (PW-1) had stated that Kailash was taken to police custody

after two to three days of complaint, Kesar Bai (PW-1) stated that she

cannot say that whether police had taken Kailash to custody in

connection with her case or other case.

16.   Though much arguments are advanced regarding the alleged

involvement of Kailash and that he was taken to custody, the entire

argument advanced qua one Kailash is based upon certain answers

elicited from Kesar Bai (PW-1). The Investigating Officer has also

denied that he has brought Kailash and one Ardaman and kept them in

                                                                     10
custody for 4-5 days. He has also denied that based on the statement

of Kesar Bai (PW-1), he kept their guns. Investigating Officer has

denied that he released both Kailash and Ardaman due to some

pressure and falsely involved respondents/accused. Investigating

Officer has also denied that Kesar Bai (PW-1) had told him that

Kailash and Ardaman had done the incident through dacoits.

Investigating Officer has also denied that Kesar Bai (PW-1) had named

Kailash and Ardaman in her statement and the same was not written

by him.   In the light of categorical denial by the investigation, there is

no merit in the contention of the respondent/accused as to the alleged

involvement of Kailash.

17.   In his evidence, Ram Naresh (PW-3) stated that the dead bodies

of Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh were found close to each other and

that dead bodies of Phoolwati and Rinku were at a distance of 25-30

feet away from the dead bodies of Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh. In

his statement, B.L. Dhanele - Investigating Officer (PW-13) has stated

that dead body of Phoolwati was at a distance of about fifty yards from

the dead bodies of Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh and that has been

mentioned by him in the Site Plan (Ex.-P24).


                                                                        11
18.   After referring to the Site Plan (Ex.-P24) and the evidence of

Ram Naresh (PW-3) and PW-13-IO, the trial court pointed out that the

place where Phoolwati and Rinku were shot and dead bodies of

Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh were found, were at a short distance of

about fifty yards. The trial court observed that since the distance was

not far away, case of the prosecution that Ganga Singh, Ganeshi Bai,

Phoolwati and Rinku were all shot by the accused in the course of the

same transaction is established by the oral evidence of Kesar Bai

(PW-1) and also by the Site Plan (Ex.-P24). After referring to the

evidence of PW-13-Investigating Officer and Site Plan (Ex.-P24), when

the trial court has recorded that the firing of all the four deceased were

in the course of the same transaction, the High Court ought not to

have doubted the version of Kesar Bai (PW-1) on the slight

improvement made in her evidence. For the sake of arguments, even

assuming that PW-1 could not have seen the firing at Ganeshi Bai and

Ganga Singh, her evidence is to be accepted to the extent of the

occurrence of firing at deceased Phoolwati and child Rinku. In her

statement Kesar Bai (PW-1) has stated that after gun shot fired at

deceased Rinku, accused-Chhaakki Lal threw the child Rinku on the

ground and also jumped on his abdomen, as a result of which


                                                                       12
intestines came out. The learned counsel for the respondents-accused

submitted that Chhaakki Lal jumping on the abdomen of the child

Rinku was not mentioned in Dehati Nalishi (Ex.P.1) and FIR and this

material omission suggests that Kesar Bai (PW-1) exaggerated her

version about throwing of child Rinku on the floor and jumping on his

abdominal region.

19.   FIR is not an encyclopaedia which is expected to contain all the

minute details of the prosecution case, it may be sufficient if the broad

effects of the prosecution case are stated in the FIR. In this case, firing

by accused-Chhaakki Lal at child Rinku was stated in the FIR and the

omission of minute detail that Chhaakki Lal jumped on the abdomen of

child Rinku cannot be regarded as fatal to the prosecution case. As

discussed earlier, the effect of the occurrence on the mind of an old

woman like Kesar Bai (PW-1) cannot be measured in yardstick. Being

grief-stricken because of the death of her four kith and kin, it may not

have occurred to Kesar Bai (PW-1) to narrate all the minute details of

the occurrence. The non-mention of accused-Chhaakki Lal throwing

the child Rinku on the ground and jumping on his abdomen due to

which the intestine came out cannot be regarded as fatal to the

prosecution case.

                                                                        13
20.   The High Court acquitted the accused merely on the ground that

the evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1) is fraught with contradictions. Kesar

Bai (PW-1) was a rustic villager and also aged. After seeing her own

daughter and daughter in law and grandson being put to death, she

must have been under tremendous shock.           Kesar Bai (PW-1) was

deposing in the court after some time. Naturally, there are bound to be

variations from her earlier version.    The trial court which had the

opportunity to observe the demeanour of the witnesses found that the

evidence of PWs is credible and trustworthy. While so, the High Court

ought not to have recorded a finding raising doubts about the

credibility of Kesar Bai (PW-1).

21.   The trial court had the opportunity of seeing and observing the

demeanour of the witnesses and the views of the trial court as to the

credibility of the witnesses is entitled to great weight.     Unless the

appreciation of evidence by the trial court was vitiated by serious error,

the findings recorded by the trial court ought not to have been

interfered by the High Court.

22.   In our considered view, the High court erred in doubting the

testimony of Kesar Bai (PW-1). It would be unreasonable to contend

that merely because Kesar Bai (PW-1) is related to the deceased and

                                                                       14
that there were contradictions in her evidence, her evidence has to be

discarded. Discrepancies which do not shake the credibility of the

witness and the basic version of the prosecution case are to be

discarded. If the evidence of the witness as a whole contains the ring

of truth, the evidence cannot be doubted.              In Prithu alias Prithi

Chand and Another v. State of Himachal Pradesh (2009) 11 SCC

588, it was held as under:-

      “14. In Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat (1983) 3
      SCC 217, it was observed that undue importance should not be
      attached to omissions, contradictions and discrepancies which do
      not go to the root of the matter and shake the basic version of the
      prosecution witnesses. A witness cannot be expected to possess a
      photographic memory and to recall the details of an incident
      verbatim. Ordinarily, it so happens that a witness is overtaken by
      events. A witness could not have anticipated the occurrence which
      very often has an element of surprise. The mental faculties cannot,
      therefore, be expected to be attuned to absorb all the details. Thus,
      minor discrepancies were bound to occur in the statement of
      witnesses.”

The same principle was reiterated in State of U.P. v. M.K. Anthony

(1985) 1 SCC 505.

23.   The High court proceeded on the footing that the evidence of

Kesar Bai (PW-1) being the solitary witness is not reliable to base the

conviction unless corroborated in material particulars. As discussed

above, so far as the place of occurrence is concerned, the evidence of

PW-1 is amply corroborated by other evidence. It is fairly well settled


                                                                              15
that it is not the number; but the quality of the evidence that matters. In

terms of Section 134 of the Evidence Act, “no particular number of

witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact”. The

test whether the evidence has a ring of truth is cogent and trustworthy.

In Prithipal Singh and Others v. State of Punjab and Another

(2012) 1 SCC 10, it was held as under:-

      “49. This court has consistently held that as a general rule the court
      can and may act on the testimony of a single witness provided he is
      wholly reliable. There is no legal impediment in convicting a person
      on the sole testimony of a single witness. That is the logic of
      Section 134 of the Evidence Act. But if there are doubts about the
      testimony, the court will insist on corroboration. In fact, it is not the
      number or the quantity, but the quality that is material. The time-
      honoured principle is that evidence has to be weighed and not
      counted. The test is whether the evidence has a ring of truth, is
      cogent, credible and trustworthy or otherwise. The legal system has
      laid emphasis on value, weight and quality of evidence, rather than
      on quantity, multiplicity or plurality of witnesses. It is, therefore,
      open to a competent court to fully and completely rely on a solitary
      witness and record conviction. Conversely, it may acquit the
      accused in spite of testimony of several witnesses if it is not
      satisfied about the quality of evidence.”
The same principle was reiterated in Sudip Kumar Sen alias Biltu v.

State of West Bengal and others (2016) 3 SCC 26.

24.   The version of the prosecution was doubted by the High Court on

the ground that FIR was registered after much delay. As per Dehati

Nalishi-complaint (Ex.-P1), time of incident was at about 12.00-12.30

pm on 20.02.2006 and Dehati Nalishi-complaint (Ex.-P1) was written at

05.15 pm on the same day. PW-13-IO stated that on 20.02.2006, he

                                                                                  16
was on duty at Health Mela in Senwdha and on receipt of information

from SDO Smt. Rekha Singh, he reached the place of occurrence and

wrote Dehati Nalishi-complaint (Ex.-P1).     After the inquest and the

preliminary investigation like preparation of spot map, seizure etc. on

20.02.2006, FIR was registered on 21.02.2006 at about 02.00 pm.

Ramveer (PW-8), son of Kesar Bai (PW-1) was not present in the

village and that he had gone to see his sister. When all the family

members of PW-1 were killed and her son Ramveer (PW-8) away from

the village, it cannot be accepted from Kesar Bai (PW-1) a seventy

years old rural woman to leave the dead bodies of family members at

the spot and go to the police station situated at a distance of ten

kilometres to lodge the complaint. As pointed out by the trial court, the

delay in registration of FIR has been properly explained.

25.    Delay in setting the law in motion by lodging the complaint or

registration of FIR is normally viewed by courts with suspicion because

there is possibility of concoction of the case against the accused. But

when there is proper explanation for the delay, the prosecution case

cannot be doubted on the ground that there was delay in registration of

FIR.   In this case, the delay in FIR has been properly explained and

the same is not fatal to the prosecution case.

                                                                      17
26.   The High Court referred to the evidence of Mewalal (PW-11) who

in his cross-examination has stated that he saw PW-1 weeping at

08.00-09.00 am and that PW-1 told him that accused persons have

killed Ganga Singh, Ganeshi Bai, Phoolwati and Rinku. Be it noted

that Mewalal (PW-11) in his chief-examination stated that at about

12.00-12.30 pm, when he was present at his home in village Ruhera,

he heard the firing sound of five-six gun shots and that PW-1, mother-

in-law of Phoolwati passed from the passage crying and saying that the

accused Chhaakki Lal and Akhilesh had committed the murder of her

daughter-in-law Phoolwati, her grandson Rinku, Ganeshi Bai and

Ganga Singh in Mandawali Dang. Resiling from his version in the

chief-examination, in cross-examination, PW-11 stated that at about

08.00-09.00 am, when he was in his house, PW-1 came to his house

saying that accused Chhaakki Lal and Akhilesh have committed

murder of her daughter-in-law Phoolwati, her grandson Rinku, Ganeshi

Bai and Ganga Singh. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent/accused submitted that the prosecution has not treated

PW-11 hostile and the statement of PW-11 in his cross-examination

throws serious doubts about the time and the manner of occurrence.

Of course, PW-11 was not treated hostile; but his prevaricating version


                                                                    18
stood in the            cross-examination neither affects his version in

the chief-examination nor does it affect the prosecution case.      The

High court was not right in doubting the prosecution case and the

trustworthiness of Kesar Bai (PW-1) based on the evidence of an infirm

witness like PW-11.

27.   The accused were arrested on 26.02.2006 and on the basis of

the disclosure statement recorded under Section 27 of the Evidence

Act, on 01.03.2006, one 0.315 bore katta/desi pistol (Ex.-A4) was

seized at the instance of accused Chhaakki Lal vide seizure memo

Ex.-P20. One 12 bore gun (Ex.-A3) along with two live cartridges (Ex.-

EB1 and EB2) and a gun licence of accused Chhaakki Lal have been

seized under seizure memo Ex.-P21 from accused Akhilesh.           One

petal khoka of 0.315 bore (Ex.-P8) was recovered from the dead body

of Phoolwati. Two fired cartridges of 0.315 bore (Ex.-P7) were found

near the dead bodies of deceased Ganeshi Bai and Ganga Singh

respectively. In Ex.-P32 and Ex.-P33, the Ballistic expert opined that

the fired kartoos (Ex.-EC1 to EC4) have been fired from 0.315 bore

katta/desi pistol (Ex.-A4).   Likewise, in Ex.-P32 and Ex.-P33, the

Ballistic expert opined that the two live kartoos (Ex.-LR1 and LR2)

could have been fired from 12 bore gun (Ex.-A3). The opinion of the

                                                                     19
Ballistic expert tallying with the arms recovered from the accused is

seen from the following:-

  Accused    Fired at   Arm recovered             Opinion of Ballistic report

  Chhaakki   Phoolwati 315 bore katta       According to the FSL reports (Ex.-P31,
  Lal (A1)             (Ex. A4) – Desi      P32 and P33), the fired kartoos (Ex.-
                       Pistol    seized     EC1 to Ex.-EC4) has been fired by
                       under Ex. P20        0.315 bore katta, a desi pistol (Ex. A4).
                                            EB-2 bullet recovered from the body of
                                            Ganga Singh was fired from 0.315 bore
                                            katta (Ex. A4). EB-3 can be part of EB-
                                            2.
  Akhilesh   Rinku      12 bore gun         According to the FSL reports (Ex. P31,
  (A2)                  (Ex.-A3) and two    P32 and P33), two live kartoos (Ex.-LR1
                        live   cartridges   and LR2) could be fired by 12 bore gun
                        (EB1 + EB2)         (Ex.-A3). Ex.-EB-1 is fired by 12 bore
                        seized      under   gun (Ex.-A3) which was found from the
                        Ex. P21             dead body of Rinku.

The opinion of the Ballistic expert that the fired kartoos has been fired

by 0.315 bore katta/desi pistol (Ex.-A4) recovered from accused

Chhaakki Lal and the opinion that live kartoos (Ex.-EB1 and EB2) were

fired from 12 bore gun (Ex.-A3) recovered from accused Akhilesh

amply proves the involvement of the complicity of the accused in the

occurrence thereby corroborating the evidence of PW-1.

28.   As pointed out earlier, country made pistol of 315 bore was

recovered from Chhaakki Lal on 01.03.2006 (seizure memo Ex.-P20)

and 12 bore gun was recovered from Akhilesh (Ex.-P21). Contention

of the learned counsel for the respondent is that Ex.-P20 refers to

                                                                                        20
recovery of 315 bore katta whereas the FSL report (Ex.-P32) speaks

about the examination of country made pistol of 0.315 bore. Further

contention of the respondent/accused is that it has not been explained

as to how country made pistol of 315 bore has been transformed into

0.315 bore during FSL report (Ex.-P32).

29.   Of course, in Ex.-P20, it is stated that 315 bore katta was

recovered from Chhaakki Lal and the same is also mentioned in the

sanction order under the Arms Act (Ex.-P14). No doubt, in FSL report

(Ex.-P32), the gun which was examined by the ballistic expert is stated

as 0.315 bore katta. There seems to be no variation in the pistol which

was seized by the police and the one that was examined by the

ballistic expert. The difference seems to be only in the description of

315 bore katta and 0.315 bore katta. Investigating Officer who seized

the weapon and the one who wrote Ex.-P20 are not ballistic experts

and are only laymen in so far as the examination of guns/pistol. Any

slight variation in the description of katta recovered from Chhaakki Lal

does not make it a different katta from the one which was examined by

the ballistic expert (0.315 bore katta).

30.   Contention of the respondent/accused is that the FSL Report

does not say anything about the use of rifle by any of the assailants. It

                                                                      21
was submitted that EB-1 and EB-2 cannot be fired by a country made

pistol of 0.315 bore or a gun of 12 bore and that EB-1 and EB-2 must

have been fired from some other big size gun. It was submitted that

Kesar Bai (PW-1) has named one Kailash in her cross-examination

that the said Kailash was kept in custody for about four to six days and

the possibility that the gun recovered from Kailash was planted on

Chhaakki Lal cannot be ruled out. It was further submitted that country

made pistol examined by the FSL must have been recovered only from

Kailash and the discrepancies between the recovery and the FSL

report has not been properly explained.

31.   It appears that there is no 315 bore gun but only 0.315 bore gun.

The description given by the police that the recovered gun from

Chhaakki Lal was 315 bore gun is only a mistaken description.

32.   Investigating Officer has stated that Kesar Bai (PW-1) told in her

statement recorded by him that the accused used big guns. Kesar Bai

(PW-1) being a rustic village woman may not have been in a position

to give proper description of the gun; the accused cannot take

advantage of the answers elicited from Kesar Bai (PW-1) that “the

accused persons were holding big size gun” as it was only a

manner of description by a rustic villager like Kesar Bai (PW-1). The

                                                                      22
contention of the respondents that only “big sized gun” stated by Kesar

Bai (PW-1) could have been the gun of Kailash who was taken to

custody by the police along with his gun and later released. This

contention does not merit acceptance. Investigation Officer has

categorically denied that the big guns were of Kailash and Ardaman.

Investigating Officer has also denied that because of pressure he did

not implicate Kailash and Ardaman and falsely implicated the accused.

33.   For reversing the verdict of conviction, the High Court has

pointed out that there was delay in sending the seized gun and pistol

(recovered on 01.03.2006) which was sent to the FSL only on

19.04.2006. The High Court has doubted the case of prosecution by

observing that apart from delay in sending the seized guns/pistol, there

is no material showing as to where the seized weapons were kept

during the period from 01.03.2006 to 19.04.2006.        Such delay in

sending the recovered weapons to FSL could only be an omission or

lapse on the part of the Investigating Officer.    Such omissions or

lapses in the investigation cannot be a ground to discard the

prosecution case which is otherwise credible and cogent. In

Nankaunoo v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2016) 3 SCC 317, it was held

as under:-

                                                                     23
      “9. ……Any omission on the part of the investigating officer cannot
      go against the prosecution case. Story of the prosecution is to be
      examined dehors such omission by the investigating agency.
      Otherwise, it would shake the confidence of the people not merely
      in the law enforcing agency but also in the administration of justice”.

34.   In V.K. Mishra and Another v. State of Uttarakhand and

Another (2015) 9 SCC 588, it was held as under:-

      “38. The investigating officer is not obliged to anticipate all possible
      defences and investigate in that angle. In any event, any omission
      on the part of the investigating officer cannot go against the
      prosecution. Interest of justice demands that such acts or omission
      of the investigating officer should not be taken in favour of the
      accused or otherwise it would amount to placing a premium upon
      such omissions”.

35.   We are conscious that in an appeal against acquittal, the

appellate court would not ordinarily interfere with the order of acquittal.

But where the approach of the High Court suffers from serious infirmity,

this court can reappreciate the evidence and reasonings upon which

the order of acquittal is based. A miscarriage of justice which may

arise from the acquittal of the guilty is no less than from the conviction

of the innocent.        Upon reappreciation of the evidence and the

reasonings of the trial court and the High Court, in our considered view,

the judgment of the High Court suffers from serious infirmity. The High

Court erred in doubting the version of PW-1-the sole eye witness

whose evidence is corroborated by the medical evidence and the

evidence of ballistic expert. The High Court did not appreciate the

                                                                                 24
evidence of PW-1 in proper perspective and erred in disbelieving her

version on the contradictions which are not material. The High court

erred in rejecting the credible evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1), which in

our considered view resulted in serious miscarriage of justice, where

four persons were murdered.

36.   Where the evidence has not been properly analysed or the High

court has acted on surmises and findings of the impugned judgment is

unreasonable, it is the duty of the appellate court to set right the

wrong. In the instant case, the High court has ignored the credible

evidence of Kesar Bai (PW-1) and unnecessarily laid emphasis on the

minor contradictions and omissions. However, the order of acquittal by

the High court cannot be sustained and the judgment of the trial court

is to be restored.

37.   After convicting the accused Chhaakki Lal and Akhilesh under

Section 302 IPC, the trial court held that the case would be one of the

‘rarest of rare cases’ and awarded death penalty. The occurrence was

of the year 2006 and moreover, the appeal against second accused –

Akhilesh has been abated due to his passing away.           Therefore,

considering the facts and circumstances of the case and the passage

of time, we are of the view that awarding of death penalty is not

                                                                     25
warranted and imposing sentence of life imprisonment upon the

respondents/accused Chhaakki Lal would meet the ends of justice.

38.     In the result, the impugned judgment is set aside and these

appeals are allowed. The judgment of the trial court convicting the

respondent/accused Chhaakki Lal under Section 302 IPC is restored

and the respondent/accused is sentenced to undergo imprisonment for

life.   The respondent/accused Chhaakki Lal shall surrender himself

forthwith within a week to serve the remaining sentence failing which

he shall be taken into custody.

                                            …………….……………J.
                                             [R. BANUMATHI]


                                            …………….……………J.
                                             [VINEET SARAN]

New Delhi;
September 26, 2018




                                                                   26

