
Supreme Court of India
Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan vs The State Of Maharashtra on 14 August, 2018Author: U U Lalit
                                                                                                   1

                                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) No. 6740 of 2018
                                              (Diary No.20446 of 2018)

                         Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan                                     ……Petitioner
                                                           Versus

                         State of Maharashtra                                    ..…. Respondent

                                                           WITH

                                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) No. 6747 of 2018
                                              (Diary No.21026 of 2018)
                         Ramhit Patel                                            ….. Petitioner

                                                           Versus

                         State of Chhattisgarh                                   …. Respondent


                                                       JUDGMENT

                         Uday Umesh Lalit, J.


                         1.     Though these two special leave petitions are completely unconnected

                         but they present one common feature and as such we propose to deal with

                         these two special leave petitions by this common Judgment.

Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.08.14

                         2.     Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.________ (D.No.20446 of 2018) of
17:46:44 IST
Reason:


                         2018    challenges the decision dated 30.08.2013 of the High Court of
                                                                         2

Judicature at Bombay dismissing Criminal Appeal No.986 of 2005 preferred

by the petitioner and thereby affirming his conviction for the offence

punishable under Section 302 IPC and sentence of imprisonment for life.

The prosecution principally relied on the testimony of two eye witnesses,

namely, PWs 3 and 5 whose evidence was found by the High Court to be

worthy of reliance and completely unblemished. The decision rendered by

the High Court, in our view, does not call for interference and as such we

dismiss this special leave petition.


3.    In Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No._______ (Diary No.21026 of

2018) of 2018 the decision dated 17.02.2014 passed by the High Court of

Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal Appeal No.850 of 2009 is under

challenge.    The High Court by its judgment and order affirmed the

conviction of the petitioner under Section 302 IPC and his sentence of

imprisonment for life. Though the defence of sudden fight was taken on

behalf of the petitioner, the High Court on detailed analysis rejected said

theory and found the petitioner guilty of the offence in question. Having

gone through the matter, we see no reason to take a different view and as

such we dismiss this special leave petition.
                                                                           3
4.    We now come to the common feature between these two matters. Mr.

Shikhil Suri, learned Advocate appeared for the accused in both the matters.

On pervious dates letters were circulated by the learned Advocate appearing

for the petitioners that the matters be adjourned so as to enable the counsel

to make arrangements for conducting video conferencing with the concerned

accused. The letter further stated that this exercise was made mandatory as

per the directions of the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee. This

Court readily agreed and adjourned the matters. On the adjourned date, we

enquired from Mr. Shikhil Suri, learned Advocate whether he could

successfully get in touch with the concerned accused. According to the

learned Advocate he could not get in touch with the accused in the first

matter but could speak with his sister whereas in the second matter he could

have video conference with the accused.


5.    In our view such a direction on part of the Supreme Court Legal

Services Committee is quite commendable and praiseworthy. Very often we

see that the learned Advocates who appear in matters entrusted by the

Supreme Court Legal Services Committee, do not have the advantage of

having had a dialogue with either the accused or those who are in the know

of the details about the case. This at times seriously hampers the efforts on

part of the learned Advocates.     All such attempts to facilitate dialogue
                                                                         4

between the counsel and his client would further the cause of justice and

make legal aid meaningful.         We, therefore, direct all Legal Services

Authorities/Committees in every State to extend similar such facility in

every criminal case wherever the accused is lodged in jail. They shall

extend the facility of video conferencing between the counsel on one hand

and the accused or anybody in the know of the matter on the other, so that

the cause of justice is well served.


                                                   …………………..……J.
                                                   (Abhay Manohar Sapre)



                                                   …………………..……J.
                                                   (Uday Umesh Lalit)
New Delhi,
August 14, 2018

