
Supreme Court of India
Rafiq Khan vs State Of M.P on 4 August, 2010Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           CRL.A. NO. 644 of 2010

                                             1





                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 644 OF 2010




         RAFIQ KHAN                               .....          APPELLANT

                                           VERSUS

         STATE OF M.P.                            .....          RESPONDENT




                                         O R D E R

                 We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

       parties.

                 It has been contended by learned counsel for the 

       appellant that  Farida - P.W. 1, the complainant was a 

       child   witness   and   her   evidence   was   uncertain;   some 

       corroboration   of   her   evidence   was   required.     It   has 

       also been submitted that as the appellant had come to 

       the place unarmed there was absolutely no intention on 

       his   part   to   have   committed   the   murder   and   the 

       appellant,  therefore   was  entitled   to  some   benefit    on 

       that account as well.

                 We have considered the arguments advanced by the 

       learned counsel in the background of the facts noticed 

       by us.  Concededly Farida P.W. 1 was about 13 years of 

       age.  She was therefore not that young a child who was 

       incapable   of   understanding   the   implication   of   an   oath 


CRL.A. NO. 644 of 2010

                                              2





       and   the   sanctity   of     evidence.     She   has     clearly 

       stated as to the manner in which the incident happened 

       and   also   as   to   the   manner   in   which   the   injuries   had 

       been   caused   by   the   appellant.     Farida's   statement   is 

       also corroborated by the statement of Maqbool Ahmed - 

       P.W.   2   who   had   been   attracted   to   the   place   on   the 

       shouts   of   the   victim   and   had   met   Farida   outside   the 

       house   and had seen the appellant running way and had 

       also   attempted   to   apprehend   him.     The   corroboration 

       therefore the learned counsel for the appellant   seeks 

       can be found from the statement of Maqbool.  The second 

       argument   is   equally   without   merit.     The   nature   of 

       injuries   particularly   injury   Nos,.   13   to   18   show   the 

       viciousness   of   the   attack   and   the   brutal   manner   in 

       which   the   deceased   had   been   cut   up   by   the   appellant. 

       It   is   true   that   there   was   no   animosity   between   the 

       appellant   and   the   deceased,   but   it   appears   that   the 

       appellant   was   doing   a   bit   of   moral   policing   and 

       compelling her to wear a burqa and on her refusal to do 

       so had got infuriated and picked up a knife and caused 

       13   injuries     with   it.     We   thus   find   no   merit   in   the 

       appeal which is, accordingly, dismissed.




                                                   ......................J
                                              [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]


CRL.A. NO. 644 of 2010

                                        3





                                             ......................J
                                             [C.K. PRASAD]
       NEW DELHI
       AUGUST 04, 2010.



