
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra & Ors vs Subhash Arjundas Kataria on 26 August, 2011Author: P Sathasivam
Bench: P. Sathasivam, H.L. Gokhale
                                                                     REPORTABLE

      

               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1117 OF 2010




State of Maharashtra & Ors                               .... Appellant (s)



            Versus



Subhash Arjundas Kataria                                  .... Respondent(s)




                                     WITH

          CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 1118, 1120, 1121, 1122 

                    AND 1123 OF 2010


                                     WITH

              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 118 OF 2010





                            J U D G M E N T 

P. Sathasivam, J.

1)   The principle question which arises in these appeals is as 



to what is the true scope and correct purport of the expression 



"commodity   in   packaged   form"   under   Section   2(b)   of   the 



Standards   of   Weights   and   Measures   Act,   1976   (in   short   `the 



Act).  In Civil Appeal No. 1117 of 2010, the specific question is 





                                                                          1


whether   the   sun   glasses   can   be   considered   "pre-packed 


commodity" under Rule 2(l) of the Standards of Weights and 


Measures   (Packaged   Commodities)   Rules,   1977   (in   short   `the 



Rules).   In the connected appeals, the product includes Titan 



watches,   fixed   wireless   phones,   sun   glasses,   electrical   goods, 



home   appliances,   consumer   electronics   and   Samsung 



Microwave Oven.  The State of Maharashtra is the appellant in 



all these appeals.  

2)  For convenience, let us briefly state the facts in Civil Appeal 



No. 1117 of 2010.  According to the respondent, he is engaged 



in the business of trading in sun glasses and has a counter on 



commission basis at Globus Stores, Bandra.   On 17.10.2003, 



the Inspector of Legal Metrology/Appellant No. 2 herein visited 



the   store   and   seized   five   Sun   glasses   belonging   to   the 



respondent and issued a seizure memo.  At the time of search, 



it was explained to him that the sun glasses delivered to them 



were   in   polythene   bags   and   some   in   individual   openable 



pouches.     According   to   them,   sometimes,   at   the   time   of 



delivery, they are put in a pouch which is normally on display 



for   the   customers   to   identify   for   the   purpose   of  purchase.     It 





                                                                               2


was   also   explained   that   the   package,   therefore,   is   only   a 



package   for   protection   or   safety   of   the   article.     The   value   of 



sun glasses whether inside the package or outside the package 



does not alter if the package is opened nor does it undergo a 



perceptive   modification   on   the   package   being   opened.     The 



testing of the sunglasses by the customer is for the purpose of 



determining   whether   he   should   purchase   the   same 



considering   various   sizes,   designs,   colours,   aesthetic   value, 



makes   and   companies   and   after   trying   and   ascertaining   the 



suitability, quality etc.  



3)  It is the grievance of the respondent that in spite of proper 



explanation,   the   Inspector/Appellant   No.   2   seized   the   sun 



glasses   for   allegedly   not   declaring   name   and   address   of   the 



manufacturer/month   and   year   of   manufacturing   which   is   in 



violation of provisions of the Act and the Rules.  It is the claim 



of the respondent that by force they were compelled to write a 



letter   to   the   authorities   for   compounding   the   offence   and 



directing   them   to   pay   Rs.   3,000/-   as   compounding   fee   by 



order dated 30.10.2003.  

                                                                                3
4)     Aggrieved   by   the   action   of   the   appellant,   the   respondent 



preferred Writ Petition No. 120 of 2004, inter alia, for quashing 



of  the seizure memo dated  17.10.2003 and also for the  order 



dated   30.10.2003   for   the   payment   of   compounding   fee.     By 



order   dated   05.05.2006,   the   High   Court,   by   appreciating   the 



submissions   made   on   behalf   of   the   respondent,   allowed   the 



writ   petition   holding   that   the   sun   glasses,   whether   it   be   a 



frame   or   glass   is   not   a  "pre-packed   commodity"  within   the 



definition   of   the   expression  "pre-packed   commodity"  under 



Rule 2(l) of the Rules.  Aggrieved by the said order of the High 



Court, the appellant-State preferred the present appeal by way 



of special leave petition.

5)   It is the stand of the respondent that the Act brings in its 



purview   not   all   the   items   which   are   kept   in   the   package   to 



protect   or   for   other   reasons   but   is   limited   to   packaged 



commodity as defined under the Act, which are being sold by 



weights or measures or numbers, and which are being sold in 



a packed form without unpacking such packaged commodities 



at the time of sale and the sun glasses do not come within the 



ambit   of   definition   of  "commodity   in   packaged   form"  in 





                                                                             4


terms of Section 2(b) of the Act nor under the purview of "pre-

packed   commodity"   under   Rule   2(l)   of   the   Rules.     It   is   also 



highlighted   that   sunglasses   cannot   be   sold   in   the   packaged 



condition   without   opening   the   packaging   since   the   customer 



will   buy   only   after   comparing,   trying   it   out   for   size   and   after 



checking   its   aesthetic   value,   the   quality   of   glass   and   vision, 



looks etc and therefore, the sun glasses can never be and are 



not sold in packaged condition.

6)   We are concerned about Section 2(b) of the Act and 2(l) of 



the Rules which read as under:-

       "2(b)   "Commodity   in   packaged   form"   means   commodity 

       packaged,  whether  in  any   bottle,   tin,  wrapper   or  otherwise, 

       in units suitable for sale, whether wholesale or retail."



       "2(l)   "pre-packed   commodity",   means   a   commodity,   which 

       without the purchaser being present, is placed in a package 

       of   whatever   nature,   whether   sealed   or   opened,   so   that   the 

       commodity   contained   therein   has   a   pre-determined   value 

       and includes those commodities which could be taken out of 

       the   package   for   testing   or   examining   or   inspecting   the 

       commodity;



       Explanation I - Where, by reason merely of the opening of a 

       package   no   alteration   is   caused   to   the   value,   quantity, 

       nature or characteristic of the commodity contained therein, 

       such commodity shall be deemed, for the purposes of these 

       rules, to be a pre-packed commodity, for example, an electric 

       bulb   or   fluorescent   tube   is   a   pre-packed   commodity,   even 

       though the package containing it is required to be opened for 

       testing the commodity.



       Explanation II. ......"


                                                                                       5
7)   Considering   the   above   definition,   the   High   Court   observed 



that   the   expression  "pre-packaged   commodity"  would   be 



applicable to:-

(i) commodities which are packed, and



(ii) the commodity packaged has a pre-determined value and



(iii)   that   value   cannot   be   altered   without   the   package   sold 



being opened at the time of sale, or



(iv) the product undergoes a modification on being opened.

8)   As rightly argued by Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior 



counsel for the respondent, in the case of sun glasses, whether 



they come in a box or not, insofar as the retailer is concerned, 



at the time when they are being sold to the consumer, are not 



in   packaged   form.     Even   if   we   hold   that   they   come   in   a 



packaged   form,   before   they   are   sold   to   the   consumer   by 



removing them from the box, the value does not alter nor does 



the product undergo a perceptive modification and as such the 



provisions,  particularly,   under   Section  2(b)  of  the  Act  are  not 



applicable.  Further, as rightly observed by the High Court, the 



explanation to the said Rule is also not attracted because the 



package is not opened for the purpose of testing as in the case 





                                                                           6


of electric bulbs.  It was asserted by the learned senior counsel 



for the respondent that the sun glasses are tested by the buyer 



for his suitability.  

9)  Similar arguments were advanced by the respective counsel 



relating   to   their   respective   products.     On   careful   scrutiny   of 



the   provisions   referred   above,   it   is   clear   that   the   expression 


"pre-packed commodity" would be applicable to commodities 


which   are   packed   and   the   commodity   packaged   has   a   pre-

determined value and that value cannot be altered without the 



package  sold being  opened   at the  time  of  sale  or  the  product 



undergoes a modification on being opened.  We are also of the 



view   that   the   Explanation   I   to   Rule   2(l)   of   the   Rules   is   not 



attracted because the package is not opened for the purpose of 



testing as in the case of electric bulbs.  We fully agree that the 



sun   glasses   are   tested   by   the   buyer   for   his   suitability,   and 



therefore, sun glasses, whether it be a frame or glass is not a 



pre-packed  commodity  within  the  definition  of the  expression 


"pre-packed"  under   Rule   2(l)   of   the   Rules,   hence,   the   High 


Court is fully justified in quashing the notice and allowing the 



writ  petition   filed  by  the   respondent.     We  also  agree   with  the 





                                                                                 7


similar   arguments   advanced   relating   to   other   products 



mentioned above.  

10)     Learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   appellant-State 



submitted   that   the   very   same   Rules   fell   for   interpretation 



before   this   Court   in   the   case   of  Whirlpool   of   India   Ltd.   vs. 


Union of India and Ors. (2007) 14 SCC 468.  Heavily relying 


on the said decision, the learned  counsel submitted  that sun 



glasses   are  "pre-packed   commodity"  within   the   meaning   of 



the   Act   and   the   Rules.     He   also   submitted   that   the   other 



products   also   would   come   within   the   above   mentioned 



definition and by applying the ratio in that decision prayed for 



setting aside the impugned order of the High Court.  

11)    In   order   to   consider   the   stand   of   the   State,   let   us 



consider   the   factual   position   and   the   ratio   laid   down   in 


Whirlpool (supra).   The short question in that matter was as 


to   whether   `refrigerator'   is   a   "packaged   commodity"   or   not. 

The   appellant-Whirlpool   was   engaged   in   manufacturing 



refrigerators.   The Central Government issued Notification No. 



9   of   2000   dated   01.03.2000   under   Sections   4-A(1)   and   (2)   of 



the   Central   Excise   Act   and   specified   the   goods   mentioned   in 





                                                                              8


Column   3   of   the   said   notification.   Entry   48   pertains   to   the 



refrigerators whereby the refrigerators invited valuation under 



Section   4-A   of   the   Central   Excise   Act   with   the   abatement   of 



40%. Sections 4-A(1) and (2) of the Central Excise Act require 



that any goods included in the notification shall be valued on 



the basis of the maximum retail price (for short "MRP") which 



is  required to be  printed  on  the  packages  of  such  goods. The 



five conditions for inclusion of the goods are:

      "(i) The goods should be excisable goods;



      (ii) They should be such as are sold in the package;



      (iii) There should be requirement in the Act or the Rules 



      made thereunder or any other law to declare the price of 



      such goods relating to their retail price on the package;
      (iv)   The   Central   Government   must   have   specified   such 



   goods by notification in the Official Gazette;

      (v)   The   valuation   of   such   goods   would   be   as   per   the 



   declared retail sale price on the packages less the amount of 



   abatement."

                                                                            9
12)    The   appellant   felt   aggrieved   by   the   fact   that   the 



refrigerators were covered and included in the aforementioned 



Notification   dated   01.03.2000   as,   according   to   the   appellant, 



the   refrigerator   is   not   such   a   commodity   which   is   sold   in   a 



package.   Significantly,   the   appellant   is   not   aggrieved   by   its 



valuation  being  under  Sections  4-A(1)   and (2)  of  the  Act.  The 



only   complaint   that   the   appellant   made   is   that   the   appellant 



should   not   be   required   to   print   MRP   on   the   package   of   the 



refrigerator manufactured by it. The appellant, therefore, filed 



a   writ   petition   before   the   High   Court   of   Punjab   and   Haryana 



praying,  inter   alia,   for   a   writ   of   certiorarified   mandamus 



restraining   the   authorities   for   taking   any   coercive   measures 



against   the   appellant   or   its   Directors,   officers,   servants   or 



agents   for   not   declaring   MRP   on   the   refrigerators 



manufactured   and   cleared   by   the   appellant   from   its   factory. 

The   Notification   dated   01.03.2000   was   challenged   to   this 



limited   extent   only.   Before   the   High   Court,   the   appellant 



pleaded   that   refrigerator   is   not   such   a   commodity   which   can 



be   termed   to   be   a   "packaged   commodity"   and   further   the 



provisions   of   the   Act   or   the   Rules   made   thereunder   are   not 





                                                                              10


applicable   to   the   refrigerator   at   all.   It   was,   therefore,   prayed 



that   the   notification   was   liable   to   be   quashed   only   to   the 



extent that it included the refrigerator and the requirement of 



declaring MRP on the refrigerator.

13)    The respondent authorities, however, maintained that the 



refrigerator   was   in   fact   sold   in   a   package   of   polythene   cover, 



thermocol,   hardboard   cartons,   etc.   and   thus   it   falls   in   the 



category   of   "pre-packed   commodity".   On   that   basis   it   was 



contended that since every packaged commodity was included 



in   the   Act   and   the   Rules   made   thereunder,   there   can   be   no 



escape   from   printing   MRP   on   the   package.   The   High   Court 



rejected the contention and dismissed the petition filed by the 



appellant. 

14)   It was vehemently contended before a three-Judge Bench 



by the counsel for the appellant that a `refrigerator' is not sold 



in a "packaged form".   It was further contended that even if it 



is   sold   in   the   packaged   form,   when   it   is   displayed   by   the 



dealers, it is not in the packaged form and the customers can 



take   the   inspection   of   the   refrigerator   and   at   least   for   that 



purpose   the   package   has   to   be   opened   and,   therefore,   there 





                                                                               11


would be no question of the refrigerator being included in the 



Act   or   the   Rules   made   thereunder.     Rejecting   the   said 



submission as incorrect, this Court concluded as under:-

      "5. It was not disputed before the High Court and also before 

      us   that   the   appellant   manufacturer   has   to   sell   the 

      refrigerators which are packed in polythene cover, thermocol, 

      etc.   and   placed   in   hardboard   cartons.   In   fact   the   appellant 

      had so  pleaded   before  the  High  Court  in para  3 to  which  a 

      reference   has   been   made   by   the   High   Court.   Once   that 

      position   is   clear,   then   the   refrigerator   clearly   becomes   a 

      commodity   in   the   packaged   form.   The   use   of   the   term   "or 

      otherwise" in the definition would suggest that a commodity 

      if packed in any manner in units suitable for sale, whether 

      wholesale or retail, becomes a "commodity in packed form..."





15)  After adverting to Rule 2(l) "pre-packed commodity" and 



Explanation   I,   their   Lordships   have   held   that   refrigerator   is 



covered   under   the   term  "pre-packed   commodity"  and 



concluded that:

   "6.  ....Even   if   the   package   of  the  refrigerator   is   required   to  be 

   opened for testing, even then the refrigerator would continue to 

   be   a   "pre-packed   commodity".   There   are   various   types   of 

   packages   defined   under   the   Rules   and   ultimately   Rule   3 

   specifically   suggests   that   the   provisions   of   Chapter   II   would 

   apply   to   the   packages   intended   for   "retail   sale"   and   the 

   expression "package" would be construed accordingly.

   7. It is not disputed before us that the sale of the refrigerator is 

   covered under the "retail sale". Once that position is clear Rule 

   6   would   specifically   include   the   refrigerator   and   would   carry 

   along with it the requirements by that Rule of printing certain 

   information including the sale price on the package. Thus it is 

   clear   that   by   being   sold   by   the   manufacturer   in   a   packaged 




                                                                                         12


   form, the refrigerator would be covered by the provisions of the 

   SWM  Act  and  the  SWM  (PC)  Rules  and  it  would   be  imperative 

   that MRP has to be printed in terms of Rule 6 which has been 

   referred to above.

   8.  The   High   Court   has   also   made   a   reference   to   Rule   2(l)   and 

   more particularly, the Explanation to which we have referred to 

   earlier. In our view the reliance by the High Court on Rule 2(l) is 

   correct.   Learned   counsel   tried   to   urge   that   every   customer 

   would like to open the package before finalising to purchase the 

   refrigerator. He would at least get it tested and for that purpose 

   the package would be destroyed. That may be so but it does not 

   change the position as rightly observed by the High Court.

   9.  It   was   tried   to   be   suggested   that   MRP   would   be   different 

   depending upon the area in which it is being sold. That may be 

   so,   however,   that   cannot   absolve   the   manufacturer   from 

   displaying   the   price   i.e.   MRP   on   the   package   in   which   the 

   refrigerator is packed. Whatever be the situation, it is clear that 

   a   refrigerator   is   a   "packaged   commodity"   and   thus   is   covered 

   under the SWM Act and the SWM (PC) Rules and, therefore, the 

   Notification dated 1-3-2000 cannot be faulted on that ground....

   "

16)   By heavily relying on the above dictum with reference to 



the   very   same   provisions   by   this   Court   in   the  Whirlpool  


(supra),  the   appellant-State   submitted   that   in   view   of 


substantive definition of the main section read with the Rules, 



the   sun   glasses   are   "pre-packed   commodity"   within   the 



meaning of the Act and the Rules thereof.  The appellant-State 



also  submitted   that  similar   analogy is  to  be  applied  for  other 



products also.

                                                                                           13
17)     Learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the   respondent 



vehemently   submitted   that   the   ratio   of   the   judgment   in 


Whirlpool   (supra)  is   not   at   all   applicable   to   these   cases, 


firstly, because the issue in that case was in context of Central 



Excise Act and, secondly, because none of the aspects stated 



have been taken into consideration by this Court in the matter 



of Whirlpool (supra).  It is also pointed out that the judgment 



is  sub silentio  because the provisions of the Act, specially the 



provisions of Section 2(v) of the Act, have not been taken into 



consideration   in  the   said   case.     In   the   context   of  sub   silentio 



reference is made to the judgment of this Court in  Municipal  


Corporation of Delhi vs. Gurnam Kaur, (1989) 1 SCC 101, 


which   according   to   the   counsel   for   the   respondent,   is   that   a 



sub silentio  judgment does not have  a binding precedent.   By 



pointing out the same, the counsel for the respondent prayed 



that   the   case   of  Whirlpool   (supra)  requires   reconsideration 



and, as a result, the present matter also would be required to 



be considered by a larger Bench.  

18)  Though it was pointed out that the decision in Whirlpool  


(supra) was made in the context of the Central Excise Act, we 




                                                                               14


have   already   extracted   the   question   which   fell   for 



consideration, relevant provisions from the Act and the Rules, 



discussion as to the applicability, and the ultimate conclusion 



in para 9, namely, "whatever be the situation, it is clear that a 



refrigerator   is   a   "packaged   commodity"   and   thus   is   covered 



under the Act and the Rules."   In view of the same, it cannot 



be   claimed   that   the   judgment   in  Whirlpool   (supra)  has   no 



bearing on the issues in these appeals.  Inasmuch as the said 



decision was rendered by a bench of three Hon'ble Judges with 



reference   to  the   very  same   Act  and  Rules,  we  are   of the   view 



that the issue raised in all these appeals have to be heard by a 



larger Bench.

19)     Accordingly,   we   direct   the   Registry   to   place   all   these 



appeals   before   Hon'ble   the   Chief   Justice   of   India   for   listing 



before a larger Bench. 

                                         ...........................................

                                       ......J.                                

                                    (P. SATHASIVAM)   
                                                                                            





                                  ..............................................J. 

                                  (H.L. GOKHALE) 





                                                                                                15


NEW DELHI;

AUGUST 26, 2011.     

                         16
                                                           REPORTABLE

      

               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1119 OF 2010





The State of Maharashtra & Ors                           .... Appellant (s)



             Versus



Raj Marketing & Anr.                                       .... Respondent(s)





                            J U D G M E N T 




P. Sathasivam, J.

1)  This appeal by State of Maharashtra is directed against the 



judgment   and   order   dated   08.12.2006   passed   by   the   High 



Court   of   Judicature   at   Bombay   in   Writ   Petition   No.   2982   of 



2006 whereby the High Court allowed the writ petition of the 



Ist respondent herein. 

                                                                               17
2)    The issue involved in this appeal is whether Candy man, 



Minto-Fresh,   Kitchens   of   India,   Badam   Halwa   and   Ashirvaad 



Atta etc. can be considered as a "wholesale  package" within 



the   definition   of   the   expression  "wholesale   package"  under 



Rule 2(x) of the Standards of Weights and Measures (Packaged 



Commodities)   Rules,   1977   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   "the 



Rules").  

3)    Brief facts:


a)    The   respondent   is   a   firm   carrying   on   the   business   of 



buying   and   selling   various   products   and   they   used   to   store 



these   products   in   their   godown   at   Gali   No.8,   Senior   Tyre 



Compound,   N.S.S.   Road,   Narayan   Nagar,   Ghatkopar   (W) 



Mumbai.

b)    On   31.10.2006,   the   second   appellant/Inspector   of   Legal 



Metrology,   Mumbai   visited   the   first   respondent's   godown   and 



seized various packages of packed commodities such as Candy 



man,   Minto-Fresh,   Kitchens   of   India,   Badam   Halwa   and 



Ashirvaad   Atta   etc.   vide   seizure   memo  bearing   Nos.   0114769 



and   0114770   dated   31.10.2006.     The   reason   for   seizure, 





                                                                          18


according to him, is that on the wholesale packets, the details 



regarding the name and addresses of the manufacturer, cost, 



month, year etc. has not been declared and also the retail sale 



price was not mentioned which is in violation of the Rules.  

c)    A   show   cause   notice   dated   06.11.2006   has   been   issued 



by   the   appellant   to   the   respondent   for   the   violation   of 



Section/Rule   33   and   39   read   with   Rule   23(1)   and   6   of   the 



Rules.   It was mentioned in the said notice that the offence is 



compoundable as per Section 73 of the Standards of Weights 



and   Measures   Act,   1976   and   Section   65   of   the   Standards   of 



Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985.  

d)    On 18.11.2006, the respondents, vide their letter, replied 



to the notice dated 06.11.2006. 

e)    On 28.11.2006, the respondents filed Writ Petition being 



W.P.   No.   2982   of   2006,  inter   alia,   for   quashing   the   seizure 



memo dated 31.10.2006 and notice dated 06.11.2006. 

4)    The   High   Court,   by   impugned   order   dated   08.12.2006 



allowed   the   writ   petition   by   holding   that   the   packages 



containing Candy man, Minto-Fresh, Kitchens of India, Badam 



Halwa   and   Ashirvaad   Atta   are   not   wholesale   package   within 





                                                                            19


the   definition   of   the   expression  "wholesale   package"  under 



Rule 2(x) of the Rules. 

5)    Questioning   the   said   order   of   the   High   Court,   the   State 



filed the above appeal by way of special leave. 

                                                                            20
6)    Heard   Mr.   Chinmoy   Khaladkar,   learned   counsel   for   the 



appellant-State and Mr. Ravinder Narain for respondent No.1.

7)    Rule   2(x)   of   the   Rules   define  "wholesale   package"  to 



mean:

      "(x) "wholesale package" means a package containing-



      (i)  a number  of  retail  packages, where such first  mentioned 

      package   is   intended   for   sale,   distribution   or   delivery   to   a 

      intermediary   and   is   not   intended   for   sale   direct   to   a   single 

      consumer; or



      (ii)     a commodity sold to an intermediary in bulk to enable 

      such   intermediary   to   sell,   distribute   or   deliver   such 

      commodity to the consumer in smaller quantities; or 



      (iii)    packages   containing   ten   or   more   than   ten   retail 

      packages   provided   that   the   retail   packages   are   labeled   as 

      required under the rules."


8)    Rule 29 of the Rules read as under:


      "29. Declaration to be made on every wholesale package.- 

      Every   wholesale   package   shall   bear   thereon   a   legible, 

      definite, plain and conspicuous declaration as to,-



      (a)      the   name   and   address   of   the   manufacturer   or   where 

      the manufacturer is not the packer, of the packer;



      (b)      the   identity   of   the   commodity   contained   in   the 

      package; and 



      (c)   the   total   number   of   retail   packages   contained   in   such 

      wholesale  package  or the  net  quantity  in terms  of standard 

      units   of   weights,   measures   or   number   of   the   commodity 

      contained in wholesale package:


                                                                                           21


      Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply in relation to a 

      wholesale package if a declaration similar to the declaration 

      specified   in   this   rule,   is   required   to   be   made   on   such 

      wholesale   packages   by   or   under   any   other   law   for   the   time 

      being in force."


9)    In   order   to   attract   violation   of   the   Rules   referred   above, 



the package seized must fall within the expression "wholesale 


package".     A   package   used   merely   for   protection   during 


conveyance  or  safety   would  not  be  pre-packed   commodity  for 



the purpose of the Act and the Rules.   As rightly observed by 



the   High   Court   that   for   the   package   to   be   treated   as   a 



wholesale   package,   the   package   must   not   be   a   secondary 



package.     In   that   event,   we   have   to   find   out   whether   the 



secondary package is only  for  safety, convenience or the like. 

As demonstrated before the High Court, the counsel appearing 



for the Ist respondent placed all the above-mentioned products 



before us i.e. both the wholesale package as well as the retail 



package.     The   Department's   only   contention   was   that   the 



secondary   package   in   which   the   wholesale   package   was 



packed does not contain the said information.   In the light of 



the   provisions   which   we   have   referred   above   and   on 



verification of the products which were shown to us, we are of 




                                                                                        22


the   view   that   the   secondary   outer   packing   for   transportation 



or for safety of the goods being transported or delivered cannot 



be described as a wholesale package.  

                                                                          23
10)       On going through the statutory provisions which we have 



adverted   to   in   the   earlier   paras   and   on   verification   of   the 



products   which   were   shown   to   us   during   the   course   of 



argument, we fully agree with the conclusion arrived at by the 



High   Court.     Consequently,   the   appeal   fails   and   the   same   is 



dismissed with no order as to costs. 

                                  .................................................J. 

                                    (P. SATHASIVAM)   
                                                                                          





                                  ..............................................J. 

                                  (H.L. GOKHALE) 


NEW DELHI;

AUGUST 26, 2011.                                  

                                                                                              24
