
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Mohar Singh on 7 August, 2019Author: R. Banumathi
Bench: R. Banumathi, A.S. Bopanna
                                                         1

                                                                                      NON-REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     Criminal Appeal     No(s).      976 of 2011

     THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                                   Appellant(s)

                                                        VERSUS

     MOHAR SINGH                                                                   Respondent(s)


                                                 J U D G M E N T

     R. BANUMATHI, J.:

     (1)                 This appeal has been preferred by the State of Madhya

     Pradesh against the Judgment dated 09.04.2007 passed by the

     High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Bench at Gwalior, in Criminal

     Appeal NO.179 of 1995 in and by which the High Court has

     modified the conviction of the respondent under Section 302

     I.P.C. to Section 304 Part-I of I.P.C. and sentenced him to the

     period                already   undergone    by   him   and    also      imposing   fine   of

     Rs.15,000/-.

     (2)                 We have heard Mr. R.K. Rathore, learned counsel appearing

     for the appellant-State of Madhya Pradesh and Mr. Lakhan Singh

     Chauhan,                learned    counsel    appearing       for   the    respondent      and

     perused the impugned judgment and the evidence and materials on

     record.

Signature Not Verified

     (3)
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
                         The case of the prosecution is that as per complainant-
Date: 2019.08.08
17:33:02 IST
Reason:
     Harnam Singh (PW-4), on 09.03.1993 at around 01.30 p.m., he was

     going                 towards     Chopal.    On   the     way,      he     saw    that     the
                                            2

respondent/accused Mohar Singh and co-accused Ajab Singh were

hurling     abuses   to    his    brother    deceased-Bhagwan          Singh.       When

deceased-Bhagwan Singh objected to it, co-accused Ajab Singh

instigated     the     respondent     Mohar     Singh     to    bring       his     gun.

Respondent-accused brought a gun from his house and fired a

shot   at    the   deceased      causing    injuries    on     the    neck     of   the

deceased who died on the spot. Complainant-Harnam Singh (PW-4)

lodged the complaint against the accused based on which FIR was

registered     under      Section   302     read   with      Section    34        I.P.C.

against the accused.

(4)    The Trial Court relying upon the evidence of Kaptan Singh

(PW-1), Harnam Singh (PW-4), Sarnam Singh(PW-2) and Narayan

Singh (PW-3) held that the respondent-accused brought gun from

his house and fired at the deceased-Bhagwan Singh which hit the

neck   of    the   deceased.        The    Trial   Court       vide    order       dated

21.03.1995 convicted the respondent-accused under Section 302

I.P.C. and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment.                               The

Trial Court, however, acquitted the other accused Ajab Singh

and Gulab Singh and acquitted them from all the charges.

(5)    In appeal, the High Court has held that the respondent-

accused has caused a single gun-shot injury to the deceased

that too on being instigated by Ajab Singh who had already been

acquitted by the Trial Court and, therefore, it cannot be held

that   the    respondent      had   intentionally       caused        the    gun-shot

injury on the deceased-Bhagwan Singh.              The High Court held that

the entire incident occurred when there was heated altercation

between both the parties and resultantly the respondent had
                                         3

fired the gun-shot injury on the deceased and, therefore, in

the   facts   and   circumstances   of       the    case,   the   act   of   the

respondent would not attract Section 302 I.P.C.; but would fall

under Section 304 Part-I of the I.P.C.              The High Court has also

pointed out that the occurrence was of the year 1993 and the

respondent has already undergone nearly seven years and six

months and if the remission is taken into account his sentence

would be more than nine years.           It is stated at the Bar that

the fine amount of Rs.15,000/- imposed upon the respondent has

already been paid by him.

(6)   In the above facts and circumstances of the case, the

impugned judgment of the High Court modifying the conviction of

the respondent from Section 302 I.P.C. to Section 304 Part-I of

I.P.C. cannot be said to be perverse and we do not find any

good ground to interfere with the impugned judgment.

(7)   In the result, the appeal is dismissed.




                                                   ..........................J.
                                                    (R. BANUMATHI)


                                                   ..........................J.
                                                    (A.S. BOPANNA)
NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 7, 2019.

