
Supreme Court of India
Viran Gyanlal Rajput vs The State Of Maharashtra on 5 December, 2018Author: J Mohan Shantanagoudar
Bench: [ M Shantanagoudar], [ Ramana]
                                                                            NON­REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1558­1559 OF 2018
                         (Arising out of SLP (Criminal) Nos. 5416­5417/2015)


          Viran Gyanlal Rajput                                     ...Appellant

                                                      Versus

          The State of Maharashtra                                 ...Respondent
                                              J U D G M E N T




          MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.

                         Leave granted in SLP (Crl.) Nos. 5416­17/2015.

          2. The instant appeals have been filed against the final common

          judgment   and   order   dated   16.02.2015   of   the   High   Court   of

          Bombay   in   Confirmation   Case   No.   3   of   2014   with   Criminal
Signature Not Verified


          Appeal   No.   760   of   2014   whereby   the   learned   High   Court
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2018.12.05
16:50:36 IST
Reason:


          confirmed the death sentence awarded to the appellant herein.



                                                    1
       By the impugned judgment, the High Court dismissed the

aforementioned   confirmation   case   and   criminal   appeal   arising

out of the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated

25.06.2014 of the Additional Sessions Judge, Mangaon, Raigad,

in   Sessions   Case   No.   8   of   2013.   The   Sessions   Court   had

convicted   the   appellant   Viran   Gyanlal   Rajput   for   the   offences

punishable   under   Sections   302   and   201   of   the   Indian   Penal

Code, and under Sections 10 and 4 of the Protection of Children

from   Sexual   Offences   Act,   2012   (“POCSO   Act”)   for   the

kidnapping, rape and murder of a 13­year­old girl, and causing

disappearance of evidence. The appellant was sentenced to death

for the offence under S. 302, IPC; R.I. for 10 years and a fine of

Rs.   200   (1   year’s   R.I.   in   default)   under   S.   366,   IPC;   R.I.   for  7

years and a fine of Rs. 200 (1 year’s R.I. in default) under S. 10,

POCSO Act; imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs. 500 (2 years’

R.I. in default) under S. 4, POCSO Act; and R.I. for 7 years and a

fine of Rs. 200 (1 year’s R.I. in default) under S. 201, IPC. Except

for   overturning   the   appellant’s   conviction   under   Section   10,

POCSO Act, lacking a specific charge for the same, the judgment

and order of conviction and sentence rendered by the Sessions

Court was maintained by the High Court.


                                           2
3.    The case for the prosecution in brief is that on 17.10.2012,

when the victim did not return home from school at the usual

time   in   the   evening,   a   search   was   undertaken.   The   next   day,

some of her belongings were found in the jungle area adjoining

the   village.   A  complaint  (Exh. 14) regarding  missing  of the  girl

was lodged around 8.30 a.m. by PW3, Samir Parab, the victim’s

cousin.  In the meantime, PW4, Vijay Parab, the victim’s uncle,

who had seen the victim being followed the last evening on the

way back from school by an unknown person wearing a red T­

shirt,   and   PW5   Abhijit   Chavan   (a   resident   of  the   neighbouring

Toranpada village), who had later seen the same person running

towards   Toranpada   village,   went   to   the   adjoining   settlement   of

Paradhis (a nomadic community) along with some other villagers,

suspecting   him   to   be   there.   The   person,   none   other   than   the

appellant   herein,   was   apprehended   by   the   villagers   and   was

being brought to Avandhe village (a neighbouring area).   At that

time,  they were  accosted  by the police who were proceeding to

undertake   investigation   with   respect   to   the   missing   person’s

complaint.   The police thereupon took custody of the appellant.

Around this time, the first information pertaining to the offence of

murder was given to the police by PW3.   The dead body of the


                                      3
victim was recovered in a naked condition, at the instance of the

appellant,   from   a   field   near   Kamthekarwadi   village   (the   village

where   the   victim   resided)   and   subsequently   her   clothes   were

recovered at his instance as well. 

      As per the post mortem report (Exh. 35) and the evidence of

the doctor who conducted it (PW13), the probable cause of death

was   opined   as   asphyxia   with   cardio­respiratory   arrest   due   to

strangulation.   It   was   also   found   that   the   deceased   had   been

forcibly subjected to sexual intercourse.

4.    The   Trial   Court   as   well   as   the   High   Court   found   the

following   incriminating   circumstances   against   the   appellant,

namely,   the   deceased   was   last   seen   with   him   while   she   was

walking home from school; the appellant was seen running alone

towards Toranpada later in the evening; the recovery of the dead

body  and  incriminating  articles (importantly, the clothes of the

victim) at the instance of the appellant; mud stains on the pants

of   the   appellant   which   matched   with   the   mud   seized   from   the

spot of recovery of the victim’s body; failure of the appellant to

explain injuries found on him; medical evidence showing that the

victim had been forcibly raped and killed; motive to gratify lust,

and to kill the victim and hide her body to suppress evidence of


                                      4
his   crime;   and   the   failure   of   the   appellant   to   offer   a   plausible

explanation   for   the   incriminating   circumstances   against   him.

Importantly, both the Courts relied on the testimony of PW Nos. 4

and 5 as last seen witnesses. 


5. Heard the counsel on either side.


6.   Shri   V.   Giri,   learned   Senior   Counsel   appearing   for   the

appellant,   duly   assisted   by   Shri   Amartiya   Kanjilal,   Advocate,

submitted that the chain of circumstantial evidence had not been

established satisfactorily by the prosecution. He argued that the

recoveries   made   at   the   instance   of   the   appellant   were

inadmissible.   According   to   him,   the   ‘last   seen’   principle   was

incorrectly applied, as none out of PWs 3­5 had actually seen the

deceased in the company of the appellant—rather, PW4 had only

seen him following the deceased at a distance, and PW5 had seen

him   in   the   morning   in   the  vicinity   and  shown  him   the  way   to

Pedali   (a   nearby   village,   where   the   victim   went   to   school)   and

later seen him running towards Toranpada, alone. Furthermore,

the  identification of  the appellant was based on the precarious

grounds of wearing a red T­shirt and having mud stains on his

pants, instead of through a Test Identification Parade. It was also


                                         5
submitted that the injuries in the form of scratch marks found on

the appellant could not be interpreted as having been inflicted by

the deceased in her defence: firstly, because as per the evidence

of   the   doctor   who   examined   the   appellant   (PW12),   the   injuries

had taken place within 24 hours preceding the examination, well

after   the   alleged   time   of   the   incident   (i.e.   the   evening/night   of

17.10.2012), which fact also suggested that they probably took

place  during  the   manhandling of the appellant by the villagers

upon apprehending him (as also evident from PW12’s admission

that the injuries were possible in a scuffle if the injured fell on a

rough object), and secondly, because as per the FSL Report being

Exh. 38, there was no blood detected on the fingernail clippings

of the deceased, which would not have been the case if she had

indeed inflicted the scratches. Learned counsel for the appellant

also  submitted   that  the   non­naming  of the appellant and non­

mentioning of the Crime Number in the inquest report (Exh. 40)

and   the   non­explanation   of   the   discovery   and   ownership   of   a

second   watch   recovered   from   near   the   spot   of   the   body   was

suspicious. At the same time, as the vaginal swabs of the victim

did not indicate the presence of semen even after 3 samples were

taken   (as   per   the   FSL   Report   being   Exh.  38,   read   with   the


                                         6
evidence   of   the   doctor   PW13),   nothing   remained   to   tie   the

appellant to the commission of the crime.


      On the issue of sentencing, learned counsel argued that the

appellant was only 22 years old at the time of the offence, had

dependents   in   the   form   of   his   wife   and   two   young   children,

lacked criminal antecedents, and had shown good behaviour post

his   incarceration,   and   therefore   the   death   penalty   was   not

warranted.


7. Per contra, Shri Nishant Ramakantrao Katneshwarkar, learned

counsel  for  the   respondent­State of Maharashtra, stressed that

the   chain   of   circumstance   had   been   established   beyond

reasonable doubt. The body of the victim as well as her articles

had been recovered only at the behest of the accused, and he had

been seen following the girl by PW4 and later running towards

Toranpada  by  PW5.  He  submitted that the identification of the

appellant could not be assailed, since the village merely consisted

of 25 houses, and thus the witnesses had immediately identified

that the person was an outsider, and went to search among the

nomadic Paradhi community as their settlement was located only

3 km outside the village, since they felt that it was probable that


                                     7
the unidentified person belonged thereto. Furthermore, the mud

stains  on the  pants of the appellant were highly incriminating,

because as per the FSL Report being Exh. 62, they matched in

composition   and   characteristics   with   the   mud   seized   from   the

spot of recovery of the deceased’s body. Lastly, he submitted that

the   non­explanation   regarding   the   second   watch   could   not   be

considered fatal to the case of the prosecution at all.


      On   the   issue   of   sentencing,  learned   counsel   for   the   State

submitted   that   the   Court   keep   in   mind   the   plight   and

helplessness of the victim and her parents.


8. We have perused the evidence on record carefully, as well as

the judgments of the Trial Court and the High Court.


      To   begin   with,   we   find   that   the   Trial  Court   and  the   High

Court were correct in relying upon the testimony of PWs 4 and 5,

which is natural and reliable. PW4 Vijay Parab was the victim’s

uncle,   and   PW5   Abhijit   Chavan   was   a   resident   of   the

neighbouring   Toranpada   village.   PW4   testified   that   he   saw   the

victim   being   followed   by   a   person   in   a   red   T­shirt,   being   the

appellant,   while   she  was   on the way  home from school on the




                                        8
evening   of   the   incident.   He   also   stated   that   he   had   asked   the

victim if she was going home alone, to which she had answered

in the affirmative. PW5 testified that a person in a red T­shirt,

being the accused before the trial Court, had asked him the way

to   Pedali   village   on   the   morning   of   the   incident,   at   Toranpada

village, and he had seen the same person running alone, with his

pants muddied, towards Toranpada in the evening around 6­6.30

p.m., at a spot which was later found to be around 300m from

the spot of recovery of the victim’s body. 


      The   presence   of   these   witnesses   at   the   relevant   points   of

time   is   also   natural.   PW4   was   proceeding   on   a   tractor   from

Kamthekarwadi   to   Pedali   when   he   met   the   victim   on   her   way

back from school proceeding in the opposite direction. PW5, on

the   other   hand,   had   been   asked   the   way   to   Pedali   by   the

appellant   on   the   morning   of   the   incident,   while   he   was   at   his

house in Toranpada, and had seen the same person again in the

evening,  running  towards  Toranpada, while he was grazing his

cattle near Awandhe. 


      PWs   4   and   5   also   testified   to   being   part   of   the   party   of

villagers that undertook to search the Paradhi settlement for the


                                         9
person in the red T­shirt when it was discovered that the victim

had   gone   missing,   and   apprehended   the   appellant   therefrom,

handing   him   over   to   the   police,   who   they   met   on   the   way   to

Avandhe village. We are of the opinion that the conduct of these

witnesses appears natural, as it would have been reasonable for

them to search the nearest settlement, when it was realised that

the victim was last seen being followed by an outsider. As rightly

contended by counsel for the prosecution, in a village of merely

25 houses, where everyone is well­acquainted with one another,

an   outsider   would   stand   out   starkly,   and   attract   attention.   In

such a situation, his identification through clothes, if supported

by the testimony of multiple witnesses whose testimony has been

found   to   inspire   confidence,   cannot   be   found   fault   with   only

because   a   Test   Identification   Parade   was   not   conducted

subsequently. 


      The   testimony   of   the   witnesses   as   referred   to   above   is

corroborated by PW3, Samir Parab, who is a cousin of the victim

and also the informant in this case. He testified that when the

search   for   the   victim   was   undertaken,   PW   4   told   him   about

seeing   a   person   in   a   red   T­shirt  with   the   victim.   The   adjacent



                                        10
jungle area was searched, and around 3 am in the morning her

sandal was recovered around 200m to the east of Kamthekarwadi

village, and in the morning her schoolbag as well as a wristwatch

given   to   her   by   PW3   himself,   were   discovered,   after   which   he

proceeded to lodge a missing person’s report. Subsequently, on

his  way to Avandhe with the police, he met PWs 4 and 5 in a

group of villagers with the appellant, who was handed over to the

police. 


      Furthermore,   the   testimony   of   PWs   3,   4   and   5   is   also

consistent on the point that after the appellant was handed over

to the custody of the police, he gave a statement to them and led

them to the spot where the body of the victim was hidden, i.e. a

field  owned  by  one   Raghunath Deshmukh, around 300m away

from Kamthekarwadi village. This field was overgrown with grass,

and the appellant revealed the body by keeping aside grass and

mud. The body was buried about 2 feet under the ground. The

body was in a naked condition with a red  odhani  (dupatta) tied

around   the   neck.   This   is   also   corroborated   by   the   evidence   of

PW8, one of the panchas, and PW14, the I.O., who also testified

that articles such as the earrings of the deceased, her schoolbag



                                       11
containing   her   ID   card,   books   and   notebooks,   as   well   as   two

wristwatches were also found on the spot.


      In this situation, we also find that the minor discrepancies

in the recorded timings and sequence of events pertaining to the

recovery   of   the   body,   and   articles   including   the   victim’s

schoolbag,   as   evident   through   the   First   Information   Statement

(Exh.   63),   the   testimony   of   the   I.O.,   PW14,   and   the   spot

panchanama   (Ex.   23),   are   not   fatal   to   the   prosecution   version

and may be explained due to all the events happening in quick

succession, viz. the apprehending of the appellant, the recovery

of the dead body, the lodging of the FIR pertaining to murder and

the preparation of the spot panchanama. Moreover, the argument

that   the   recovery   of   the   dead   body   at   the   instance   of   the

appellant is highly suspicious cannot be sustained either, since it

is clear from the testimony of the witnesses that the body was

recovered   from   a   spot   which   could   only   have   been   within   the

knowledge of the person who hid the body to begin with. This is

also   fortified   by   the   lack   of   any   explanation   by   the   appellant

regarding the recovery of the body and the circumstance of the

victim   being   last   seen   around   him.   To   add   to   this,   even   the



                                       12
clothes   of   the   deceased   were   recovered   at   the   instance   of   the

appellant, from a spot around 200m from Kamthekarwadi, from a

pit which had been covered with a stone. This again is a location

of   which   only   the   perpetrator   of   the   offence   could   have   had

knowledge. Although it is true that the recovery of articles is to be

made based on the statement of the accused immediately after

the   arrest   of   the   accused   and   recording   his   statement,   the

recovery   should   be   based   on   the   voluntary   action   relating   to

showing   of   the   place   by   the   accused.     Therefore,   unless   the

accused   volunteers   to   show   the   place   of   hiding   certain

things/facts,   the   recovery   cannot  be  made  by  the  investigating

officers.  In this view of the matter, if the accused volunteered to

show the place where he had hidden the deceased’s clothes at a

particular place only after 5 days, the investigating officer cannot

be   blamed   for   the   same.     In   a   given   case,   the   accused   may

confess   ten   or   fifteen   days   after   his   arrest   and   as   such   the

recovery   cannot  be  suspected on this ground alone.   Together,

these circumstances establish that the appellant had hidden the

body of the deceased, as well as her clothes, in a bid to suppress

the evidence of his crime.


                                       13
      The   matching   of   the   mud   recovered   from   the   spot   of

recovery of the victim’s body with the mud stains on the pants of

the appellant is also highly incriminating, as rightly held by the

Trial Court and the High Court.


      As regards the scratch marks found on the face and neck of

the accused, we have considered the argument of the appellant

that it was possible for the injuries to have been inflicted during

the scuffle that would have ensued at the time that the party of

villagers   apprehended   the   appellant,   even   though   the   medical

evidence  given by PW13  also shows that they could have been

inflicted by a woman resisting sexual assault. It is the defence of

the   appellant   that   10   to   15   villagers   who   went   to   the  Paradhi

settlement in search of the accused wearing a red T­shirt must

have caught hold of the accused and assaulted him mercilessly,

consequent to which the accused sustained scratch marks on his

body.     Such   explanation   on   behalf   of   the   accused   cannot   be

accepted, inasmuch as a total of 8 injuries have been sustained

by the accused, out of which 7 are scratch marks and only 1 is a

contusion. If really the accused was assaulted mercilessly by 10

to   15   villagers,   at   least   10   to   15   contusions   or   abrasions   etc.



                                         14
should   have   been   found   on   the   body   of   the   accused.     On   the

other hand, the scratch marks suffered by the appellant are of

such a nature as would generally occur while a victim resists any

illegal   action   by   such   person   such   as   rape   etc.     Such   scratch

marks   are   generally   inflicted   by   nails.     Since   the   victim   was

unarmed,   she   must   have   resisted   the   assault   on   her   by   the

accused, leading to scratches on the accused.  Thus, the scratch

marks found on his face and neck clearly show the resistance of

the victim.    


      The medical evidence also clearly establishes the occurrence

of rape. As per the evidence of PW13 and the post mortem report

(Exh. 35), there was swelling in the victim’s labia majora along

with multiple tears in the hymen. Additionally, there were several

scratch marks all over her body. As regards the murder of the

victim,   the   evidence   of   PW13   indicates   that   she   was   killed   by

strangulation   by   the   red  odhani  which   was   found   tied   tightly

around the victim’s neck when her body was recovered. 


      The motive for the crime, i.e. lust, is also apparent, which is

an   important   consideration   in   cases   based   on   circumstantial

evidence, as pointed out by the High Court. No doubt, the semen


                                       15
of the appellant has not been detected in the vaginal swabs of the

deceased   (as   per   the   FSL   Report   being   Exh.   38),   having   been

found only on the knickers of the appellant himself (as per the

FSL   Report   being   Exh.   61).   However,   this,   too,   cannot   be   a

ground   to   exonerate   the   appellant,   given   the   totality   of

circumstances of the case, and also considering that the swabs

were mixed with mud, as stated by the doctor PW13.


      Additionally,   in   light   of   the   incriminating   circumstances

enumerated   above,   we   find   ourselves   unable   to   agree   with   the

contention of  the   learned  Senior counsel for the appellant that

the   non­investigation   into   the   ownership   of   the   second

wristwatch   recovered   vitiates   the   case   against   the   accused.

Moreover,   as   noted   by   the   High   Court,   the   non­seizure   of   the

sandal   of   the   victim   and   the   stone   used   to   hide   the   victim’s

clothes, also does not strike at the root of the matter.


9.   Thus,   we   are   of   the   opinion   that   each   link   in   the   chain   of

circumstantial evidence has been adequately established by the

prosecution, and the conviction of the appellant is affirmed.




                                          16
10.   We   now   turn   our   attention   to   the   issue   of   quantum   of

sentence,   particularly   the   sentence   of   death   awarded   to   the

appellant.   Before   proceeding   further,   it   would   be   pertinent   to

recall that life imprisonment is the rule and the death penalty is

the exception, and the death penalty is to be imposed only when

the   alternative   of   life   imprisonment   is   totally   inadequate,   and

therefore unquestionably foreclosed, i.e. if it is the only inevitable

conclusion,   as   per   the   well­settled   legal   proposition   first

enunciated in Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC

684.  While determining the sentence, it is equally important for

the Court to consider the aggravating circumstances of the crime

and the mitigating circumstances of the criminal. Moreover, since

the decision in Machhi Singh v. State of Punjab, (1983) 3 SCC

470,  a   balancing   approach   of   such   aggravating   and   mitigating

circumstances has been adopted, to see if the crime is among the

rarest of rare cases. 


      The Trial Court and the High Court, on an evaluation of the

aggravating   and   mitigating   circumstances   of   the   case,   have

arrived at the conclusion that the death sentence is warranted in

this case. Undoubtedly, the Courts were correct in giving weight



                                      17
to the dastardly nature and manner of the crime, i.e. kidnapping

a girl of the tender age of 13 years, taking her to a secluded area

and committing the act of rape and subsequently murdering her

by strangulation and burying her body in a field, having disrobed

her   completely,   and   also   in   giving   weight   to   the   youth   and

helplessness   of   the   victim,   and   to   the   fact   that   the   appellant

proceeded to target her to satisfy his lust.


      Though   we   agree   that   the   crime   committed   is   of   an

abominable   nature,   it   cannot   be   said   to   be   of   such   a   brutal,

depraved,   heinous   or   diabolical   nature   so   as   to   fall   into   the

category of the rarest of rare cases and invite punishment with

death. We also find ourselves unable to agree with the view of the

Courts   that   the   appellant  is  such  a  menace  to   society  that  he

cannot be allowed to stay alive. 


      On the other hand, we are of the view that the prosecution

did not establish that the appellant was beyond reform, especially

given his young age. We are also mindful of the appellant’s lack

of   criminal   antecedents   prior   to   the   commission   of   this   crime,

and of his post incarceration conduct, which in no way suggests

the impossibility of his reform. It would be pertinent to observe at


                                       18
this point that although the Trial Court noted his lack of remorse

during the hearing, and the High Court noted his lack of remorse

after committing the  crime, as he was found calmly wandering

around the locality, this does not in any way indicate that there

is no scope of reform for the appellant.


11.   Thus,   neither   the   circumstances   of   the   crime   nor   the

circumstances   of   the   criminal,   i.e.   the   appellant,   would   go   to

show that the instant matter falls into the category of the rarest

of   rare   cases,   or   that   the   sentence   of   life   imprisonment   is

unquestionably   foreclosed   and   grossly   disproportionate.

Therefore, in the totality of the facts and circumstances of this

case,   we   find   it   fit   to   commute   the   death   sentence   of   the

appellant to life imprisonment.


      At the same time, we are of the opinion that a sentence of

life imprisonment simpliciter would not be proportionate to the

gravity of the offence committed, and would not meet the need to

respond   to   crimes   against   women   and   children   in   the   most

stringent   manner   possible.   Moreover,   though   we   have   noticed

above   that   the   possibility   of   reform   of   the   accused   is   not

completely precluded, we nevertheless share the concerns of the


                                      19
Trial Court and the High Court regarding the lack of remorse on

behalf of the appellant and the possibility of reoffending. In such

a situation, we deem it fit to restrict the right of the appellant to

claim remission in his sentence of life imprisonment for a period

of 20 years.


12.   At   this   juncture,   we   would   like   to   acknowledge   and

appreciate   the   diligence   and   painstaking   attention   to   detail   in

preparing for this matter on the part of Shri Amartiya Kanjilal,

learned counsel for the appellant, as also commended by Shri V.

Giri, learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant.


13.   Thus,   the   Criminal   Appeals   arising   from   Special   Leave

Petition   (Criminal)   Nos.   5416­17   of   2015   are   disposed   of   by

commuting the sentence of death awarded to the appellant to life

imprisonment, out of which the appellant shall mandatorily serve

out a minimum of 20 years without claiming remission.


                                    ..............................................J.
                                                               [N.V. RAMANA]

                                    ...............................................J.
                                    [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR] 

NEW DELHI;                         .................................................J.
DECEMBER 05, 2018.                                          [HEMANT GUPTA]


                                       20

