
Supreme Court of India
S. K. Miglani vs State Nct Of Delhi on 30 April, 2019Author: A Bhushan
Bench: K.M.Joseph, A Bhushan
                                                                                   1




                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.744 OF 2019
                         (arising out of SLP(CRL.) No.11070 of 2018)



        S.K. MIGLANI                                           .... APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

        STATE NCT OF DELHI                                     .... RESPONDENT(S)



                                         J U D G M E N T

                 ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.

                         This   appeal       has     been   filed      against   the

                 judgment       of   Delhi    High     Court   dated     06.08.2018

                 dismissing the application filed by the appellant

                 under Section 482 Cr.P.C. praying for setting aside

                 the order dated 03.12.2014 and 13.12.2014 passed by

                 Chief     Metropolitan       Magistrate,      Saket    Court,   New

                 Delhi and further to quash the F.I.R. No. 432 of
Signature Not Verified

                 2000 under Sections 201, 409, 419, 420, 467, 468,
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.04.30
16:49:06 IST
Reason:

                 471, 120-B I.P.C. and the charge sheet.
                                                                         2
2.   The brief facts of the case necessary to be

noted are:-

     2.1   The   appellant      has    been      working        at     the

           relevant     time    as     Manager       in      Bank       of

           Baroda,     Faridabad       Branch.            Mr.     Anant

           Chatterjee, Director, Housing gave written

           complaint dated 14.11.2000.               On said basis

           a FIR No. 432 of 2000 dated 15.11.2000 was

           lodged at PS Kotla Mubarakpur for offence

           under    Section     201,    409,     419,     420,        467,

           468, 471, 120-B IPC. It was the case of

           the     prosecution         that      Mehender         Kumar

           (Accountant), H.R. Sharma (Senior Account

           Officer),     S.C.     Chugh        (Asstt.       Director

           Housing),     V.D.    Nanda        (Ht.      FA      (H)     in

           collusion    with    other      DDA    employees           M.L.

           Ahuja and Asha Gupta and property dealer

           S.K. Khanna and S.K. Goel and SPA holder

           of      original     allottee         Praveen          Kumar

           illegally     acted        on      fake    request           of

           original allottee Mr. Gautam Dhar for cost

           reduction of flat from 10.66 lakhs to 7.77
                                                                    3




      lakhs with approval of competent authority

      and found that the original FDR and refund

      application           dated           07.07.1994            was

      removed/misplaced from the DDA file.                       The

      F.I.R.,       however,         alleged       that        refund

      cheque of Rs.2,22,263/- was withdrawn by

      opening a saving bank account No.33604 in

      Bank     of   Baroda,      Faridabad         with        forged

      signature of the allottee.

2.2   After    investigation,          a    charge    sheet       was

      submitted      against         the     DDA      officials,

      property      dealers     and        Special    Power       of

      Attorney Praveen Kumar.                 A supplementary

      charge sheet was also filed, in which the

      appellant’s      name     was    included.           In    the

      supplementary         charge          sheet,        it      is

      mentioned      that      the     appellant      opened        a

      fictitious savings bank account No.33604

      in the name of Gautam Dhar in connivance

      with     Praveen      Kumar,         attorney       of     Shri

      Gautam    Dhar     and    Shri       Rajinder    s/o      Shri
                                                                  4




      Braham Pal in order to encash the cheque

      dated 07.01.2000 for Rs.2,22,263/-.                     The

      supplementary charge sheet further stated

      that   prosecution         sanction       under    Section

      197 Cr.P.C. has been obtained against DDA

      officials.            Investigation        agency      also

      obtained       report      dated      30.12.2002       from

      Forensic        Science      Laboratory       regarding

      handwriting           on        various      documents.

      Handwriting opinion was also obtained with

      regard    to    signatures       on   account      opening

      form of Gautam Dhar with the signature of

      the appellant.



2.3   An application dated 09.05.2012 was filed

      by the appellant before the ACMM, Saket

      Court, New Delhi in FIR No.432 of 2000

      stating that appellant is a public servant

      employed       with   a    nationalized      bank      as   a

      Manager    and        it   is    mandatory        to   seek

      prosecution sanction against the appellant

      in terms of Section 197 Cr.P.C.                     It was
                                                           5




stated    that     prosecution      has       not   sought

prosecution         sanction         against             the

appellant-accused,          hence        he      may      be

discharged on account of non-compliance of

Section     197         Cr.P.C.            The         Chief

Metropolitan       Magistrate       (South),           Saket

Court     passed     an    order     on        03.12.2004

rejecting the application of the appellant

seeking    discharge      for     want    of   sanction.

Case was fixed for framing of charge on

13.12.2014.        On     13.12.2014,         charge     was

framed against the appellant under Section

465/120-B    I.P.C.         following         charge     was

framed      against         the      appellant            on

13.12.2014:-


                        “CHARGE

      I, Vivek Kumar Gulia, Chief
   Metropolitan, Magistrate (South),
   Saket Courts Complex, New Delhi do
   hereby charge you accused S.K.
   Mighlani son of Sh. Lal Chand
   Mighlani as under :

      That    you,   in   1996    and
   afterwards, at DDA, INA, Vikas
   Sadan, New Delhi and other places,
                                         6




alongwith     co-accused    Mahender
Kumar, H.R. Sharma, S.C. Chugh,
V.D. Nanda, Praveen Kumar, S.K.
Khanna, S.K. Goel. M.L. Ahuja and
Asha   Gupta,   agreed   to   commit
criminal breach of trust with DDA,
pursuant to which forged letters
for       depositing       challans,
application for change of address,
related affidavit, application for
reduction of cost bearing forged
signature of allottee Sh. Gautam
Dhar and forged seal of Notary were
entertained and further the cheque
issued in the name of allottee was
encashed through forged account
opened by you and thereby committed
an offence punishable U/s. 120-B
IPC and within the cognizance of
this Court;

   Secondly, that you, at Bank of
Baroda, Faridabad Branch, Haryana,
forged the account opening form in
the name of allottee Sh. Gautam
Dhar   (account   no.   33604) with
intention to get the refund cheques
encashed and thereby committed an
offence punishable U/s. 465 IPC and
within   the   cognizance   of this
Court.

   I hereby direct you to be tried
by this court for the aforesaid
charges.

             CMM(South) Saket Courts
                New Delhi/13.12.2014


The   charge    is   read    over  and
explained    to    the    accused   in
vernacular    language    and   he  is
questioned as under:
                                                      7
         Ques.: Do you plead guilty or claim
         trial ?

         Ans. I plead not guilty and claim
         trial.”



2.4   An application under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

      was filed by the appellant before the High

      court   of   Delhi,   where   following   prayers

      have been made:-

         i.   Set   aside  the   order  dated
              03.12.2014 passed by Sh. V.K.
              Gulia, Ld. CMM, Saket Courts,
              New    Delhi   dismissing   the
              discharge application of the
              petitioner;

         ii. Set   aside  the  order   dated
             13.12.2014 passed by Sh. V.K.
             Gulia, Ld. CMM, Saket Courts,
             New   Delhi,  thereby   framing
             charges against the petitioner
             by taking cognizance without
             obtaining     sanction      for
             prosecution as required U/s.
             197 Cr.P.C. in the interest of
             justice;

         iii. Quash the FIR No.432/2000, U/s.
              406/201/419/420/467/468/471/
              120B IPC registered at PS:
              Kotla     Mubarakpur,     Delhi,
              Charge-sheet U/s. 406/201/419/
              420/467/468/471/120B   IPC   and
              further   proceeding  emanating
              therefrom qua the petitioner;
                                                                   8




               iv. Pass   any   such  or  further
                   order(s) as this Hon’ble Court
                   may deem fit and proper in the
                   interest of justice.”


      2.5   The High Court vide the impugned judgment

            dismissed       the     application     filed     under

            Section 482 Cr.P.C. upholding the order of

            CMM dated 13.12.2014.           Aggrieved against

            the said judgment, this appeal has been

            filed.


3.    Learned counsel for the appellant in support

of this appeal submits that the appellant, who was

working as a Branch Manager in Bank of Baroda had

permitted opening of a savings account No.33604 in

discharge     of   his      official    duty.      The   appellant

being a public servant, sanction ought to have been

obtained under Section 197 Cr.P.C. for prosecuting

the    appellant.        It    is    submitted    that     although

sanction     has     been    obtained    with     regard    to   DDA

officials, but no sanction has been obtained for

the appellant.        He submits that CMM committed error

in rejecting the application of the appellant for
                                                                                9




discharge due to want of sanction.                          It is further

submitted that the appellant’s name came only in

the supplementary charge sheet and allegations are

only    with     regard       to    opening       of    a     savings        bank

account.       Investigation Agency has obtained opinion

of handwriting experts with respect to signatures

of Gautam Dhar on the account opening form and the

specimen       signatures          of    the     appellant.             It    is

submitted       that     in    the       report       dated    30.12.2002,

which      was     received              from      Forensic             Science

Laboratory, Govt. of NCT of Delhi with regard to

signatures of Gautam Dhar on the account opening

form    and     with     the       specimen       signatures        of       the

appellant, it has been mentioned in the report that

it has not been possible to express a definite

opinion    on     rest    of       the    items       on    the    basis      of

materials at hand.             It is submitted that although

the    said    report      was       very      much     with      the     I.O.,

another       report     was       called       for    from       the     Chief

Forensic Scientist & Director (FS) to seek further

opinion from GEQD, Shimla.                      It is submitted that

the    report     has     been      submitted          by   letter       dated
                                                                                10




29.10.2003 opining that the signatures of Gautam

Dhar in the account opening form tallies with the

specimen signatures of the appellant.                              He submits

that       the    subsequent       report,          which    was       sent    by

letter dated 29.10.2003 could not have been relied,

since       in    the    signature        of    Gautam       Dhar        in   the

account          opening     form       and         signatures         of      the

appellant there is no similarity.                           It is further

submitted that in any view of the matter, opinion

of     a    handwriting           expert       is     only        an     opinion

evidence, which is a weak nature of evidence and

could not have been relied in rejecting the claim

of the appellant that he has opened the account in

exercise         of   his    official      duty.            It    is     further

submitted         that      the     CMM        in     his        order      dated

03.12.2014 has held that forgery has been committed

by the appellant in sanctioning the account opening

form.       It is submitted that appellant has been held

guilty before even trial has proceeded.



4.     Learned        counsel     for     the       respondent         refuting

the     submission          of    the   appellant           contends          that
                                                                   11




appellant     cannot      claim   benefit     of    Section       197

Cr.P.C.,    since      the    allegations     against       him   are

allegations of forgery, which allegations cannot be

held to be performed in exercise of official duty.

It has been submitted that this Court has held in

Parkash Singh Badal and Another Vs. State of Punjab

and Others, (2007) 1 SCC 1 that the offence of

cheating    under       Section   420   or    for    that    matter

offences relatable to Sections 467, 468, 471 and

120B can by no stretch of imagination by their very

nature be regarded as having been committed by any

public servant while acting or purporting to act in

discharge of official duty.


5.   Learned counsel for the State submits that the

application       of    the   appellant      has    been    rightly

rejected by the CMM.


6.   We    have    considered     the     submissions       of    the

learned counsel for the parties and have perused

the records.

7.   The CMM in his order dated 03.12.2014 while

rejecting    the       application   of    the     appellant      for
                                                   12




discharge for want of sanction under Section 197

Cr.P.C. has relied on the judgment of this Court in

Parkash Singh Badal (supra).    With regard to the

appellant, following order was passed by CMM:-

     “Accused   S.K.   Mighlani    pressed   his
     application for discharge for want of
     sanction u/s 197 Cr.P.C. It was argued
     that he had opened account as per the
     procedure prescribed and since this act was
     done in discharge of his duties, the
     cognizance should not have been taken
     against him in absence of section 197
     Cr.P.C. From the FSL report, it is clear
     that accused S.K. Mighlani forged the
     signatures of Sh. Gautam Dhar on account
     opening form and moreover, the introducer
     Rajender Kr. is absconding. In view of
     this Court, an act of forgery done by
     public servant cannot be considered an
     act done in discharge of his official
     duties. In this regard, reliance can be
     placed on the decision given by the Apex
     Court in the case of Parkash Singh Badal &
     Another vs. State of Punjab & Others
     {(2007) 1 SCC 1}, wherein it was laid
     down that:

        "……..The offence of cheating under
        Section 420 or for that matter
        offences relatable to Sections 467,
        468, 471 and 120B can by no stretch
        of imagination by their very nature
        be   regarded    as   having   been
        committed by any public servant
        while acting or purporting to act
                                                          13




           in discharge of official duty. In
           such cases, official status only
           provides    an   opportunity  for
           commission of the offence”.

         Otherwise also, when accused pleads
     sanction in bar, the onus is on him to
     prove its necessity, but the accused has
     not satisfied this Court that Section 197
     Cr.P.C applies in this case because at
     the relevant time he was public servant
     not removable from his office saved by or
     with the sanction of the Government.”


8.   One   of   the   reasons   given   by   CMM   is   that

accused has not satisfied the Court that Section

197 Cr.P.C. applies in this case because at the

relevant time, he was public servant not removable

from his office saved by or with the sanction of

the Government. Section 197 Cr.P.C. provides:-

     “197. Prosecution of Judges and public
     servants.--(1) When any person who is or
     was a Judge or Magistrate or a public
     servant not removable from his office save
     by or with the sanction of the Government
     is accused of any offence alleged to have
     been committed by him while acting or
     purporting to act in the discharge of his
     official   duty,   no   Court   shall   take
     cognizance of such offence except with the
     previous   sanction   [save   as   otherwise
     provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act,
     2013]-
           (a) in the case of a person who is
           employed or, as the case may be,
                                                        14




           was at the time of commission of
           the alleged offence employed, in
           connection with the affairs of the
           Union, of the Central Government;

           (b) in the case of a person who is
           employed or, as the case may be,
           was at the time of commission of
           the alleged offence employed, in
           connection with the affairs of a
           State, of the State Government:

               Provided that where the alleged
           offence was committed by a person
           referred to in clause (b) during
           the period while a Proclamation
           issued under clause (1) of Article
           356 of the Constitution was in
           force in a State, clause (b) will
           apply as if for the expression
           “State     Government"    occurring
           therein, the expression “Central
           Government" were substituted.

           Explanation — For the removal of
           doubts it is hereby declared that
           no sanction shall be required in
           case of a public servant accused of
           any offence alleged to have been
           committed   under   section   166A,
           section 166B, section 354, section
           354A, section 354B, section 354C,
           section 354D, section 370, section
           375, section 376, section 376A,
           section   376AB,    section   376C,
           section   376D,    section   376DA,
           section 376DB or section 509 of the
           Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).”

                  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX”

9.   The   appellant   being   Manager   in   nationalized
                                                             15




bank whether can claim that before prosecuting him

sanction is required under Section 197.               The CMM

having come to opinion that appellant having not

satisfied that he was public servant not removable

from his office saved by or with the sanction of

the   Government,      Section    197   Cr.P.C.       was   not

attracted with regard to appellant.             After coming

to the above conclusions, it was not necessary for

the CMM to enter into the question as to whether

acts alleged against the appellant were discharged

in performance of official duty.

10. The    question    as    to   whether   a    manager    of

nationalized bank can claim benefit of Section 197

Cr.P.C. is not res integra.          This Court in K.CH.

Prasad    Vs.   Smt.   J.   Vanalatha   Devi    and    Others,

(1987) 2 SCC 52 had occasion to consider the same

very question in reference to one, who claimed to

be a public servant working in a nationalized bank.

The application filed by appellant in above case

questioning the maintainability of the prosecution

for want of sanction under Section 197 Cr.P.C. was
                                                                           16




rejected by Metropolitan Magistrate and revision to

the High Court also met the same fate.                          This Court

while dismissing the appeal held that even though a

person working in a nationalized bank is a public

servant still provisions of Section 197 are not

attracted       at    all.         In   paragraph         No.6     of    the

judgment, following has been held:-

      “6. It is very clear from this provision
      that this section is attracted only in
      cases where the public servant is such who
      is not removable from his office save by
      or with the sanction of the Government. It
      is not disputed that the appellant is not
      holding a post where he could not be
      removed from service except by or with the
      sanction of the government. In this view
      of the matter even if it is held that
      appellant is a public servant still
      provisions   of   Section  197   are   not
      attracted at all.”



11. The High Court in its impugned judgment has

not   adverted       to     the    above      aspect      and    has     only

confined    to       the    discussion         as   to    whether        acts

alleged    of    the       appellant         were   in    discharge        of

official    duty.           High    Court      also      had    relied     on

judgment    of       this    Court      in    Parkash      Singh        Badal

(supra).        We having come to the conclusion that
                                                                    17




appellant being not a public servant removable from

his office saved by or with the sanction of the

Government, sanction under Section 197 Cr.P.C. was

not    applicable.        The       appellant        cannot     claim

protection under Section 197 Cr.P.C.                 We are of the

view that examination of further question as to

whether appellant was acting or purporting to act

in    the   discharge    of   his    official        duty    was   not

required to be gone into, when he did not fulfill

conditions     for   applicability       of     Section       197(1)

Cr.P.C.

12. We further notice that CMM in his order dated

03.12.2014     as    extracted       above      made        following

observations:-

       “………………From the FSL report, it is clear
       that accused S.K. Mighlani forged the
       signatures of Sh. Gautam Dhar on account
       opening form and moreover, the introducer
       Rajender Kr. is absconding. In view of
       this Court, an act of forgery done by
       public servant cannot be considered an
       act done in discharge of his official
       duties………………………………”


13. At the stage, when Court is considering the

question     regarding    applicability         of    Section      197
 18




Cr.P.C., it was not necessary for the CMM to make

observation       that   appellant        has   done   an    act       of

forgery.     The FSL report was one of the evidences

collected by I.O. Its evidentiary value was still

to be gone into at the time of trial in the light

of the evidences, which may come before the trial

court.


14. Learned counsel for the appellant has relied

on judgment of this Court in S.P.S. Rathore Vs.

Central Bureau of Investigation and Another, (2017)

5 SCC 817, where this Court had held that although

the     opinion    of    a   handwriting        expert      is    also

relevant,    but    that     too    is    not   conclusive.       This

Court    further    held     that    expert      evidence        as    to

handwriting is only opinion evidence, which need to

be    corroborated       either      by       clear,   direct          or

circumstantial      evidence.            In   Paragraph     No.       47,

following has been laid down:-

        “47. With regard to the contention of the
        learned Senior Counsel for the appellant-
        accused that the signatures of Ms Ruchika
        on the memorandum were forged though she
        signed the same in front of Shri Anand
                                             19




Prakash, Shri S.C. Girhotra, Ms Aradhana
and Mrs Madhu Prakash and they have
admitted the same, we are of the opinion
that expert evidence as to handwriting is
only opinion evidence and it can never be
conclusive. Acting on the evidence of any
expert, it is usually to see if that
evidence is corroborated either by clear,
direct or circumstantial evidence. The
sole evidence of a handwriting expert is
not normally sufficient for recording a
definite finding about the writing being
of a certain person or not. A court is
competent to compare the disputed writing
of a person with others which are admitted
or proved to be his writings. It may not
be safe for a court to record a finding
about a person’s writing in a certain
document merely on the basis of expert
comparison, but a court can itself compare
the writings in order to appreciate
properly   the   other   evidence produced
before it in that regard. The opinion of a
handwriting expert is also relevant in
view of Section 45 of the Evidence Act,
but that too is not conclusive. It has
also been held by this Court in a catena
of cases that the sole evidence of a
handwriting    expert   is    not normally
sufficient   for    recording   a definite
finding about the writing being of a
certain person or not. It follows that it
is not essential that the handwriting
expert must be examined in a case to prove
or disprove the disputed writing. It is
opinion evidence and it can rarely, if
ever, take the place of substantive
evidence. Before acting on such evidence,
it is usual to see if it is corroborated
either by clear, direct evidence or by
circumstantial evidence.”
                                                                      20
15. The     observation       made   by     CMM    as        extracted

above, by giving opinion using the expression that

appellant has committed forgery ought to have been

avoided.      The Magistrate, at any stage prior to

final trial, is to avoid any conclusive opinion

regarding        any      evidence        collected             during

investigation.         It is true that evidence collected

in the investigation can be looked into to form an

opinion as to whether prima facie charge is made

out against an accused and what is the nature of

offence alleged against him.


16. Insofar      as    the    judgment    of      this       Court    in

Parkash     Singh     Badal   (supra)     relied        on    by     the

counsel    for   the    respondent    and      other     judgments,

i.e.,     Inspector      of    Police       and     Another          Vs.

Battenapatla Venkata Ratnam and Another, (20150 13

SCC 87 and Devinder Singh and Others Vs. State of

Punjab,     (2016)       12    SCC   87        reiterating           the

proposition, which was laid down in Parkash Singh

Badal (supra), there cannot be any quarrel to the

proposition.        In Parkash Singh Badal (supra), this
                                                          21




Court laid down following in paragraph No.15;-

      “15. It is their stand that where the
      public servant has ceased to be a public
      servant in one capacity by ceasing to hold
      office which is alleged to have been
      misused, the fortuitous circumstance of
      the accused being in another capacity
      holding   an   entirely   different   public
      office is irrelevant. It was categorically
      held in R.S. Nayak case, (1984) 2 SCC 183,
      in para 13 that “on analysis of the policy
      of   the   whole   section   the   authority
      competent to remove the public servant
      from the office alleged to have misused is
      alone     the     competent      sanctioning
      authority”.”



17. Other judgments relied on by the counsel for

the   respondent   lays   down   the   same   proposition.

Learned counsel for the appellant has also placed

reliance   on   N.K.   Ganguly   Vs.   Central   Bureau   of

Investigation, (2016) 2 SCC 143, where this Court

in paragraph No.35 laid down following:-

      “35. From a perusal of the case law
      referred to supra, it becomes clear that
      for the purpose of obtaining previous
      sanction from the appropriate Government
      under    Section  197   Cr.P.C.,   it   is
      imperative that the alleged offence is
      committed in discharge of official duty by
      the accused. It is also important for the
      Court to examine the allegations contained
      in    the   final   report   against   the
      appellants, to decide whether previous
                                                              22




       sanction is required to be obtained by the
       respondent from the appropriate Government
       before taking cognizance of the alleged
       offence by the learned Special Judge
       against the accused. In the instant case,
       since the allegations made against the
       appellants in the final report filed by
       the respondent that the alleged offences
       were committed by them in discharge of
       their official duty, therefore, it was
       essential for the learned Special Judge to
       correctly   decide   as   to whether   the
       previous   sanction    from  the   Central
       Government under Section 197 Cr.P.C. was
       required to be taken by the respondent,
       before taking cognizance and passing an
       order issuing summons to the appellants
       for their presence.”



18. No exception can be taken to the proposition

as laid down in the above case.             We having taken

the view that appellant being not removable by or

saved with the sanction of the Government was not

covered      by   Section   197   Cr.P.C.      There    was   no

necessity to consider any further as to whether

acts    of    the   appellant     complained    of     were   in

discharge of official duty or not.



19. We, thus, upheld the order of the CMM dated

03.12.2014 rejecting the application under Section
                                                                    23
197 Cr.P.C. on the ground that appellant was not

removable     by   his     office    saved     by    or    with    the

sanction of the Government.                 We, however, delete

the   following      observations     from     the    order      dated

03.12.2014:-


        “…………………………From the FSL report, it is
        clear that accused S.K. Mighlani forged
        the signatures of Sh. Gautam Dhar on
        account opening form and moreover, the
        introducer Rajender Kr. is absconding. In
        view of this Court, an act of forgery
        done   by   public   servant  cannot   be
        considered an act done in discharge of
        his official duties……………………”



20. Although,        we   uphold    the     order    of    the    High

Court    as   well    as    the     order    of     CMM,   but    the

observations made by CMM in its order, as noted

above, are deleted. The appeal is partly allowed to

the extent indicated above.


                          ...............................J.
                                 ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )



                          ...............................J.
                                   ( K.M.JOSEPH)
NEW DELHI,
APRIL 30, 2019.

