
Supreme Court of India
Jayamma vs State Of Karnataka on 31 March, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                       1





                                        
 
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1456 of 2005





      JAYAMMA                                          ..... APPELLANT



                                        VERSUS

       
      STATE OF KARNATAKA                           .....        RESPONDENT





                                      O R D E R

     1.      This appeal arises out of the following facts.  

     1.1     Latha, the deceased herein, about 19 years of age 

     at the time of her death, had been married with Murugesh 

     A1 about nine months prior to her death which happened 

     on the 6th  January, 1995.  The other two accused Jayamma 

     and   Nagendrappa   A2   and   A3,   are   the   sister   and   the 

     brother-in-law   of   the   first   accused.     After   the 

     marriage, the deceased and her husband had been residing 

     with   A2   and   A3   in   the   police   quarters   in   Bangalore   as 

     the third accused was, at that time, working as a Head 

     Constable   with   the   Bangalore   Police.     As   per   the 


                                     2





prosecution story, the accused subjected the deceased to 

mental   and   physical   cruelty   on   account   of   various 

demands   including   demands   for   dowry   and   that   the   first 

and   second   accused   would   call   her   a   prostitute   whereas 

the   third   accused   was   forcing   her   to   have   sexual 

intercourse   with   him   as   well.         This   behaviour   was 

conveyed by the deceased to her parents who consoled her 

and told her to live with her husband who had promised 

to conduct himself properly.   On the morning of the 6th 

January,   1995,   however,   while   the   first   accused   was 

still asleep, Jayamma the second accused started abusing 

the   deceased.     The   first   accused   thereupon   without 

speaking a word left the house whereas the third accused 

also left for his office a short while later.   At about 

9:00a.m. the deceased went into the bathroom to wash her 

face closely followed by Jayamma who was carrying a can 

of   kerosene   oil   and   after   sprinkling   the   same   on   her 

person set her on fire.  On hearing Latha's screams some 

of   the   persons   from   the   neighbourhood   came   there   and 

removed her to the hospital.  Amongst these persons were 

PW 5, PW 10, PW 11 and PW 13.  She was ultimately taken 

to   the   Victoria   Hospital   in   Bangalore   where   she   was 

examined by Dr. Trishula - PW 7 who recorded on the bed 

head   ticket   on   her   statement   that   she   had   made   an 

attempt   to   commit   suicide.     Information   with   regard   to 

the incident was also conveyed to the police station on 


                                      3





which PW 14, the Sub-Inspector, reached the Hospital and 

after   taking   an   endorsement   from   one   Dr.   Anil   Kumar 

recorded   Latha's   statement   between   2   and   2:30p.m.,   and 

on   its   basis   a   First   Information   Report   was   registered 

against the three accused for offences punishable under 

Section   307,   498A/34   of   the   IPC.     In   the   statement 

Exhibit P8, the deceased stated that she had been burnt 

by A2   with the association of the other accused. Latha 

subsequently   died   and   on   the   completion   of   the 

investigation,   the   three   accused   were   charged   for 

offences   punishable   under   Section   302/34,   498A   of   the 

IPC.   




1.2     During   the   course   of   the   trial,   the   prosecution 

relied   on   the   evidence   of   the   aforementioned   witnesses 

as   also   the   post   mortem   report   which   indicated   90   per 

cent   burn   injuries   on   the   dead   body.     The   trial   court 

noted   that   the   basic   issue   for   deliberation   was   as   to 

whether   the   death   was   suicidal   or   homicidal   in   nature. 

The trial court relying on the evidence of PWs 5, 7, 10, 

11   and   13   observed   that   these   witnesses   had   clearly 

stated that a dying declaration had been made to them by 

the   deceased   and   this   statement   indicated   a   case   of 

suicide.     In   this   background,   the   statement   Exhibit   P8 

and   the   evidence   of   PW   14   was   rejected   by   the   trial 

court.     The   accused   were,   accordingly,   acquitted.     The 


                                      4





matter   was   thereafter   taken   in   appeal   by   the   State   of 

Karnataka.     The   High   Court   has,   by   the   impugned 

judgment,   allowed   the   appeal   qua   A2   Jayamma   insofar   as 

the charge of murder is concerned, but has also allowed 

the   appeal   qua   all   three   accused   with   respect   to   the 

charge under Section 498A of the IPC.  Jayamma appellant 

was,   accordingly,   sentenced   to   imprisonment   for   life 

under   Section   302   but   no   separate   sentence   was   awarded 

to her under Section 498A of the IPC  whereas the other 

two accused were released on probation.   It is in this 

situation that the appeal is before us at the instance 

of Jayamma alone.


2.      We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. 

It may be seen that the High Court has given preference 

to the Statement Exhibit P8 and the oral evidence of PW 

14   who   had   recorded   the   statement   and   also   on   the4 

evidence   of   PW   1,   the   mother   of   the   deceased   that   the 

story   given   in   P8   was   in   fact   the   correct   one.     We, 

however,   find   that   there   is   no   discussion   whatsover   by 

the   High   Court   as   to   the   veracity   or   otherwise   of   the 

evidence of Pws 5, 10, 11 and 13.  We have gone through 

the evidence of these four witnesses very carefully and 

it reveals that several statements had been made by them 

in   the   course   of   their   evidence   that   the   deceased   had 

stated   that   she   had   burnt   herself   in   an   attempt   to 


                                       5





commit suicide.   Curiously, the High Court has not even 

alluded     to   these   statements.     Likewise,   we   find   that 

the   evidence   of   PW   7   Dr.   Trishul   fully   supports   the 

theory of suicide.  We see, therefore, that the evidence 

of   Pws   5,   10,   11   and   13   is   supported   by   the   medical 

record that the deceased had burnt herself in an attempt 

to commit suicide.


3.      We have also gone through the evidence of PW 1 who 

could be said have to some extent supported the theory 

of   murder.     We   find   that   except   for   the   fact   that   she 

stated   that   her   daughter   was   being   ill-treated   even   by 

appellant   Jayamma     she   has   not   said   a   word   about   any 

dying   declaration   being   made   to   her   or   as   to     how   the 

deceased   had   suffered   the   injuries     though   as   per   her 

own   showing,   she   had   reached   the   hospital   at   about 

9:30a.m..     We   are,   therefore,   left   with   the   solitary 

statement of PW 14 and the Report Exhibit P8.   In this 

connection,   it   must   be   noted   that   Dr.   Anil   Kumar     who 

had given the endorsement that the deceased had been fit 

to   make   a   statement   did   not   come   to   give   evidence 

despite   being   served   twice   over.     We   are   unable   to 

fathom as to why coercive steps were not taken by Court 

as his evidence would have been relevant in proving the 

condition of the deceased at the time when her statement 

had been recorded at 2:30p.m., on the 6th  January, 1995. 


                                     6





In the light of the fact that the trial court had on a 

consideration   of   the   evidence   recorded   an   acquittal   in 

favour of the accused and taken a view which was clearly 

possible   on   the   evidence,   we   feel   that   the   High   Court 

should not have interfered in this matter.




4.     We,   accordingly,   allow   the   appeal   insofar   as   the 

conviction of Jayamma   under Section 302 of the IPC is 

concerned but dismiss the appeal qua Section 498A of the 

IPC.  We also direct that the appellant will undergo six 

months   imprisonment   for   the   offence   under   Section   498A 

and also pay a fine of `5,000/- and in default of payment 

of fine to undergo three months rigorous imprisonment.





                               ..............................J
                               [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                               ..............................J
                               [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

NEW DELHI
MARCH 31, 2011.



