
Supreme Court of India
Lourembam Deben Singh vs Union Of India on 12 November, 2018Author: M B Lokur
                                                                                  REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                                CRL.M.P. NO. 125554 OF 2018
                                                             IN
                                       WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 205 OF 2018


                              Lourembam Deben Singh & Ors.                     .… Petitioners
                                                           versus
                              Union of India & Ors. etc.                      …. Respondents
                                                            AND
                                                CRL.M.P. NO. 125550 OF 2018
                                                             IN
                                       WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 206 OF 2018

                         Raj Kumar Brojen & Ors.                                ….Petitioners

                                                           versus

                         Union of India & Ors.                                  …Respondents

                                                           WITH
                                   WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NOS. 205 & 206 OF 2018


                                                    JUDGMENT

                         Madan B. Lokur, J.
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2018.11.12
16:28:17 IST
                         1.       These writ petitions have been filed by some police personnel of
Reason:


                         Manipur Police under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. We have

             Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.        Page 1 of 20
      been given to understand that these petitions have the support of a few

      hundred officers from the Indian Army, the paramilitary forces and

      Manipur Police. These petitions are a fall-out of the decision rendered by

      us in Extra-Judicial Execution Victim Families Association v. Union of

      India1 and subsequent orders passed therein by way of a continuing

      mandamus. The prayer in the writ petitions is for an appropriate writ,

      order or direction for quashing certain oral observations said to have been

      made by us which, according to the petitioners, violate their rights

      guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution. Pending a decision in the

      writ petitions, it is prayed that we should not proceed with the continuing

      mandamus in the case.

      2.     Interlocutory applications have also been moved in these writ

      petitions specifically for a direction that we should recuse from hearing

      these writ petitions which should be placed for consideration before

      another Bench of this Court.

      3.     Submissions were made before us in the interlocutory applications

      for recusal but we find no merit in these applications and therefore

      dismiss them.

      The background

      4.     On 8th July, 2016 we delivered judgement in Extra-Judicial


1 (2016) 14 SCC 536

 Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 2 of 20
     Execution Victim Families Association. v. Union of India. We noted the

     allegations made in the writ petition in the following words:

                  “The allegations made in the writ petition concern what are
                  described as fake encounters or extra-judicial executions said to
                  have been carried out by Manipur Police and the Armed Forces of
                  the Union, including the Army. According to the police and
                  security forces, the encounters are genuine and the victims were
                  militants or terrorists or insurgents killed in counter-insurgency or
                  anti-terrorist operations. Whether the allegations are completely
                  or partially true or are entirely rubbish and whether the encounter
                  is genuine or not is yet to be determined, but in any case there is a
                  need to know the truth.

                  The right to know the truth has gained increasing importance
                  over the years. This right was articulated by the United Nations
                  High Commissioner for Human Rights in the Sixty-second
                  Session of the Human Rights Commission. In a study on the right
                  to the truth, it was stated in Para 8 that though the right had its
                  origins in enforced disappearances, it has gradually extended to
                  include extra-judicial executions. This paragraph reads as
                  follows:

                         “With the emergence of the practice of enforced
                         disappearances in the 1970s, the concept of the right to the
                         truth became the object of increasing attention from
                         international and regional human rights bodies and special
                         procedures mandate-holders. In particular, the ad hoc
                         working group on human rights in Chile, the Working
                         Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
                         (WGEID) and the Inter-American Commission on Human
                         Rights (IACHR) developed an important doctrine on this
                         right with regard to the crime of enforced disappearances.
                         These mechanisms initially based the legal source for this
                         right upon Articles 32 and 33 of the Additional Protocol to
                         the Geneva Conventions of 12-8-1949. Commentators
                         have taken the same approach. However, although this
                         right was initially referred to solely within the context of
                         enforced disappearances, it has been gradually extended to
                         other serious human rights violations, such as extra-
                         judicial executions and torture. The Human Rights
                         Committee has urged a State party to the International
                         Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to guarantee that
                         the victims of human rights violations know the truth with

Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.      Page 3 of 20
                          respect to the acts committed and know who the
                          perpetrators of such acts were.” [ Promotion and
                          Protection of Human Rights: Study on the right to the
                          truth. Report of the Office of the United Nations High
                          Commissioner for Human Rights; 8-2-2006. Commission
                          on Human Rights, Sixty-second Session, Item 17 of the
                          provisional agenda.]

                   It is necessary to know the truth so that the law is tempered with
                   justice. The exercise for knowing the truth mandates ascertaining
                   whether fake encounters or extra-judicial executions have taken
                   place and if so, who are the perpetrators of the human rights
                   violations and how can the next of kin be commiserated with and
                   what further steps ought to be taken, if any.”


     5.    While concluding the decision, we observed that accurate and

     complete information had not been made available in respect of each of

     the cases that the Extra-Judicial Execution Victim Families Association or

     EEVFAM had complained about. Accordingly, we observed and directed

     as follows:

                   “Unfortunately, we have not been given accurate and complete
                   information about each of the 1528 cases that the petitioners have
                   complained about. Therefore, there is a need to obtain and collate
                   this information before any final directions can be given. The
                   learned amicus has told us that there are 15 cases out of 62 in
                   which it has been held by the Justice Hegde Commission or by
                   the judicial inquiries conducted at the instance of the Gauhati
                   High Court that the encounters were faked. On the other hand,
                   NHRC has informed us that there are 31 cases out of 62 in which
                   it has been concluded that the encounters were not genuine and
                   compensation awarded to the next of kin of the victims or the
                   award of compensation is pending.

                   Therefore, as a first step, we direct:
                   Of the 62 cases that the petitioners have documented, their
                   representative and the learned amicus will prepare a simple
                   tabular statement indicating whether in each case a judicial

Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.     Page 4 of 20
                     enquiry or an inquiry by NHRC or an inquiry under the
                     Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 has been held and the result of
                     the inquiry and whether any first information report or complaint
                     or petition has been filed by the next of kin of the deceased. We
                     request NHRC to render assistance to the learned amicus in this
                     regard. We make it clear that since a magisterial enquiry is not a
                     judicial inquiry and, as mentioned above, it is not possible to
                     attach any importance to the magisterial enquiries, the tabular
                     statement will not include magisterial enquiries.

                     The representative of the petitioners and the learned amicus will
                     revisit the remaining cases (1528 minus 62) and carry out an
                     identical exercise as above. This exercise is required to be
                     conducted for eliminating those cases in which there is no
                     information about the identity of the victim or the place of
                     occurrence or any other relevant detail and then present an
                     accurate and faithful chart of cases in a simple tabular form.”

       6.     Subsequently, on 14th July, 20172 we took up the matter again, inter

       alia, for ascertaining whether the first step that we had directed in our

       judgement and order of 8th July, 2016 had been acted upon. While

       considering this, we recorded what could be described as the background

       of the case in the following words:

                     “In the present petitions, the allegation was that 1528 persons had
                     been killed in fake encounters by police personnel and personnel
                     in uniform of the armed forces of the Union. By our judgment
                     and order dated 8-7-2016 [Extra Judicial Execution Victim
                     Families Assn. v. Union of India, (2016) 14 SCC 536: (2016) 14
                     SCC 578 (2)] we respectfully followed the view laid down by a
                     Constitution Bench of this Court in Naga People's Movement of
                     Human Rights v. Union of India [Naga People's Movement of
                     Human Rights v. Union of India, (1998) 2 SCC 109]. The
                     Constitution Bench held that an allegation of use of excessive
                     force or retaliatory force by uniformed personnel resulting in
                     the death of any person necessitates a thorough enquiry into
                     the incident. We were of the opinion that even the “Dos and
                     Don'ts” and the “Ten Commandments” of the Chief of Army
2 Extra Judicial Execution Victim Families Assn. v. Union of India, (2017) 8 SCC 417



 Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.          Page 5 of 20
                  Staff believe in this ethos and accept this principle. However,
                  after considering the submissions at law, we found that the
                  documentation was inadequate to immediately order any inquiry
                  into the allegations made by the petitioners and therefore directed
                  them to complete the documentation indicating whether the
                  allegations were based on any judicial enquiry or an enquiry
                  conducted by the National Human Rights Commission or an
                  enquiry conducted under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952.
                  A tabular statement has since been filed by the learned counsel
                  for the petitioners and this statement has been accepted by the
                  learned Amicus Curiae and no objection was raised by the Union
                  of India or by the State of Manipur. We therefore proceed on the
                  basis of the tabular statement before us.

                  The petitioners have been able to gather information with regard
                  to 655 deaths out of 1528 alleged in the writ petitions. The break-
                  up is as follows:

       Sl. No.                        Particulars                          No. of cases
          1.     Commissions of Inquiry cases                                   35
          2.     Judicial inquiry and High Court cases                          37
          3.     NHRC cases                                                     23
          4.     Cases with written complaint                                 170
          5.     Cases with oral complaint                                      78
          6.     Cases with eyewitnesses                                      134
          7.     Family claimed cases                                         178
                 Total number                                                  655

                  We have perused the tabular statement given with regard to cases
                  with written complaints, oral complaints and eyewitness accounts
                  as well as family claimed cases but find that apart from a simple
                  allegation being made, no substantive steps appear to have been
                  taken by either lodging a first information report (FIR) or by
                  filing a writ petition in the High Court concerned or making a
                  complaint to the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC).
                  The allegations being very general in nature, we do not think it
                  appropriate to pass any direction for the time being in regard to
                  the cases concerning these written complaints, oral complaints,
                  cases with eyewitness accounts and family claimed cases. It is not
                  that every single allegation must necessarily be inquired into. It
                  must be remembered that we are not dealing with individual
                  cases but a systemic or institutional response relating to
                  constitutional criminal law.” (Emphasis supplied by us)



Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.     Page 6 of 20
     7.    Thereafter, having considered the case law and submissions made

     by the learned Amicus and learned counsel for the parties including the

     learned Attorney General, we held as follows:

                  “Having considered the issues in their entirety, we are of the
                  opinion that it would be appropriate if the Central Bureau of
                  Investigation (or CBI) is required to look into these fake
                  encounters or use of excessive or retaliatory force. Accordingly,
                  the Director of CBI is directed to nominate a group of five
                  officers to go through the records of the cases mentioned in the
                  three tables given above, lodge necessary FIRs and to complete
                  the investigations into the same by 31-12-2017 and prepare
                  charge-sheets, wherever necessary. The entire groundwork has
                  already been done either by the Commissions of Inquiry or by a
                  Judicial Inquiry or by the Gauhati or Manipur High Court or by
                  NHRC. We leave it to the Special Investigation Team to utilise
                  the material already gathered, in accordance with law. We expect
                  the State of Manipur to extend full cooperation and assistance to
                  the Special Investigation Team. We also expect the Union of
                  India to render full assistance to the Special Investigation Team to
                  complete the investigation at the earliest without any unnecessary
                  hindrances or obstacles. The Director of CBI will nominate the
                  team and inform us of its composition within two weeks.”


     8.    Notwithstanding the law laid down by a Constitution Bench of this

     Court in Naga People’s Movement of Human Rights v. Union of India

     and the explicit directions given by this Court in Extra-Judicial

     Execution Victim Families Association v. Union of India [EEVFAM]

     the CBI was seemingly following up rather casually and taking its own

     time to complete investigations, which were required to be completed by

     31st December, 2017 and prepare charge-sheets/final reports, wherever

     necessary.


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.      Page 7 of 20
     9.    In our order of 8th January, 2018, we noted that on 23rd November,

     2017 the CBI had asked for increasing the strength of the Special

     Investigation Team (SIT) and we acceded to that request. We noted that it

     appeared to us that the matter was not being taken up by the CBI and the

     SIT with the seriousness that it deserves.

     10.   Thereafter the EEVFAM case was adjourned a couple of times and

     on 27th July 2018 we observed that no final report had been filed but

     approval was granted in respect of one of them on 24 th July, 2018 and in

     respect of another, approval was granted on 26 th July, 2018. Two other

     cases were pending for approval. We also observed that the investigations

     were taking an unduly long time and that we were not satisfied with the

     progress made by the CBI so far. Consequently, we required the Director

     of the CBI to let us know the steps that must be taken to ensure that the

     investigations are completed early and final reports are filed as

     expeditiously as possible. For this purpose, we required the personal

     appearance of the Director of the CBI on 30th July, 2018.

     11.   On 30th July, 2018 the Director of the CBI appeared in Court. He

     informed us that two charge-sheets had been filed in which there were 14

     accused persons and all of them had been charged with an offence

     punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section

     120-B of the Indian Penal Code (murder and criminal conspiracy). It was


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 8 of 20
     also pointed out that these accused have also been charged with an

     offence punishable under Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code (causing

     disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to

     screen offender). He also informed us that some more final

     reports/charge-sheets would be filed making a total of seven final

     reports/charge-sheets. On 30th July, 2018 we also recorded the submission

     of learned counsel for EEVFAM that since the accused persons have been

     charged with offences punishable as above, they would normally be

     arrested and that where investigations are going on in respect of similar

     offences, custodial interrogation would be necessary. We recorded the

     submission but left it entirely to the discretion of the Director of the CBI

     and the SIT to take a call on whether arrests should be made and whether

     custodial interrogation should be carried out. We may mention that we

     have not been informed whether and if, as of now, any arrests have been

     made and whether and if any custodial interrogation has been carried out.

     The present applications

     12.   It is in the above background that during the continuing mandamus

     hearing of the petition filed by EEVFAM on 30th July, 2018 certain oral

     observations were made and attributed to us. We need not go into the

     correctness of the text or otherwise of the observations made or into the

     context in which they were made. The fact of the matter is that the


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 9 of 20
     observations said to have been made were widely reported in the press

     with varying degrees of accuracy and completeness. The observations led

     to the filing of the present two writ petitions. The prayer made in both the

     writ petitions is identical. We are not, for the present, concerned with the

     maintainability or otherwise of the writ petitions or the grant of final

     relief to the petitioners herein. What we are concerned with are the

     applications for directions moved in both the writ petitions. The prayer

     made in these applications reads as follows:

                  “direct that the Hon’ble Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice
                  Madan B. Lokur and Hon’ble Mr Justice Uday Umesh Lalit
                  hearing of the present writ petition recuse itself and that the writ
                  petition be placed for hearing by another Bench of this Hon’ble
                  Court in accordance with law.”


     13.   In the applications, the petitioners make a reference to various

     newspaper reports and it is submitted that the reported observations

     coming from the highest court of the country have created a real

     apprehension in the mind of the petitioners about the impartial manner in

     which EEVFAM is being heard by this Court. It is further submitted that

     hearing that case by another Bench of this Court is essential to subserve

     the cause of justice but the prayer should not be construed as casting

     aspersions on the Bench. It is further submitted and reiterated that there is

     a real apprehension in the mind of the applicants about the manner in

     which the Bench is proceeding with the case and it is submitted that the


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.      Page 10 of 20
         apprehension is not based on any ipse dixit but is based on reports of the

         proceedings held on 30th July, 2018 widely reported in the print and

         electronic media, which clearly shows that the ‘guilt’ of each and every

         one of the applicants/petitioners has been prejudged, though only a police

         report under Section 173(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 has

         been filed. The applicants/petitioners have referred to a few

         decisions/case laws in the application and their learned counsel, during

         the course of hearing of the application, referred to a few other decisions.

         All this was supplemented by written submissions. The principal

         decisions relied on were: (i) Manoj Narula v. Union of India3, (ii)

         Usmangani Adambhai Vahora v. State of Gujarat 4, (iii) Captain

         Amarinder Singh v. Prakash Singh Badal 5 and (iv) Supreme Court

         Advocates-on-Record Association v. Union of India (Recusal Matter). 6

         Some decisions of foreign jurisdictions have also been referred to and

         relied on.

         Submissions

         14.       The learned Attorney General appearing on behalf of the Union of

         India supported the prayer made in the applications but did not file any

         written submissions. It was orally submitted by the learned Attorney

         General that the observations made by this Court had a demoralising
3   (2014)   9   SCC   1
4   (2016)   3   SCC   370
5   (2009)   6   SCC   260
6   (2016)   5   SCC   808

    Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 11 of 20
     effect on the Indian Army, the paramilitary forces and the Manipur Police

     or in any event, it had affected the morale of these forces in their fight

     against insurgency.

     15.   In response to these submissions, it was contended by learned

     counsel appearing on behalf of EEVFAM that the allegations made by the

     petitioners were reckless and without reading the articles in the

     newspapers. It was also submitted that the allegations hurled at the Court

     were of a serious nature and ought to have been made after a careful

     study and cross-checking the facts from those who were present in court,

     but nothing of that sort seems to have been done in the present case. The

     learned counsel then placed reliance upon a few decisions of this Court

     on the subject of recusal of judges from a case. Apart from giving his

     interpretation to the decisions cited by learned counsel for the

     applicants/petitioners, it was submitted by learned counsel for EEVFAM

     that the attempt of the applicants/petitioners was to put pressure on this

     Court to keep its hands off the case.

     16.   Learned Amicus submitted that the applications filed by the

     applicants/petitioners were mala fide and amounted to gross forum

     shopping. It was submitted that the applications as well as the writ

     petitions be dismissed with exemplary costs. It was submitted that even

     though the learned Attorney General supported the prayer for recusal, he


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 12 of 20
     clarified that none of the parties were questioning the integrity or fairness

     in the investigations carried out by the SIT appointed by the Director of

     the CBI on the directions of this Court. She further submitted that the

     contentions urged on behalf of the petitioners were based on a selective

     reading of the news reports and even assuming what was attributed to this

     Court was correct, the observations could not hamper or influence the

     trial of the officers who are charge-sheeted. She pointed out that on the

     issue of arrest of the accused persons, this Court had explicitly left the

     matter to the discretion of the Director of the CBI and the SIT. She

     submitted that learned counsel for the petitioners had a duty as an officer

     of the court to refrain from making allegations of bias on flimsy grounds

     particularly in view of the order passed on 30 th July, 2018. Learned

     Amicus referred to certain decisions on the subject of recusal and

     submitted that given the peculiar circumstances of the case, monitoring

     the investigation by the CBI or the SIT was necessary. Finally, it was

     submitted that if the present applications are allowed, then in all cases

     where judges of this Court make enquiries which are probing or even

     inconvenient to one of the parties in the matter, they could be compelled

     to recuse themselves. Learned Amicus drew attention to R.K. Anand v.

     Registrar, Delhi High Court.7




     7 (2009) 8 SCC 106

Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 13 of 20
     17.      The effective prayer of the applicants/petitioners is that in view of

     the observations said to have been made by this Court on 30 th July, 2018

     the investigations should be monitored by another set of judges of this

     Court.     Our recusal is sought on the ground that as a result of the

     observations said to have been made, the applicants/petitioners have a

     real apprehension that either the investigations or the trial (if any) would

     be tainted to their prejudice.

     18.      Having heard the learned Attorney General, learned counsel and

     learned Amicus and having gone through the written submissions filed,

     we are of the view that the apprehension of the applicants/petitioners that

     justice will not be done to them is misplaced if not unfounded.

     Decision

     19.      The decisions referred to and relied upon have been fully

     considered by us. The discussion on recusal has been exhaustively dealt

     with in the cited decisions and there is nothing to add to it. But we find a

     crucial distinguishing feature in the case of EEVFAM and the cited cases.

     20.      It is undeniable that the EEVFAM case pertains to allegations of

     serious violations of the human rights of persons described as insurgents.

     A large number of such persons were killed in operations carried out by

     the Army, the paramilitary forces and the Manipur Police. Whether the

     death/killing of such persons was justified or not is a matter of

Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.    Page 14 of 20
     investigation by the SIT. It is nobody’s case that the CBI or the SIT was

     not conducting fair investigations into the allegations. On the contrary,

     the learned Attorney General submitted that the integrity or fairness of the

     investigations were not in question. As mentioned above, no one disputed

     this.

     21.     The distinguishing feature is this: The substantive legal and factual

     issues raised in EEVFAM have already been decided by us and what

     remains is the continuing mandamus requiring implementation of the

     orders of the Court. During the hearing of EEVFAM and even after the

     decision was rendered on substantive legal and factual issues, no

     allegation of any bias of any sort or any apprehension that justice will not

     be done or that anybody would be treated unfairly was made. It is only at

     the continuing mandamus stage that the controversy is raised and that too

     on the basis of certain observations said to have been made by this Court.

     22.     What is pending at the continuing mandamus stage is the

     implementation of the orders of the court which necessitate a fair

     investigation by the CBI and the SIT constituted by the Director of the

     CBI. There is no allegation of any nature with respect to the impartiality

     and integrity of the SIT. Indeed, the learned Attorney General made it

     clear that no one was disputing the capability, expertise and fairness of

     the CBI and the investigations carried out by the SIT.


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 15 of 20
     23.   Even during the hearing of the applications and in the written

     submissions, no doubt has been cast on the integrity and fairness of the

     investigations. In any event, we make it clear that the law of the land is

     quite explicit that no one, and that means no one, can interfere in the

     investigations being carried out by the Investigating Officer or an

     Investigating Team.    This law is well settled and does not need any re-

     consideration. The purpose of a continuing mandamus is only to ensure

     that there is no interference during the course of investigations from

     anybody, whether due to political pressure or executive pressure or any

     other pressure (including, as it seems, ‘judicial pressure’) that could

     compromise the investigations. It is only when the Investigating Officer

     or the Investigating Team is given a free hand that the investigations will

     be meaningful, fair and with integrity.

     24.   Yet another purpose of a continuing mandamus is to ensure that the

     Investigating Officer or the Investigating Team (as the case may be) does

     not deviate from the natural course of investigations for whatever reason,

     either due to pressure or due to a misdirection or some other extraneous

     reason. This is the limited role of a Constitutional Court in monitoring

     investigations in a continuing mandamus.

     25.   Consequently, the apprehension that the observations said to have

     been made by this Court on 30 th July, 2018 would influence the SIT is


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 16 of 20
     erroneous.

     26.   It is equally clear that once the judicial process has begun with the

     filing of the final report or charge sheet as the case may be, the concerned

     court is in complete charge and full control of the proceedings. No one,

     and that again means no one, can interfere in the course of judicial

     proceedings otherwise it would amount to interference in the due course

     of justice or the administration of justice. It is for this reason that when

     investigations are complete and a final report or charge sheet is filed, the

     Constitutional Court keeps its hands off any further progress in the

     matter. We are fortunate to have an independent judiciary and as far as the

     EEVFAM case is concerned there has been no allegation of any kind that

     any Trial Judge dealing with the case has shown a lack of independence.

     Interference in the due course of justice or the administration of justice

     would lead to adverse consequences. Therefore, it is inappropriate for the

     applicants/petitioners to harbour any apprehension that the Trial Judge(s)

     would be influenced by the observations said to have been made by this

     Court on 30th July, 2018. The applicants/petitioners are indirectly, perhaps

     unwittingly, questioning the fairness and independence of the judiciary.

     27.   The upshot of this discussion is that there can be no interference in

     investigations and the courts cannot brook any interference in the judicial

     process. An exception may occur as we have noticed above, when there


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 17 of 20
     is an unjustified deviation from the natural course of investigations or

     illegal interference in the judicial process. Such a situation would be rare

     and would have to be dealt with on a case by case basis and it is to pre-

     empt this that the Constitutional Courts monitor investigations on

     extraordinary occasions. Consequently, the apprehension expressed by

     the applicants/petitioners that due to the observations said to have been

     made by this Court there would be interference in the investigations by

     the SIT all interference in the due judicial process by the courses not real

     or justified.

     28.    The decisions cited before us by learned counsel and learned

     Amicus do not deal with or concern the situation confronting us.

     29.    A few other contentions have been urged before us by learned

     counsel for the applicants/petitioners. It is submitted that the observations

     said to have been made by this Court can impact on the decisions to be

     taken by the SIT. We do not find any basis for any such apprehension.

     The SIT is independent and so far, no allegation of unfairness has been

     made against the functioning of the SIT. Observations made by this Court

     or any court for that matter cannot impact on the investigations as long as

     they are conducted by professionals and we have no doubt that the SIT

     does consist of professionals who will not be swayed by any observations

     made by this Court during the continuing mandamus process.


Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 18 of 20
     30.   It was also submitted and this submission was supported by the

     learned Attorney General that the Indian Army, the paramilitary forces

     and the Manipur Police have been demoralised by the observations made

     by this Court. This is a rather overbroad submission. In any event, in our

     opinion, it should be clear to everyone that officers and personnel of the

     Indian Army, paramilitary forces and the State Police are made of much

     sterner stuff than is sought to be projected and they can hardly be

     demoralised by observations said to have been made by anybody.            It is

     unfortunate that a bogey of demoralization of the Indian Army,

     paramilitary forces and the State Police is being raised. We are unable to

     comprehend the reason for this. As mentioned earlier, the Indian Army,

     paramilitary forces and the Manipur Police are made of sterner stuff and

     are disciplined forces strong enough to take everything in their stride. To

     contend that some observations said to have been made by this Court

     have demoralized the Indian Army, the paramilitary forces and the

     Manipur Police is suggestive of a weakness in them. Be that as it may,

     this is really stretching the argument to the vanishing point.

     31.   That apart, there is no material to support the theory of the Indian

     Army, paramilitary forces and the Manipur Police being demoralised. It is

     only a submission made for some unfathomable reason.




Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 19 of 20
     32.   The continuing mandamus must go on and the independence and

     integrity of the SIT and the judges dealing with the final reports/charge-

     sheets must be maintained. Therefore, even though there is no reason for

     the applicants/petitioners to entertain any doubt that the SIT or the

     judiciary would be influenced by the observations said to have been made

     by this Court, to remove any vestige of doubt, we make it absolutely clear

     that any observations made or said to have been made on 30 th July, 2018

     during the implementation of the orders of this Court through a

     continuing mandamus are not intended to and should not in any manner

     be construed as compromising the independence, integrity and fairness of

     the SIT and the concerned judges. Institutional integrity of the CBI and

     the judiciary is positively required to be maintained.

     33.   We see no merit in these applications and they are accordingly

     dismissed. The writ petitions be listed for preliminary hearing on

     26th November, 2018 at 2 PM.



                                                         ...……………………J
                                                           (Madan B. Lokur)



                                                         ...…………………....J
     New Delhi;                                             (Uday Umesh Lalit)
     November 12, 2018




Crl. MP No.125554/2018 IN W.P. (Crl.) No. 205/2018 etc. etc.   Page 20 of 20

