
Supreme Court of India
Mohan, Yashin, Duli Chand, Balbir ... vs State Of Rajasthan on 15 January, 1997Author: G.N.Ray.
Bench: G.N. Ray, Faizan Uddin
           PETITIONER:
MOHAN, YASHIN, DULI CHAND, BALBIR SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF RAJASTHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	15/01/1997

BENCH:
G.N. RAY, FAIZAN UDDIN




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
			    WITH
	      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 191 OF 1987
			    WITH
	       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.192 OF 1987
			    WITH
	       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.450 OF 1982
		      J U D G M E N T
G.N.RAY. J.
     These appeals  arise out  of the  common Judgment dated
October 11.  1985 passed  by the  High Court of Rajasthan at
Jodhpur	 in  D.B.  Criminal  Appeal  No.788  of	 1974.	D.B.
Criminal Appeal	 No.89	of  1973  assailing  the  Judgmental
Sessions Judge.	 Court by  which the appellant Balbir singh.
Yashin, Duli  Chand and	 Mohan were convicted by the learned
Additional Sessions  Judge under  Section 147. 302 read with
Section 34 I.P.C. and each of the said accused was sentenced
it buffer one year's rigorous imprisonment under Section 147
and impressment	 for life  under Section  302.	The  accused
mohan was  further convicted  under Section  404  I.P.C	 and
sentenced to suffer two years rigorous imprisonment and also
a fine	of Rs.500/-.  In default  of payment of fine further
riggers imprisonment  for six months. the learned Additional
Sessions  Judge	  directed  that  the  sentences  would	 run
concurrently.
     Against the  said Judgment. there separate appeals were
preferred by  the convicted  accused before  the high  Court
being D.B.  Criminal Appeal  No.785 of	1974  D.B.  Criminal
Appeal No.64  of 1975  and D.B.	 Criminal Appeal  No. 817 of
1975. all  the said  appeals were  cussed of  by the  common
Judgment sine  Impugned in  these appeals  by dismissing the
said appeals  and maintaining  the conviction  and sentences
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge.
     On February  24, 1974,  Pw. 1  Surja Ram the brother of
the  deceased	Ram  lacked   F.I.R.  with  Police  Station.
Sardarsanar, to	 the effect  that at  about  10.00  A.M.  on
February 24,  1974 their  was a rumor in the village Mitasar
that a	dead body was living in the Tail located outside the
village Mitasar.  According to Surja Ram. P.W.S. Musmat Mail
had identified	the dead  body as  then of her husband Ramu.
When Surja  Ram caused annuity. one told that previous night
at about  10 to	 10.50 the  accused Mohan and another person
not know to her had come to her hours. she had served tea to
those persons and the said persons had told her husband that
a truck	 of sugar  was standing	 near the  Tail and Ramu had
taken money with him to purchase the supra. Her husband Ramu
went with  the said  persons after taking Rs.200/- with him.
Thereafter. Ramu  did not  return to his house but was found
to be dead in the Tail on February 24. 1974.
     On the  basis of  the said F.I.R.. a case under Section
302 was	 registered by	the police and on February 28. 1974.
The police  arrested  the  accused  Balmukand.	Mohan.	Duli
Chand. Yashin  and Balbir Singh . It may be stated here that
the accused  Balmukand later  on  became  the  approver	 and
deposed as  PW.12. According  to the  prosecution  case.  on
March 3. 1974. at the instance of accused Yashin. Police had
recovered a  lathe stated to have been used in the crime and
on the	very same  day at  the instance	 of  other  accused.
Police had  recovered a	 day (sharo edged weapon) alleged to
have been  used in committing the crime. On March 4, 1974. a
test identification  parade was	 held and  Muscat  Mali	 had
identified the	accused Balbir	Singh. Balmukand Intended to
become accorder	 in the	 case and his statement was recorded
under Section  161 Criminal  Procedure Code and on March 13.
1974 the  statement of	Balmukand was recorded under Section
164 Criminal  Procedure Code  by the  concerned	 Magistrate.
Ultimately. on	March 29.  1974 Balmukand  was	collared  as
approver in the case.
     All the  said four	 accused faced	the trial before the
learned Additional  Sessions Judge under Section 147. 302/3.
404 I.P.C.  PW.12 Balmukand.  the add  rover. has deposed to
the effect  that in  the month of January. 1974. about 20 to
25 day	before 20th  February,	1974.  the  said  Balmukand.
Mohan. Duli  Chand. Yashin  along with	three other persons.
namely, Pranav	Ranjan. Kamal  Bhomik  and  Raju  Soni.	 had
assembled in  the Nehru	 Park at Sarcarsanar for planning to
commit dacoity.	 It was planned that initially petty acuity.
In that	 meeting  Mohan	 had  mentioned	 about	one  of	 his
relatives living  in the  village Miramar  who	had  lot  of
silver and  money. Mohan  had suggested to collect the money
from the said relative and to kill him put that than was not
executed because  the absorber	Balmukand  had	backed	out.
Balmukand had  further deposed	that on	 February  20.	1974
which was a Shivratri day. the accused Mohan. Duli Chand and
the said Balmukand and Balbir Singh pranad Ranjan. Kamal had
assembled to celebrate the marriage of Raju Soni in the room
of Kamal  Bhomik  which	 is  located  in  the  Johnson	Bulb
Factory, Bardarsanar.  All of  them had	 a lot of drinks and
Raju Soni  become tiosy	 and vomitted.	At that	 time Mohan.
Yashin. Duli  Chand. the absorber Balmukand and Balbir Singh
tame out of the room of Kamal Bhomik and they had decided to
go the	Miramar for  committing the  dactyl but as they were
heavily	 drunk.	  the  approver	  and  Duli  Chand  made  an
unsuccessful attempt  to start	a car  standing outside	 the
Factory and  all the  said persons  came to the Tail located
outside the  said factory  where they made an attempt to rod
one <??>  but nothing  was  found  from	 him.  According  to
Balmukand. Mohan  was armed  with a  Day. Yashin with a lath
and Balbir  Singh with a bestow. After an hour or so. Yashin
and Balmukand went to their respective houses out Duli Chand
and Balbir  Singh had goner to the house of the because Ramu
gritted in the village Miramar. It is said that Ramu and his
wife had  served the  said persons  with tea and so they did
not decide  to rod  Ramu but  the said persons had told Ramu
that within a day of two. they would be getting one cruet of
sugar and asked him to keep the money ready.
     The approver further <??> that in February 23. 1974, at
about 6.00  P.M. Balmukand.  Yashin. Duli  Chand and  Balbir
Singh assembled	 at the	 house of  the other  accused  Mohan
where they  had drinks	and meal. The approver Balmukand had
brought two  bicycles one  belonging to	 him and  other from
Pranav Ranjan  and  he	also  brought  one  cost  from	him.
According  to	Balmukand.  Third  curve  was  arcaded	from
Giranar. On  the said  bicycles they had gone to the village
Miramar	 at  about  10	to  10.30  P.M.	 the  accused  Mohan
entreated them	to commit  dactyl on  Ramu. Balmukand.	Duli
Chand and  Yashin stayed  pack at  the tail  of the  village
Miramar and  the accosted Mohan and Balbir Singh went to the
house of  Ramu to  bring Ramu  there. At  the house  of Sam.
Mohan and  Balbir Singh	 were treated  with tea	 Mohan their
told Ramu that near the Tail of the Village Miramar. a truck
load of sugar was standing and Ramu should take money to day
sugar. thereafter, Ramu took a sum of Rs.200/- and went with
then where  the three  persons were  within. Duli Chand then
told Ramu  that a Deed had come and thereafter the tract had
been sent away. The approver Balmukand had also deposed that
approver encircled  Ramu and on Mohan saying that work would
be started immediately, Balbir Singh had caught hold of Ramu
from benign  and Duli Chand gave lathe blow to the deceased.
The said  approver had deposed to the effect that Mohan also
started inflicting  blows on  Rampant Ramu  fell  down.	 The
approver at  that time	had caught  hold of the legs of Ramu
and Duli  Chand inflicted blows with Day. Mohan tried to cut
the throat  of Ramu  out as  he could  not go so. Uashin had
headed him  in cutting	the throat of Ramu. According to the
approver. the  accused Balmukand  and the  said approver did
not inflict any injury to the deceased. The approver further
deposed that after seeing that the throat of Ramu is cut. he
felt uneasy  and he raised a false alarm that some light was
coming from  the side  of village  Miramar. Thereafter. they
left the  side of village Miramar. Thereafter. they left the
scene of  occurrence in	 great nasty  and came on the nearby
road. The  approver further deposed that Mohan had taken out
Rs.200/- from the pocket of deceased Ramu. The approver also
deposed that  after they reached the road side. they started
moving towards	Sarcarsanar and	 when they  had covered	 the
distance of  about 2  1/2 miles	 from  the  Tal	 of  village
Mitasar. They  saw a car coming from the village Mitasar. At
that time.  they come  arcades two  persons who	 were coming
from the  village Sawal.  One of those two persons had aside
Mohan as  to wherefrom	they had  been coming  and Mohan and
replied that  they were coming after doing some Banker work.
All the	 five persons  thereafter returned to Sarcarsanar in
three separate groups on three bicycles.
     Mr. Lalit.	 learned senor	counsel	 appearing  for	 the
appellant Balbir Singh in Criminal Appeal No.65 of 1986. has
submitted  that	 the  prosecution  case	 was  sought  to  be
established on	the basis  of the  deposition of  one single
witness. namely,  the approver Balmukand PW.12. Mr.Lalit has
submitted that	where a	 case is sought to be established on
the basis  of a single witness. It must be ensured that such
witness is  wholly reliable.  Mr.Lalit	had  contended	that
PW.12  Balmukand   is  an   approver  and  his	evidence  is
essentially tainted. PW.12 attempted to minimise his role as
much as	 possible and  made an	attempt to ascribe the roles
begging played	be the	other  accused.	 Mr.Lalit  had	also
submitted that	the principal  act of  causing injury on the
deceased has  been ascribe  to Mohan. Yashin and Duli Chand.
It had	been submitted	by Mr.Lalit that PW.12 Balmukand has
made an attempt to give an impression that he was an uniting
participant and	 he had	 played a  very minor  rice so as to
make himself  a conspirator.  According to Mr.Lalit. it will
be unsafe to rely on such evidence of the approver PW.12 The
said PW.12  had also  involved two  others.  namely.  Pranad
Ranjan and  Raju Soni  although they were not present at the
time of	 commission of	the Of fence. PW.12 had also deposed
that he	 did not get money out of the dacoity and killing of
Ramu. Such evidence cannot be accepted being contrary to the
purpose of  conspiracy and  commission of  the of  fence for
collecting  money   from  the  deceased.  Mr.Lait  has	also
submitted that	there is contradiction about the weapon used
to commit  the under  of Ramu because both day and <??> were
mentioned.  So	 far  as   the	appellant  Balbir  singh  is
concerned. Mr.	Lalit has submitted that Balbir Singh had no
weagon and  he had  not inflicts any injury on the person of
the deceased.  Mr. Lalit has also submitted that it has come
out in	the evidence  that golden ear rings on the person of
the because  had not  been removed by the accused. Such fact
raises serious about whether Ramu was killed for looting the
valuables possessed  by him at the time of commission of the
crime.
     Mr. Lalit has also submitted that the identification of
the appellant  Balbir singh  by the  widow of  the deceased.
namely, Pw.3  does  not	 inspire  confidence  and  the	test
identification parade  was also	 not properly heal. Mr Lalit
has  submitted	 that	Pw.15	had   concocted	  the	test
identification parade	on March 4. 1974. The said Pw.19 had
deposed that  11 persons  per liked with the under trial and
Pw.3 Muscat  Mall Identified  the accused Balbir Singh after
taking two  rounds., the  said Pw.19 did not record the ages
of the	persons who  were mixed with the accused out he only
stated that  they were	almost of the age of the accused. He
also could not any scar hear the eve and whether any of them
was of the eight of 5 6. Pw.3 has however. admitted that the
persons who were mixed with the accused were all taller than
the accused. Mr. Lalit has submitted that a scar on the fact
of a  person is	 rarely noticed	 by the a village rustic who
did not	 know the  person beforehand and only an occasion to
see just for sometime on the day of the occurrence. Moreover
unless persons	of similar age and similar eight and more of
less of similar stature and appearance are mixed up with the
accused. no  reliance should be placed on the identification
made in	 the test  identification parade. Therefore. benefit
of about  should be  given in flavor of the appellant Balbir
Singh. Mr.Lalit	 has also  submitted that  the deposition of
Pw.12 is  also falsified  by the  medical evidence. Although
Pw.12 has  deposed that	 a lalit  injury was  caused on	 the
deceased out  from the	medical evidence. It transpires that
all the	 injured noticed  on the person of the deceased were
incised wounds.	 Mr.Lalit has  also submitted  that there is
contradiction  in   the	 depositions  of  the  investigating
Officer and  Pw.12 the	approver about	the  date  when	 the
approvers  statement   was  recorded.	In   the   aforesaid
circumstances. It  would not  be proper	 the base conviction
against the  appellant and other accused on the basis of the
testimony of the approver (Pw.12).
     Mr. Goyal, the learned counsel appearing for the other
appellants as animus curies. has also supported the
submissions made by Mr.Lalit. Mr.Goyal has submitted that
there are contradictions in the deposition of the approver
Pw.12 with the statements previously made by him. Such fact
was notices by the trial court. The learned counsel has also
submitted that the approver Balmukand had made different
submissions with regard to the weapons used by the
appellants. Mr.Goyal has also submitted that the deposition
of the approver Pw.12 about the injuries on the chest of the
debased in false and the same is not supported by
Dr.S.L.Bundala Pw.8. Mr.Goyal has also submitted that it is
not unlikely that the approver had himself Ramu and made
false statements Implicating the accused in order to save
himself. Mr.Goyal has submitted that although the approver
had surrendered before the police on February 28. 1974. his
statement was receded on March 9 and March 12.1974.
Balmukand has stated to the police that he was willing to
become approver and he made confessional statement before
the Magistrate on March 13. 1974. Mr.Goyal has submitted
that there are discrepancies in his depositions and the
statements made under Section 164 Criminal Procedure code.
It has also been submitted by Mr.goyal that according to the
prosecution case and also according to the deposition the
approver the deceased was o friend of Mohan. Five persons
including the approver made a conspiracy to kill the
deceased to rod only Rs.200/- by that process to get Rs.40/-
only in their respective share. It is unbelievable that
Mohan should kill his friend  only for a sum of Rs.40/- when
he had gone to the house of the deceased and was noticed by
the wife of the deceased. The learned counsel has submitted
that the projection case could not have been established
beyond reasonable doubt and the conviction and sentences
passed against the appellants are liable to be set aside.
     After giving our careful consideration to the facts and
circumstances of  the case  and the  Judgments passed by the
courts below.  It appears  to us  that the  approver has not
made statements	 to exculpate  him out	has clearly  coerced
that he	 was party  to the conspiracy and on the date of the
incident was  waiting hear  the Tall  when Balbir  Singh and
Mohan had  been sent  to bring	Ramu with money so that Ramu
would be murdered and the money would be looted. he had also
deposed that he himself did not inflict injury but he caught
hold of	 the legs of the deceased when the deceased was done
to death.  So far  as the  identification of Balbir Singh by
the widow  of the  deceased on	concerted. We not think that
such identification  is to  be discarded  simply because the
height of the accused was less than the persons with whom he
was liked  up or  he had  a scar mark. Fateh Lal (Pw.19) has
deposed that  the persons with whom the accused Balbir Singh
was liked up were almost of the same age and after going two
rounds, the widow had identified Balbir. The contention that
no reliance  shall be  placed on  the evidence	of  approver
because the  golden ear	 rings were  not taken	away by	 the
accused even  though they  had committed the murder for gain
cannot be  accepted. It	 may be	 indicated here that because
Pw.12, the  approver had  raised an  alarm that	 some lights
were seen  from the  village side. The accused had hurriedly
left place of occurrence and Mohan had only removed Rs.200/-
from the  pocket of  the deceased.  The	 deposition  of	 the
approver  Balmukand  that  a  car  came	 from  the  side  of
Lookaransar and	 two persons  also saw	them and one of such
persons enquired  of Mohan  as to  wherefrom they  had	been
coming. Stands fully corroborated from the testimony of Pw.4
Began Ram  and Pw.5  Magoj Singh.  Both the  witnesses	have
stated that  they alighted  from the  bus at  village  Bawai
After covering	some distance  for coming  to their  village
Mitasar, they  saw five	 persons. At that time. not car came
from the  side of  Loonkaransar. They  had also deposed that
the said  persons had  three bicycles  with them.  The	said
witnesses have	also deposed  that they could identify Mohan
and Yashin  but could  not identify  rest of  three  persons
because the others were little away from them.
     In our view. the deposition of the approver Pw.12 about
the injuries  caused  on  the  person  of  the	deceased  is
substantially corroborated  from  the  medial  evidence	 and
absence of any injury caused by the plant weapon of be lathe
on the	person of  the deceased	 cannot be held to be such a
contradiction in  the deposition  of Pw.12  for	 which	such
deposition is  liable  to  be  discarded.  We  have  already
indicated that	five persons  were seen by Pas 4 and 5. Such
evidence tallies  with the  deposition of Pw.12 that besides
the approved.  there were other four accused. The deposition
of Pw  12 also	stands corroborated  that Pw  4 and  5 could
identify Mohan	and Yashin  and had  enquired of  them as to
from where  they had been coming then. Such deposition fully
lends support  to the  deposition given	 by Pw.12,  The High
Court  has   indicated	cogent	reasons	 for  affirming	 the
conviction and	sentences passed  against the appellants and
we do  not find	 any reason to interfere with the concurrent
findings made  by the  courts below  against the appellants.
These  appeals.	 therefore.  fall  and	are  dismissed.	 The
appellants were	 released on pail during the pungency of the
appeals. They are directed to be taken into custody to serve
out the	 sentences passed  against them.  Their	 bail  bonds
stand canceled.

