
Supreme Court of India
Padma Mishra vs State Of Uttarakhand on 13 February, 2020Author: Hon'Ble Ms. Banerjee
Bench: Hon'Ble Ms. Banerjee, Aniruddha Bose
                                                            1

                                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 20/2010


      PADMA MISHRA                                                                  Appellant(s)

                                                           VERSUS

      STATE OF UTTARAKHAND & ANR.                                                   Respondent(s)


                                                       JUDGMENT

      INDIRA BANERJEE, J.


                       This appeal is against the Order dated 9.06.2009 passed by the

      High               Court   of   Uttarakhand     at   Nainital   dismissing       writ    petition

      No.427/2009                filed    by   the    petitioner    under    Article     226    of   the

      Constitution of India                    for quashing of an FIR instituted against

      the petitioner being FIR No.179/2009 under Sections 2/3 of the

      Uttar                      Pradesh              Gangsters             and          Anti-Social

      Activities(Prevention)Act,1986,                       ‘hereinafter          referred’     to    as

      “Gangsters Act”.

                         Sections 2(b) and 2(c) of the            Gangsters Act define as :
                      “gang” and Gangster.
                      2(b)”Gang” means a group of persons, who acting either
                      singly or collectively, by violence, or threat or show of
                      violence, or intimidation, or coercion or otherwise with the
                      object of disturbing public order or of gaining any
                      undue temporal, pecuniary, material or other advantage for
                      himself or any other person, indulge in anti-social
Signature Not Verified
                      activities.
Digitally signed by
SUSHMA KUMARI
BAJAJ
Date: 2020.03.07
10:56:23 IST
Reason:               2(c)”gangster” means a         member or leader or organizer of a
                      gang and includes any          person who abets or assists in the
                      activities of a gang           enumerated in clause (b), whether
                      before or after the            commission of such activities or
                      harbours any person who        has indulged in such activities.
                                        2




    Section 3 of the       Gangsters Act provides as follows:

  3. “Penalty (1) A gangster, shall be punished with
  imprisonment either description for a term which shall not
  be less than two years which may extend to ten years and
  also with fine which shall not be less than five thousand
  rupees:
    Provided that a gangster who commits an offence against
  the person of a public servant or the person of a member of
  the family of a public servant shall be punished with
  imprisonment of either description for a term which shall
  not be less than three years and also with fine which shall
  not be less than five thousand rupees.”

    The definition of gangster is made in the Gangsters Act and

includes any person who is a member or leader or organizer of a

gang or abets or assists in the activities of a gang, which

includes violence, threat, intimediation, coercion with the object

of disturbing public order or of going any undue advantage for

himself or any other person.

    In the FIR it is categorically stated that the appellant has,

along with others created terror, beating and fighting with the

common people. The FIR, in substance, contains the allegation that

the appellant and others are taking recourse to public threats and

coercion    including    physical      violence   to     gang   the    voices    of

witnesses in cases against them.

    The FIR contains a list of various cases against the appellant

pending at the material time when the FIR was lodged and they

included    offences    under    the   relevant   positions     of    the   I.P.C.,

including    Section    323     (voluntarily   causing    hurt),      Section   506

(criminal intimedation) Section 504 (provoking breach of peace)

Section 307 (attempt to murder). It cannot therefore,                 be said that
                                     3



the allegations in the FIR did not disclose any act warranting

penalization under the Gangsters Act.

      In proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,

the   High   Court   does   not   adjudicate   the    correctness   of   the

allegations in an FIR.      The   Court    may       only   intervene     in

exceptional cases, if the allegations made in the FIR          ex facie do

not disclose any offence at all.

      In our considered opinion, the High Court rightly refused to

quash the FIR    under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and

dismissed the writ petition.

      The Appeal is therefore, dismissed.

      Pending application(s) stand disposed of.




                                                        ……………………………………...J
                                                       [ INDIRA BANERJEE ]




                                                         ……….……………………...J
                                                        [ ANIRUDDHA BOSE ]
   New Delhi;
  February, 13 2020
4

