
Supreme Court of India
Farida Begum vs State Of Uttarakhand on 4 December, 2018Author: J M. Shah
                                                            1


                                                                         NON­REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1560 OF 2013

                         Farida Begum                                           .. Appellant

                                                         Versus

                         State of Uttarakhand                                   .. Respondent
                                                          WITH

                         Criminal Appeal No. 1652 of 2013 and
                         Criminal Appeal No. 1653 of 2013


                                                   J U D G M E N T


                         M. R. SHAH, J.


                         1.    The present appeals before this Court arise against the

                         impugned   common   judgment   and   order   dated   22.08.2012

                         passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital passed in

                         Criminal Appeal Nos. 235/2004, 239/2004 and 261/2004 by

                         which the High Court has dismissed the said appeals preferred
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2018.12.04
16:32:34 IST
Reason:
                         by the original Accused Nos.1, 2 and 5 and has confirmed the

                         conviction   and   sentence   imposed   by   the   learned   trial   Court
                                     2


convicting them for the offences under Sections 302/149 and

147 of the IPC.  

1.1   That,   in   all,   eight   accused   were   tried   for   the   offences

under Sections 147, 148 and 302/149 of the IPC for having

committed murder of one Mukhtar Ahmed.   That, out of the

eight   accused,   three   accused   namely,   Raees   Ahmed   (A4),

Mohd. Ashraf (A2) and Raees Ahmed @ Satna (A5) were also

tried for the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act.  That,

during   the   trial,   accused   Mohd.   Aslam   (A3)   died   and,

therefore,   the   case   of   the   said   accused   was   ordered   to   be

abated.  That, on conclusion of the trial, the learned Additional

Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court, Kashipur, District Udham

Singh Nagar (hereinafter referred to as “the trial Court”) held

all the accused guilty for the offences under Sections 302/149

of the IPC and sentenced them to undergo life imprisonment

and a fine of Rs.2,000/­ each and, in case of default in paying

the fine, to undergo one year RI.  The learned trial Court also

convicted   the   original   Accused   No.1   Smt.   Farida   Begum,

original   Accused   No.6   Mohd.   Nasim   @   Churti   and   original

Accused No.7 Idrish for the offence under Section 147 of the

IPC and sentenced them to undergo one year RI.  The learned
                                    3


trial   Court   also   convicted   the   original   Accused   No.2   Mohd.

Ashraf, original Accused No.4 Raees Ahmed and the original

Accused No.5 Raees Ahmed   @ Satna for the offences under

Section   148   of   the   IPC   and  sentenced   them   to   undergo   two

years RI.   That the learned trial Court acquitted the original

Accused Nos.2, 4 and 5 for the offence under Section 25 of the

Arms Act.

1.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and

order of conviction and sentence imposed by the learned trial

Court, the original Accused No.1 Smt. Farida Begum preferred

Criminal Appeal No.235 of 2004 before the High Court.   The

original Accused No.2 Mohd. Ashraf preferred Criminal Appeal

No.239   of   2004   and   original   Accused   No.5   Raees   Ahmed   @

Satna   preferred   Criminal   Appeal   No.261   of   2004   before   the

High   Court.     The   original   Accused   No.7   Idrish   preferred

Criminal   Appeal   No.238   of   2004,   Mohd.   Nasim   @   Churti

original   Accused   No.   6   preferred   Criminal   Appeal   No.240   of

2004   and   Raees   Ahmed   original   Accused   No.4   preferred

Criminal   Appeal   No.251   of   2004   before   the   High   Court,

challenging their respective conviction and sentence imposed

by the learned trial Court.   That, by the common impugned
                                    4


judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed the appeals

preferred   by   the   original   Accused   Nos.1,2,4   and   5   and   has

confirmed   their   conviction.   The   High   Court,   however,   has

allowed   the   appeals   preferred  by   the   original  Accused  Nos.6

and 7, i.e. Criminal Appeal Nos.238 of 2004 and 240 of 2004

and has acquitted them by giving them the benefit of doubt.

1.3   Feeling   aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with   the   impugned

judgment   and   order   passed   by   the   High   Court,   the   original

Accused   Nos.1,2   and   5   have   preferred   the   present   Criminal

Appeals   being   Criminal   Appeal   Nos.1560/2013,   1652/2013

and 1653/2013 respectively.  At this stage, it is required to be

noted that so far as the original Accused No.4 Raees Ahmed is

concerned, he has not preferred any appeal, however, his case

shall be dealt with hereinbelow.


2.      The case of the prosecution in nutshell is as under:

       That FIR was lodged on 01.07.1999 at about 9.15 PM at

Police   Station,   Jaspur,   Udham   Singh   Nagar   by   one   Shahid

Hussain  against  the  accused persons  for  the offences under

Section 302/149, 147, 148 of IPC and Section 25 of the Arms

Act.   It was revealed that the complainant, along with two of
                                      5


his   companions,   Mukhtar   Ahmed   and   Mohd.   Rafi   after

performing   their   evening   Namaj   at   a   Mosque   in   their   town,

reached the house of one Rafiq Ahmed (Dildar) at about 8.00

PM in the evening.  It was further stated that the complainant

and  Mukhtar  Ahmed  often used to visit the house of Dildar

after   performing   the   evening   Namaj.    On that  day, at  about

8.20   PM,   Dildar   went   inside   his   house   to   bring   tea   for   his

guests.     During   this   period,   Smt.   Farida   Begum   (A1),

Chairman, Nagar Palika, Jaspur, Mohd. Ashraf, Raees Ahmed,

Raees Ahmed @ Satna, Mohd. Aslam, Naseem @ Churti and

Idrish   (all   original   accused),   accompanied   by   one   unknown

person entered the house of ‘Dildar’, where these three guests

were sitting.   Out of these persons, Mohd. Aslam and Idrish

caught   the   hands   of   the   Mukhtar   Ahmed   (deceased),   and

Nasim @ Churti and the unknown person caught hold of the

legs of Mukhtar Ahmed (deceased).       While the complainant

and Mohd. Rafiq objected, Smt. Farida Begam exhorted that

“the son of Darji should be finished and we will see how he

removes me as Chairman of the Nagar Palika”.   It was further

stated that, on this exhortation, Raees Ahmed, Raees Ahmed

@   Satna   and   Mohd.   Ashraf   fired   from   their   respective   guns
                                     6


which they were carrying.   It was further stated that, out of

three   gun   shots,   two   had   hit   Mukhtar   Ahmed   (deceased),

whereas  one   did  not  fire or mis­fired.   It was further  stated

that thereafter Smt. Farida Begum threatened that if anyone

names   them   to   the   police   or   approves   the   “no   confidence

motion” against her, he shall also be killed.  That the case was

investigated   by   the   Investigating   Officer   D.   K.   Sharma.     He,

along with other Police Officers, reached the spot at about 9.15

PM.     The  inquest  report was completed by 11.45 PM.   The

Investigating Officer recorded the statements of the witnesses.

After   preparing   the   inquest   report,   other   formalities   were

performed   to   send   the   dead   body   for   post­mortem.         The

Investigating Officer also prepared the Panchnama of the place

of   incident   and   also   prepared   the   map.       That,   during   the

course   of   investigation,   the   respective   accused   came   to   be

arrested.   The Investigating Officer also recovered the firearm

used   in   the   commission   of   the   offence   and   sealed   them.

During the course of the investigation, the Investigating Officer

also collected the incriminating materials.  During the course

of the investigation, the Investigating Officer also collected the

medical evidence as well as the report of the scientific analyst.
                                       7


After conclusion of the investigation, the Investigating Officer

filed   charge­sheet   for   the   offences   under   Sections   147,   148,

302/149 of the IPC and Section 25 of the Arms Act against the

respective   accused.     That   the   learned   Magistrate   took

cognizance   and   committed   the   case   to   the   learned   Sessions

Court,   which   was   numbered   as   Sessions   Trial   Nos.   147   of

2000,   148   of   2000   and   149   of   2000.     At   this   stage,   it   is

required to be noted that, as such, Session Trial No. 147 of

2000 was the main case, insofar as Session Trial Nos. 148 and

149 of 2000 were against Raees Ahmed (A4) and Mohd. Ashraf

(A2) for the offences under Section 25 of the Arms Act.   That

all the accused pleaded not guilty and, therefore, all of them

came to be tried for the aforesaid offences.

3.    To   bring   home   the   charge   against   the   accused,   the

prosecution examined the following witnesses:

          PW1             Shahid Hussain            Informant   and   eye­
                                                    witness
          PW2             Mohd. Rafi                Eye­witness
          PW3             Mohd. Navi
          PW4             Naim Khan
          PW5             Dr. J. K. Goel            Who   conducted   the
                                                    post­mortem
          PW6             Sub­Inspector             One   of   the
                          Nirvikar                  Investigating
                                                    Officers
          PW7             S.I. D. K. Sharma         Investigating
                                    8


                                                Officer
         PW8            Sub­Inspector
                        Suresh   Chandra
                        Saxena


3.1   That the prosecution also brought on record through the

concerned  witnesses the documentary  evidence, such as the

first information report, post­mortem report, Forensic Science

Laboratory   report,   Panchnama   of   the   place   of   incident,

Panchnama of the recovery of the firearm used by the original

accused No. 2 etc.

3.2   After closing of the evidence on behalf of the prosecution,

the defence examined the following witnesses:



        DW1             Shankar   Dutta
                        Kandpal
        DW2             Ayub Alam
        DW3             Naseem   Ahmed,
                        Jr.   Engineer,
                        Electricity   Supply
                        Division,   Jaspur
                        (Rural)


3.3   That   the   defence   also   brought   on   record   the   following

documentary evidence:

1)    Ex.D20   –   the   report   about   the   electricity   supply   in

Jaspur town on 1.7.1999.
                                     9
2)    Ex.D32   –   the   register   of   the   daily   log   sheet   dated

1.7.1999 (found to be having overwriting in the column of time

on it).


4.    That,   thereafter,   after   completing   the   evidence,   the

accused persons came to be examined under Section 313 of

the   Cr.P.C.   on   the   basis   of   the   material   on   record   against

them.    All  the   accused denied their  involvement in the case

and denied the evidence against them.   

5.    Thereafter,   after   hearing   the   learned   counsel   appearing

for the parties and, on appreciation of evidence, the learned

trial Court by a common judgment and order dated 23.7.2004

convicted Smt. Farida Begum (A1), Mohd. Ashraf (A2), Raees

Ahmed   (A4),   Raees   Ahmed   @   Satna   (A5),   Mohd.   Nasim   @

Churti   (A6)   and   Idrish   (A7)   for   the   offences   under   Sections

302/149 IPC and sentenced all of them to imprisonment of life

with a fine of Rs.2,000/­ and, in default of payment of fine, to

undergo   one   year’s   RI.     That   the   learned   trial   Court   also

convicted   the   original   accused   No.   1   Smt.   Farida   Begum,

original   Accused   No.   6   Mohd.   Nasim   @   Churti   and   original

Accused No. 7 Idrish also for the offence under Section 147 of
                                    10


the IPC and also convicted the original Accused No. 2 Mohd

Ashraf,   original   Accused   No.   4   Raees   Ahmed   and   original

Accused   No.   5   Raees   Ahmed   @   Satna   for   the   offence   under

Section   148   of   the   IPC   and  sentenced   them   to   undergo   two

years’ RI.   That the learned trial Court acquitted the accused

persons under Section 25 of the Arms Act.   The case against

the   original   Accused   No.   3   Mohd.   Aslam   was   ordered   to   be

abated due to his death during the trial.

6.    As   observed   hereinabove,   the   accused   approached   the

High   Court  by   filing   their  respective criminal appeals.   That

the High Court, by the impugned common judgment and order

has dismissed the appeals preferred by the original Accused

Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5 and maintained the conviction and sentence

imposed by the learned trial Court.  However, the High Court

has   acquitted   the   original   Accused   Nos.   6   and   7   by   giving

them the benefit of doubt.  Hence, the original Accused Nos. 1,

2 and 5 are before this Court by way of present appeals.

7.    Shri  K.T.S. Tulsi, learned senior  counsel, has appeared

on   behalf   of   the   original   Accused   No.1,   Shri   Deepak   Singh,

learned   counsel   has   appeared   on   behalf   of   original   Accused
                                     11


No.2 and Shri K.K. Tyagi, learned counsel appeared on behalf

of original Accused No.5.

7.1      Heard Shri Rajiv Nanda, learned counsel appearing on

behalf   of   the   respondent   State   of   Uttarakahand   and   the

learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   original

Complainant in each of the appeals.


8.   SUBMISSIONS MADE BY SHRI K.T.S. TULSI, LEARNED
     SENIOR   COUNSEL   APPEARING   ON   BEHALF   OF
     ORIGINAL ACCUSED NO.1

      Shri  Tulsi learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

original Accused No.1 has vehemently submitted that, in the

facts and circumstances of the case, both the High Court as

well   as   the   learned   trial   Court   have   materially   erred   in

convicting   the   original   Accused   No.1   for   the   offences   under

Sections 302   read with Section 149 and also under Section

147 of the IPC.

8.1               It   is   further   submitted   by   the   learned   counsel

appearing   on   behalf   of   the   original   Accused   No.1   that   the

conviction   by   both   the   Courts   below   is   based   upon   the

depositions of PWs.1 and 2 whose credibility is very doubtful

and both of them are not believable.   It is further submitted
                                     12


that,   as   such,   there   are   material   contradictions   in   the

depositions of PWs.1 and 2 and other witnesses and, therefore,

both the Courts below have materially erred in convicting the

original Accused No.1 relying upon the depositions of PWs.1

and 2.

8.2      The learned counsel for the original Accused No. 1 has

further submitted that, as such, the prosecution has failed to

prove   the   motive   and   the   reason   for   the   Accused   No.1   to

kill/commit the murder of deceased Mukhtar Ahmed.

8.3.         It   is   submitted   that   the   enmity   with   PW.1   Shahid

Hussain could not have been accepted as the reason for the

original   Accused   No.1   exhortation   that   Mushtak   Ahmed   be

shot.   It is submitted that, therefore, as the prosecution has

failed   to   prove   the   motive   so   far  as   the   enmity   between   the

original   Accused   No.1   and   deceased   is   concerned,   both   the

Courts below have materially erred in convicting the original

Accused No.1.  

8.4     It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing

on behalf  of  the  original Accused No.1 that both the Courts

below  have   materially  erred in  not  properly  appreciating  the

fact that the dimension of the room in which the incident had
                                    13


taken place was such that it was impossible to believe that 11

persons were present in the room, when the incident allegedly

took place.   It is further submitted that, therefore, the story

put   forward   by   PWs.1   and   2   and   the   prosecution   is   totally

unbelievable and, therefore, the impugned judgment and order

of   conviction  and   sentence insofar  as convicting  the original

Accused No.1 deserves to be quashed and set aside.  

8.5   It is further submitted that, as such, there are material

contradictions so far as the electricity at the time of incident

was or not.  It is submitted that, in fact, the accused has been

able   to   prove   by   leading   the   cogent   evidence,   namely,

examining D­3 – the officer of the Electricity Supply Division

that at the time of the alleged incident there was no electricity

supply.     It   is   further   submitted   that   the   same   has   been

established   and   proved   even   by   producing   documentary

evidences Exh.D­20/D­34.   It is submitted that, therefore, it

was   not   possible   for   any   of   the   prosecution   witnesses   to

identify the accused.  It is submitted that, therefore, both the

Courts below have materially erred in convicting the original

Accused No.1.
                                      14


8.6     It   is   further   submitted   that   even   the   original   accused

No.1was successful in proving by examining DW­2, the son of

the  owner   of  house,   that  the original  Accused No.1 was not

present at the time of alleged incident.   It is submitted that

DW­2   in   his   deposition   categorically   stated   that   the   original

Accused No.1 and others were not involved in the murder of

deceased Mushtak Ahmed.

8.7             It is further submitted that the High Court ought to

have acquitted the original Accused No.1 also by giving her the

benefit of doubt,   as was given to original Accused Nos.6 and

7.     It   is   submitted   that   once   the   case   against   the   original

Accused Nos.6 and 7 has not been believed and consequently

they   are   acquitted   by   giving   them   benefit   of   doubt,   similar

benefit of doubt ought to be given to the other accused, more

particularly, Accused No.1 also.

8.8         Making   the   above   submissions   and   relying   upon   the

decisions of this Court in the case of Jainul Haque v. State

of   Bihar  (1974)   3   SCC   543;  Pandurang   Chandrakant

Mhatre   v.   State   of   Maharashtra  (2009)   10   SCC   773;

Vaijayanti v. State of Maharashtra (2005) 13 SCC 134 and
                                    15
Hoshiar Singh v. State of Punjab 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 413, it

is   requested   to   allow   the   present   appeals   and   acquit   the

original Accused No. 1 for the offences for which she has been

convicted.

9.    Shri Deepak Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf

of original Accused No. 2 has adopted the submissions made

by   Shri   K.T.S.   Tulsi,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   on

behalf of original Accused No. 1 and, as such, has reiterated

what was submitted on behalf of original Accused No. 1.   In

addition,   learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   original

Accused No. 2 has also relied upon the decisions of this Court

in  Mohinder   Singh   v.   State   of   Punjab  AIR   1955   SC   762;

Willie   (William)   Slaney   v.   State   of   Madhya   Pradesh  AIR

1956 SC 116; Balaka Singh v. State of Punjab (1975) 4 SCC

511; Phani Bhusan Das v. State of West Bengal (1994) SCC

(Cri) 1752 and  Suresh Rai v. State of Bihar  (2000) 4 SCC

84.

9.1   Making   above   submissions  and  relying  upon   the  above

decisions,   it   is   requested   to   allow   the   appeal   preferred   by
                                        16


original   Accused   No.   2   and   acquit   him   for   the   offences   for

which he has been convicted.

10.    Shri K.K. Tyagi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

original Accused No. 5, has vehemently submitted that, so far

as   original   Accused   No.   5   is   concerned,   as   looking   to   the

dimension of the room which was hardly 10’ x 10’, it was not

possible   for   the   original   Accused   Nos.   4   &   5   to   fire.     It   is

further submitted that, therefore, the story put forward by the

prosecution   that   the   original   Accused   Nos.   4   and   5   were

present and they fired, is unbelievable.  

10.1 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing

on  behalf  of  original  Accused No.5 that, even  otherwise, the

prosecution   has   failed   to   prove   by   leading   cogent   evidence

that, in fact, the original Accused Nos. 4 and 5 fired from the

firearms.    It  is submitted that neither the firearm alleged to

have   been   used   by   the   original   Accused   No.   5   had   been

recovered,   nor   even   the   bullet   was   recovered/seized.       It   is

submitted that even there is no scientific evidence like ballistic

report on  record  which would suggest and/or prove that, in

fact, original Accused No. 5 fired from the firearm, as alleged

by the prosecution and as stated by PWs 1 and 2. It is further
                                     17


submitted   that,   as   such, the  original  Accused Nos. 4  and 5

both   are   entitled   to   be   acquitted   by   giving   them   benefit   of

doubt on the very ground on which the High Court acquitted

the original Accused Nos. 6 & 7 by giving the benefit of doubt.

10.2 It  is   further   submitted   that,   as  such,   even   the   original

Accused No. 5 is acquitted for the offence under the Arms Act

and,   therefore,   also   both   the   Courts   below   have   materially

erred in convicting the original Accused No. 5.

10.3 Making  above  submissions, it is requested to allow the

appeal preferred by the original Accused No. 5 and quash and

set aside the judgment and order passed by both the Courts

below convicting the original Accused No. 5.

11.   Shri Rajiv Nanda, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the State of Uttarakhand and the learned counsel appearing

on   behalf   of   the   original   complainant   have   supported   the

impugned   judgment   and   order   of   conviction   and   sentence

imposed by the learned trial Court and confirmed by the High

Court, convicting the original Accused Nos. 1, 2 and 5 for the

offences   under   Sections 302/149  IPC  and  other   offences  for

which they are convicted.
                                       18


11.1 It is further submitted by the learned counsel appearing

for   the   State   that,   so   far   as   the   original   Accused   No.   1   is

concerned, the motive for her to exhort the deceased has been

established and proved and the same has been discussed by

the learned trial Court as well as the High Court in detail.

11.2 It   is   further   submitted   that,   even   otherwise,   as   has

rightly been observed by the High Court and the learned trial

Court   that   in   view   of   the   overwhelming   evidence   on   record,

more   particularly,   the   depositions   of   PWs   1   and   2   the   eye

witnesses,   the   presence of   original   Accused  Nos. 1  and  2  is

established and proved beyond doubt and the prosecution has

been   successful   in   proving   the   case   against   the   original

Accused Nos. 1 and 2, the motive may be inconsequential. It is

submitted that,  as such, the motive by the original Accused

No. 1 has been established and proved beyond doubt.

11.3 It   is   further   submitted   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the

State   that,   in   the   present   case,   the   prosecution   has   been

successful   in   proving   the   case   against   the   original   Accused

Nos. 1 and 2 by leading cogent evidence, more particularly, by

examining PWs 1 and 2 and other witnesses. It is submitted

that both PWs 1 and 2 have fully supported the case of the
                                   19


prosecution   and   even   they   are   fully   cross­examined   by   the

defence,   however,   in   the   cross­examination,  the   defence   has

not been successful in proving anything contrary to what the

aforesaid   two  witnesses have stated in their  examination­in­

chief.

11.4 It   is   further   submitted   that,   as   such,   there   are   no

material contradictions in the depositions of PWs 1 and 2, as

alleged, on behalf of the original Accused Nos. 1and 2.

11.5 Now, so far as the submissions on behalf of the original

Accused Nos. 1 and 2 that at the time of incident there was no

electricity supply and reliance placed upon the deposition of

DW­3,   Junior   Engineer   of   the   Electric   Supply   Division   is

concerned,   it   is   vehemently   submitted   that,   as   such,   the

learned trial Court as well as the High Court have given cogent

reasons to disbelieve the deposition of DW­3.   It is submitted

that, as rightly observed by the Courts below, DW­3 deposed

in favour of the Accused No. 2 to favour the accused persons.

It  is   submitted   that   his  conduct   is  very  much  doubtful  and

even it is established and proved from the cross­examination

of the said witness that the document Ex.D­34 was concocted

and false one and there was interpolation by mentioning the
                                      20


specific time, only with a view to suit the case of the accused.

It is submitted that, therefore, the DW­3 is not believable at all

and, as such, both the Courts below have rightly not believed

the   story   put   forward   by   the   accused   that   there   was   no

electricity supply at the time of the incident.

11.6 It   is   further   submitted   that   even   the   prosecution   has

been successful in proving by leading cogent evidence that at

the time of the incident there was electricity supply.

11.7 Now,   so   far   as   the   submission   made   on   behalf   of   the

original  Accused  No.  5 that he shall also be entitled for  the

benefit   of   doubt   and   is  entitled   to   the   acquittal   on   the   very

ground on which the other accused ­ original Accused Nos. 6

& 7 came to be acquitted by the High Court is concerned, it is

submitted that the case against the original Accused Nos. 6 &

7 and the original Accused Nos. 4 & 5 will be different and is

not   comparable   and,   therefore,   merely   because   the   other

original   Accused   Nos.   6   &   7   are   acquitted   by   giving   them

benefit   of   doubt,   the   other   accused,   more   particularly,   the

original Accused Nos. 4 and 5 shall not be entitled to acquittal.

11.8 It   is   further   submitted   that   even   the   original   Accused

No.4 has not preferred any appeal against his conviction and
                                    21


sentence and has accepted the judgment and order passed by

both the Courts below convicting him for the offences under

Sections 302/148 IPC. 

11.9 Now so far as the submissions on behalf of the accused

that   as   the   accused   persons   came   to   be   acquitted   for   the

offence   under   the   Arms   Act   and,   therefore,   the   accused   are

entitled to be acquitted, it is submitted that merely because

the accused are acquitted for one offence, ipso facto, they shall

not  be   entitled   to  the  acquittal  for   the other  offences, if the

other offences are proved against the accused.  It is submitted

that, in the present case, both the Courts below have rightly

convicted the accused for the offences under Sections 302/149

and 302/148 of the IPC, more particularly, relying upon the

depositions of PWs 1 and 2 and on appreciation of the entire

evidence on record.

11.10   Making above submissions, it is requested to dismiss

the present appeals.

12.  Learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   original

complainant   has   fully   supported   the   judgment   and   order

passed   by   both   the   Courts   below   convicting   the   original

accused,   by   further   submitting   that   even   the   motive   by   the
                                     22


original   Accused   No.   1   to   bestow   the   deceased   has   been

established and proved, which has been elaborately discussed

by the learned trial Court in paragraph 48.     Therefore, it is

requested to dismiss the appeals preferred by the accused.

13.   Heard   the   learned   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of

respective   parties   at   length.     We   have   gone   through   and

considered the impugned judgment and order passed by the

High Court as well as the learned trial Court.   We have also

considered in detail and reappreciated the entire evidence on

record.

14.   Now, so far as the impugned judgment and order passed

by   the   High   Court   maintaining   the   conviction   and   sentence

imposed   by   the   learned   trial   Court,   while   convicting   the

original   Accused   No.   1   for   the   offences   under   Sections

302/149   and   Section   147   of   the  IPC   is   concerned,   we  have

heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the accused

as well as the State and have reappreciated the evidence on

record.       For   the   reasons   stated   hereinbelow,   we   are   of   the

opinion that both the Courts below have not committed any

error in convicting the original Accused No. 1.
                                     23


14.1 The presence of original Accused No. 1 at the time of the

incident has been established and proved beyond doubt by the

prosecution.   The witnesses, more particularly, PWs 1 and 2,

in   no   uncertain   words,   have   clearly   stated   that   the   original

Accused No. 1 came to the place of the incident and that she

started   shouting   and   told   to   kill   the   deceased.       The   role

attributed to the original Accused No. 1 clearly suggests that

the original Accused No. 1 committed the offence punishable

under   Sections   302/149   IPC.     PW1   has   categorically   stated

that   the   original   Accused   No.   1   Smt.   Farida   Begum   came

inside the room from the eastern side and, from the northern

door, the other accused entered.  PW1 categorically stated that

the original Accused No. 1 exhorted and said that the deceased

must be finished and further stated that she will see how the

“no   confidence   motion”   is   passed   against   her.       The   said

witness has further stated that, immediately thereafter, Mohd.

Ashraf who was carrying Tamancha shot at Mukhtar Ahmed

(deceased).   The deposition of the said witness PW1 has been

further supported by the deposition of PW2 Mohd. Rafi.  Both

the aforesaid two witnesses are thoroughly cross­examined by
                                     24


the   defence,   however,   nothing   adverse   to   the   case   of   the

prosecution has been brought from the cross­examination.  

14.2 Now,   so   far   as   the   submission   on   behalf   of   original

Accused   No.   1   that   the   prosecution   has   failed   to   prove   the

motive  to  kill  the   deceased by the original Accused No. 1 is

concerned, at the outside, it is required to be noted that it has

come   on   record   that   the   original   Accused   No.   1   was   having

enmity with the deceased Mukhtar Ahmed due to municipality

politics.     PW1,   in   his  evidence,  has  categorically   stated  that

the deceased Mukhtar Ahmed was elected as the Chairman of

the Municipality, Jaspur in the election prior to the election at

the time of occurrence and that his wife Smt. Sameena Begum

had contested the next election for the post of the Chairman

against Smt. Farida Begum and Sameena Begum had lost that

election.  He has further stated that Smt. Sameena Begum, the

wife of the deceased, had challenged the election of A­1 in the

court by filing an election petition.   That Smt. Farida Begum

(A1)   was   facing   ‘no   confidence   motion’.         The   Investigating

Officer   PW7   had   categorically   stated   that   as   the   deceased

Mukhtar   Ahmed   was   opposing   the   actions   taken   by   the

original Accused No. 1 Farida Begum in the municipality and
                                     25


that Smt. Farida Begum was the Chairman and Mohd. Aslam

was the Councillor in the Municipality and that the deceased

Mukhtar Ahmed had got an election petition filed through his

wife   against   Smt.   Farida   Begum,   it   could   be   the   cause   of

committing   the   murder   of   Mukhtar   Ahmed   by   the   accused

persons. 

14.3 Even   otherwise,   it   is   required   to   be   noted   that,   in   the

present case, the presence of the Accused Nos. 1 and 2 at the

time of the incident has been established and proved beyond

doubt.    The role attributed to them has also been established

and   proved   by   the   prosecution   by   leading   cogent   evidence.

The testimony of the eye witnesses fully supports the case of

the   prosecution.     Under   these   circumstances,   as   rightly

observed by the learned trial Court and confirmed by the High

Court,   the   aforesaid   defence   shall   not   help   the   accused

persons.

14.4 Reliance   has   been   placed  upon   the   deposition   of  DW3,

the Junior Engineer of the Electricity Supply Department, by

the  learned   counsel   appearing  on   behalf  of  original   Accused

Nos. 1 and 2 in support of their case that, at the time of the

incident, there was no electricity supply and, therefore, it was
                                    26


not possible for PWs 1 and 2 to identify the accused persons.

At the outset, it is required to be noted that, both the learned

trial Court and the High Court have disbelieved the deposition

of DW3.  From the cross­examination of DW­3, it appears that

he   had   concocted   the   document   Ex.D­32   and   that   there

interpolation   by   inserting   the   time   which   suits   the  accused.

On re­appreciation of the deposition of DW­3, we are also of

the   opinion   that   the   said   witness   is   not   reliable   and

trustworthy and that he had given the deposition only with a

view to favour the accused persons.   In the cross­examination

of DW­3, the prosecution has succeeded in proving that there

was interpolation and overwriting in Ex.32 on the timing and

20.15   PM   has   been   shown   as   20.30   PM.       Thus,   as   rightly

observed by the learned trial Court as well as the High Court,

the defence had made an unsuccessful attempt to prove that

there was no electricity supply at the time of incident and that

DW­3 had attempted to favour the accused persons for some

special   reasons   and   had   tempered   with   the   departmental

records.     We   are   in   complete   agreement   with   the   findings

recorded by the learned trial Court and confirmed by the High

Court while not believing DW­3.
                                     27


14.5 Now,   so   far   as   the   submission   made   by   Shri   Tulsi,

learned   senior   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   the   original

Accused No. 1 that there are contradictions in the deposition

of PWs 1 and 2 and  DW­2 is concerned, on considering the

entire deposition of PWs 1 and 2, we do not find any material

contradictions which may destroy the case of the prosecution.

Sometime   there   may   be   minor   contradictions.     However,

unless  those  contradictions are such material contradictions

which may destroy the case of the prosecution, the benefit of

such contradictions  cannot be given to the accused.   In the

present case, we do not find any material contradictions in the

deposition of PWs 1 and 2 which may destroy the case of the

prosecution.

14.6 Now,   so   far   as   the   submission   made   on   behalf   of   the

original   Accused   No.   1 that  as the  original  Accused Nos. 6

and   7   are   acquitted   by   the   High   Court   and,   therefore,   the

number of other accused shall be five or less than five and,

therefore, the conviction of the original Accused No. 1 for the

offence punishable under Section 302 with the aid of Section

149  IPC,  is not sustainable is concerned, the same has no

substance.   It   is   required   to   be   noted   that,   from   the   very
                                      28


beginning,   the   case   of   the   prosecution   was   that   7   to   8

persons  entered  the house with a common intention to kill

the   deceased.       It   is   required  to   be  noted   that   the   original

Accused Nos. 6 and 7 are acquitted by giving the benefit of

doubt and on the ground that the story put forward by the

prosecution   that   they   caught   hold   of   the   deceased,   is   not

believable.         There   is   no   finding   by   the   High   Court   while

giving   the   benefit   of   doubt   and   acquitting   the   original

Accused Nos. 6 and 7 that they were not present at the time

of   the   incident.     Therefore,   the   overt   act   and   the   role

attributed to them is not believable.   Even otherwise, so far

as original Accused No. 1 and even original Accused No. 2 are

concerned, we are of the opinion that the prosecution in the

present case has proved beyond doubt the case against them

individually for the offence under Section 302 of IPC.   

14.7 Now,   so   far   as   the   reliance   placed   by   the   learned

counsel appearing on behalf of the original Accused Nos. 1

and   2   upon   the   decisions   of   this   Court   referred   to

hereinabove   is   concerned,   we   are   of   the   opinion   that,   on

facts, the said decisions shall not be applicable to the facts of

the case, more particularly, the overwhelming evidence in the
                                      29


form of depositions of PWs 1 & 2 and PW7, which prove the

case against the original Accused Nos. 1 and 2 beyond doubt.

15.   It   is   further   required   to   be   noted   that   so   far   as   the

original   Accused   No.   2   is   concerned,   PWs   1   and   2   have

categorically stated that, along with Farida Begum, the original

Accused No. 2 also entered and he fired from his firearm.   His

presence   and   the   overt   act   attributed   to   him   has   been

established and proved by the prosecution beyond doubt.  The

firearm used in the commission of the offence by the original

Accused No. 2 has been recovered at the instance of original

Accused No. 2 himself.  There is a direct evidence in the form

of the eye witnesses ­ PWs 1 and 2, which fully supports the

case of the prosecution even after thorough cross­examination

by the defence.

16.   In view of the further reasons stated above, we are of the

opinion that the High Court as well as the learned trial Court

have rightly convicted the original Accused Nos. 1 and 2. 

17.   Now, so far as the conviction and sentence imposed by

the   learned   trial   Court   and   confirmed   by   the   High   Court

convicting the original Accused No. 5 is concerned, we are of
                                     30


the opinion that the original Accused No. 5 shall be entitled to

be   acquitted   by   giving   the   benefit   of   doubt   on   the   same

grounds   on   which   the   High   Court   acquitted   the   original

Accused   Nos.   6   and   7   by   giving   them   benefit   of   doubt.

Looking to the dimension of the room and the role attributed

to the original Accused Nos.4 and 5, we are of the opinion that

the original Accused Nos. 4 and 5 are required to be acquitted

by   giving   them   benefit   of   doubt,   as   has   been   given   to   the

original   Accused   Nos.   6   and   7   by   the   High   Court.     At   this

stage, it is required to be noted that so far as the acquittal of

the   original   Accused   Nos.   6   and   7   by   the   High   Court   is

concerned, the same has been accepted by the State and same

has attained the finality.  

17.1 It is also required to be noted that even otherwise so far

as Accused No. 5 is concerned, the prosecution has even failed

to prove beyond doubt that in fact Accused No. 5 fired from his

firearm, which as such has missed, as alleged.     There is no

evidence on record in the form of recovery of weapon or even

the   missed   bullet.     Therefore   also   A­5   is   entitled   to   be

acquitted by giving him benefit of doubt.
                                     31


17.2 At this stage, it is also required to be noted that so far as

the original Accused No. 4 is concerned, he has not preferred

any   appeal   against   his   conviction   and   sentence.     However,

there   may   be   number   of   reasons   for   that,   including   the

financial constraint.     However, we cannot loose sight of the

fact that his case is similar to that of the original Accused No.

5 and even original Accused Nos. 6 and 7.   Therefore, we take

suo   moto  cognizance   and   we   are   of   the   opinion   that   the

original  Accused  No.  4 is also entitled to acquittal by giving

him benefit of doubt, as the case of the original Accused No. 4

is   similar   to   that   of   original   Accused   No.   5   and   even   the

original Accused Nos. 6 and 7.

18.  In  view   of   the   above  and  for  the  reasons   stated above,

Criminal   Appeal   No.   1560   of   2013   preferred   by   original

Accused No. 1 and Criminal Appeal No. 1652 of 2013 preferred

by the original Accused No. 2 stand dismissed by confirming

the judgment and order passed by the learned trial Court and

confirmed by the High Court convicting the original Accused

Nos.   1   and   2   for   the   offences   under   Sections   302/149   and

Sections 147 & 148 IPC.   The conviction and sentence of the

original Accused Nos. 1 and 2 imposed by the trial Court and
                                     32


confirmed by the High Court, is hereby maintained.  It appears

that the original Accused No. 1 (Smt. Farida Begum) is on bail.

On her conviction and sentence being confirmed by this Court,

her bail bond  shall stand cancelled and she shall surrender

before   the   Court   concerned   to   serve   out   the   remaining

sentence  within  a  period of two weeks from the date of this

judgment.

18.1 In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

Criminal   Appeal   No.   1653   of   2013   preferred   by   the   original

Accused No. 5 is hereby allowed.  The original Accused Nos. 4

and 5 (Raees Ahmed and Raees Ahmed @ Satna) shall stand

acquitted for the offences for which they were convicted by the

learned trial Court and confirmed by the High Court by giving

them   benefit   of   doubt.     The   original   Accused   Nos.   4   and   5

(Raees   Ahmed   and   Raees Ahmed @ Satna) shall be released

forthwith, if not required in any other case.

                                 …………………..……………………J.
                                               (N. V. RAMANA)
                                 …………………………………..…….J.
                                 (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)

                                  …………………..……………………J.
                                              (M. R SHAH)
New Delhi,
December 4, 2018

