
Supreme Court of India
Yogendra Pratap Singh vs Savitri Pandey & Anr on 3 April, 2012Author: ……………………….……..……J.
Bench: T.S. Thakur, Gyan Sudha Misra
                                                                      REPORTABLE



                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.    605        OF 2012
                 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.5761 of 2010)



Yogendra Pratap Singh                        …Appellant

Versus

Savitri Pandey & Anr.                         …Respondents



                               J U D G M E N T

1.    Leave granted.

2.    This appeal assails an order passed by the High Court whereby  it  has
allowed a petition under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. and  quashed  the  order
passed by the Magistrate taking cognizance of an  offence  punishable  under
Section 138 of The Negotiable Instruments  Act,  1881.   The  following  two
questions arise for consideration:

         (i) Can cognizance of an offence punishable under  Section  138  of
         the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 be taken  on  the  basis  of  a
         complaint filed  before  the  expiry  of  the  period  of  15  days
         stipulated in the notice required to be served upon the  drawer  of
         the cheque in terms of Section 138 (c) of the  Act  aforementioned?
         And,

         (ii) If answer to  question  No.1  is  in  the  negative,  can  the
         complainant  be  permitted   to   present   the   complaint   again
         notwithstanding the fact that the period of  one  month  stipulated
         under Section 142 (b) for  the  filing  of  such  a  complaint  has
         expired?

3.    The questions arise in the following factual backdrop:

The appellant  filed  a  complaint  under  Section  138  of  the  Negotiable
Instruments Act against respondent No.1 Smt. Savitri Pandey in the Court  of
Additional Civil Judge (J.D.)/Magistrate, Sonbhadra in the  State  of  Uttar
Pradesh.  The respondent’s case was that four cheques issued by the accused-
respondent in his favour were dishonoured, when presented for encashment.  A
notice calling upon the respondent-drawer of the cheque to  pay  the  amount
covered by the cheques was issued and duly served  upon  the  respondent  as
required under Section 138 (c) of The Negotiable Instruments Act,  1881.  No
payment was, however, made by the accused till  7th  October,  2008  when  a
complaint under Section 138 of the Act aforementioned was filed  before  the
Magistrate. Significantly enough the notice in question having  been  served
on 23rd September, 2008, the complaint presented on 7th  October,  2008  was
filed before expiry of the stipulated period of 15 days. The Magistrate  all
the same took cognizance of the offence on 14th  October,  2008  and  issued
summons to the accused, who then assailed  the  said  order  in  a  petition
under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. before the  High  Court  of  Judicature  at
Allahabad. The High court took the view that since the  complaint  had  been
filed within 15 days of the service of  the  notice  the  same  was  clearly
premature and the order passed by the Magistrate taking  cognizance  of  the
offence on the basis of such a complaint is  legally  bad.  The  High  Court
accordingly quashed  the  complaint  and  the  entire  proceedings  relating
thereto in terms of its order impugned in the present appeal.

4.    We have  heard  learned  counsel  for  the  parties  at  some  length.
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, inter alia, provides:
         “where any cheque  drawn by a person on an  account  maintained  by
         him with a banker for payment of any amount  of  money  to  another
         person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole  or  in
         part, of any debt or other  liability,  is  returned  by  the  bank
         unpaid, either because of the  amount  of  money  standing  to  the
         credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that
         it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account  by  an
         agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to  have
         committed an offence and  shall  without  prejudice  to  any  other
         provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment  for  a  term
         which may extend to two year, or with  fine  which  may  extend  to
         twice the amount of the cheque, or with both.”




5.    Proviso to Section 138,  however,  is  all  important  and  stipulates
three distinct conditions precedent, which  must  be  satisfied  before  the
dishonour of a cheque can constitute an offence and become punishable.   The
first condition is that the cheque ought to have been presented to the  bank
within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn  or  within
the period of its validity, whichever is earlier. The  second  condition  is
that the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as  the  case  may
be, ought to make a demand for the payment of the said amount  of  money  by
giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within thirty  days
of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the  return  of
the cheque as unpaid. The third condition is  that  the  drawer  of  such  a
cheque should have failed to make payment of the said  amount  of  money  to
the payee or as the case may be, to the holder in due course of  the  cheque
within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. It is only  upon  the
satisfaction of all the three  conditions  mentioned  above  and  enumerated
under the proviso to Section 138 as clauses (a), (b) and  (c)  thereof  that
an offence under Section 138 can be said  to  have  been  committed  by  the
person issuing the cheque.

6.    Section 142 of  the  Negotiable  Instruments  Act  governs  taking  of
cognizance of  the  offence  and  starts  with  a  non-obstante  clause.  It
provides that no court shall  take  cognizance  of  any  offence  punishable
under Section 138 except upon a complaint, in writing,  made  by  the  payee
or, as the case may be, the holder in due course and such complaint is  made
within one month of the date on which  the  cause  of  action  arises  under
clause (c) of the proviso to Section 138.  In terms of  sub-section  (c)  to
Section 142, no court inferior to that of a  Metropolitan  Magistrate  or  a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class  is  competent  to  try  any  offence
punishable under Section 138.

7.    A conjoint reading of Sections 138 and 142 makes it  abundantly  clear
that  a complaint under Section 138 can be filed only after  the   cause  of
action to do so accrues to the complainant in terms of  clause  (c)  of  the
proviso to Section 138 which  as  noticed  earlier  happens  only  when  the
drawer of the cheque in question fails to make the  payment  of  the  cheque
amount to the payee or the holder of  the  cheque  within  15  days  of  the
receipt of the notice required to be sent in terms  of  clause  (b)  to  the
proviso to Section 138.

8.    The upshot of the above  discussion  is  that  a  complaint  filed  in
anticipation of the accrual of the cause of action under clause (c)  of  the
proviso to Section 138 would be a premature complaint. The complainant  will
have no legal justification to file  such  a  complaint  for  the  cause  of
action to do so would not accrue to him till such time  the  drawer  of  the
cheque fails to pay the amount covered by the cheque within  the  stipulated
period of 15 days from the date of the receipt of the  notice.   It  follows
that on the date such a premature complaint is presented to  the  Magistrate
the same  can  and  ought  to  be  dismissed  as  premature  and  hence  not
maintainable. That is, however, not what happened in the case  at  hand.  In
the present case, the Magistrate took cognizance  of  the  offence  on  14th
October, 2008 by which time the stipulated period of  15  days  had  expired
but no payment towards the cheque amount was made to  the  complainant  even
upto the date the cognizance was taken.  The commission of the  offence  was
thus complete on the date cognizance was taken, but  the  complaint  on  the
basis whereof the cognizance was taken remained premature.

9.     The  question  in  the  above  backdrop  is  whether  the  subsequent
development namely completion of the third requirement  for  the  commission
of an offence under Section 138 could be  taken  note  of  for  purposes  of
cognizance under Section  142  of  the  Act.  The  complaint  filed  by  the
appellant was in our view plainly premature. The  fact  that  subsequent  to
the filing of the complaint an offence under Section 138 had been  committed
was no reason for the court to ignore the fact that  the  complaint  on  the
basis of which it was taking cognizance of  the  offence  was  not  a  valid
complaint. We say so because Section 142 of the Negotiable  Instruments  Act
forbids taking of cognizance of any offence  punishable  under  Section  138
except upon a complaint, in writing, made by the payee or the holder of  the
cheque in due course.  Such  a  complaint  in  order  to  be  treated  as  a
complaint within the contemplation of  Section  142  ought  to  be  a  valid
complaint. This in turn means that such a complaint  must  have  been  filed
after the complainant had the cause of action to do so under clause  (c)  of
the proviso  to  Section  138.  A  complaint,  that  is,  premature  was  no
complaint in the eyes of law and no cognizance could be taken on  the  basis
thereof.

10.   Having said that, we must refer to two decisions of  this  Court  that
were cited at the Bar by learned counsel  for  the  parties  in  support  of
their respective submissions.  In Narsingh  Das  Tapadia  v.  Goverdhan  Das
Partani and Anr. (2000) 7 SCC 183, a similar question arose  before  a  two-
Judge Bench of this Court. That was also  a  case  where  on  the  date  the
complaint was filed the complainant had no cause of action but by  the  time
cognizance of the offence  was  taken  by  the  Magistrate,  the  stipulated
period of 15 days  had  expired  and  the  commission  of  the  offence  was
complete. This Court drew a distinction between  “taking  cognizance  of  an
offence” and ”the filing of a complaint by  the  complainant”.   This  Court
held that while there was a bar  to  the  taking  of  a  cognizance  by  the
Magistrate, there was no bar to  the  filing  of  a  complaint  and  that  a
complaint filed even before the expiry of the period of  15  days  could  be
made a basis for taking cognizance of the offence  provided  cognizance  was
taken after the expiry of the said period.  This Court observed:

         “Mere presentation of the complaint in the court cannot be held  to
         mean that its cognizance had been taken by the Magistrate.  If  the
         complaint is found to be premature, it can  await  maturity  or  be
         returned  to  the  complainant  for  filing  later  and  its   mere
         presentation at an earlier date need  not  necessarily  render  the
         complaint liable to be dismissed  or  confer  any  right  upon  the
         accused to absolve himself from  the  criminal  liability  for  the
         offence committed.”

11.   The other decision pressed into service before us was  also  delivered
by a two  Judge  Bench  of  this  Court  in  Sarav  Investment  &  Financial
Consultancy Private Limited  and  Another  v.  Llyod  Register  of  Shipping
Indian Office Staff Provident Fund and Anr. (2007) 14 SCC  753.  There  this
Court held that Section 138 of the Negotiable  Instruments  Act  contains  a
penal provision and creates a vicarious liability. Even the burden of  proof
to some extent is on the accused. Having regard to the purport of  the  said
provision and the severe penalty sanctioned  by  it,  the  same  warrants  a
strict construction.  The Court further held that service  of  a  notice  in
terms of Section 138 proviso (b) of the Act  is  a  part  of  the  cause  of
action for lodging the complaint under Section 138 and  that  service  of  a
notice under clause (b) of the proviso  to  Section  138  was  an  essential
requirement to be complied with before a complaint could be filed.
The Court observed:

         “16. Section 138 of the Act contains a penal  provision.  It  is  a
         special statute. It creates a vicarious liability. Even the  burden
         of proof to some extent is on the accused.  Having  regard  to  the
         purport of the said provision as also in view of the fact  that  it
         provides for a severe penalty,  the  provision  warrants  a  strict
         construction. Proviso  appended  to  Section  138  contains  a  non
         obstante clause. It provides that nothing  contained  in  the  main
         provision shall apply unless the  requirements  prescribed  therein
         are complied with. Service  of  notice  is  one  of  the  statutory
         requirements for initiation of a criminal proceeding.  Such  notice
         is required to be given within  30  days  of  the  receipt  of  the
         information by the complainant from the bank regarding  the  cheque
         as unpaid. Clause (c) provides that the holder of the  cheque  must
         be given an opportunity to pay the amount  in  question  within  15
         days of the receipt of the said notice. Complaint  petition,  thus,
         can be filed for commission of an offence by a drawee of  a  cheque
         only 15 days after service of the notice. What are the requirements
         of service of a notice is no longer res  integra  in  view  of  the
         recent decision of this Court  in  C.C.  Alavi  Haji  v.  Palapetty
         Muhammed”

12.   It follows that a complaint filed before the expiry of the  stipulated
period of 15 days was not a valid complaint for purposes of Section  142  of
the Act.  To that extent, therefore, the view taken  in  the  two  decisions
referred to above are at variance with each other. That apart, the  decision
in Narsingh Das Tapadia (supra) does not, in our  opinion,  correctly  state
the legal position and may require a fresh look by a larger  Bench  of  this
Court. The cleavage in the judicial opinion on the question does not  appear
to be confined to the judgments of this Court alone.

13.   Judicial opinion on the question is split even among the  High  Courts
in the country. For instance, the High Court of Calcutta in Sandip  Guha  v.
Saktipada Ghosh 2008 (3) CHN 214, High Court of Orissa in Niranjan Sahoo  v.
Utkal Sanitary, BBSR, [Crl. Misc. Case  No.889  of  1996,  decided  on  13th
February, 1998], High Court of Bombay in Rakesh Nemkumar Porwal  v.  Narayan
Dhondu Joglekar and Anr. 1994 (3) Bom CR  355,  High  Court  of  Punjab  and
Haryana in Ashok Verma v. Ritesh Agro Pvt. Ltd. 1995 (1) Bank  CLR  103  and
the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in N. Venkata Sivaram Prasad  v.  Rajeswari
Constructions  1996  Cri.L.J.  3409  (A.P.)  have  taken  the  view  that  a
complaint filed within 15 days of the notice period was premature and  hence
liable to be quashed.

14.   The High Court of Allahabad on the other hand  has  taken  a  contrary
view in Smt. Hem Lata Gupta v. State of U.P & Anr. 2002 Cri.L.J. 1522  (All)
and held that cognizance taken on the basis of a complaint filed  within  15
days of the notice period was perfectly in  order  if  such  cognizance  was
taken after the expiry of the said period.   To  the  same  effect  are  the
decisions of High Court of Allahabad in Ganga Ram Singh v. State of  U.P.  &
Ors. 2005 Cri.L.J. 3681 (All), High  Court  of  Gauhati  in  Yunus  Khan  v.
Mazhar Khan, [2004 (1) GLT 652], High Court of Rajasthan (Jaipur  Bench)  in
Mahendra Agarwal v. Gopi Ram Mahajan, [RLW 2003 (1) Raj 673], High Court  of
Delhi in Zenith Fashions Makers (P) Ltd. v.  Ultimate  Fashion  Makers  Ltd.
and Anr., [121 (2005) DLT 297], High Court of Madhya Pradesh,  Indore  Bench
in Bapulal v. Krapachand Jain, 2004 Cri.L.J. 1140, High  Court  of  Himachal
Pradesh in Rattan Chand v. Kanwar Ram Kripal  and  Anr.  2010  Cri.L.J.  706
and High Court of Madras in I.S.P. Solutions India  (P)  Ltd.  and  Ors.  v.
Kuppuraj, 2006 Cri.L.J. 3711.

15.   It is noteworthy that the same High Court has in certain  cases  taken
different views on the subject. For instance the High  Court  of  Jammu  and
Kashmir has in Harpreet Hosiery Rehari v. Nitu Mahajan, 2000  Cri.L.J.  3625
held that dismissal of complaint on ground of that the same is premature  is
valid; while in S. Janak Singh v. Pritpal Singh, 2007 (2) J.K.  91,  it  has
held that cognizance taken on a complaint filed before expiry of 15 days  of
the notice, after the expiry of the said period is  permissible.  A  similar
difference of opinion can also be seen in two  decisions  of  the  Karnataka
High Court in Ashok Hegde v. Jathin Attawan, 1997  Cri.L.J.  3691  and  Arun
Hegde and Anr. v. M.J. Shetty, ILR  2001  Kar  3295.  The  conflict  in  the
judicial pronouncements referred to above, therefore, needs to  be  resolved
authoritatively.

16.   The second question formulated earlier may  arise  only  in  case  the
answer to the first question is in the negative.  If no cognizance could  be
taken on the basis of a complaint filed prematurely, the question  would  be
whether such a complaint could be presented again after  the  expiry  of  15
days and beyond the period of one month under the clause (b) of Section  142
of the Act. Whether or not the complainant can in a situation like  the  one
in the case at hand invoke the proviso to clause  (b)  and  whether  or  not
this Court can and ought to invoke its power under  Section  142  to  permit
the complainant to file a complaint even after the expiry of period  of  one
month stipulated under Section 142 are incidental questions  that  may  fall
for determination while answering question no.2.

17.   In the light of the above, we deem it fit to refer the  two  questions
formulated in the beginning of the judgment to a three-Judge Bench  of  this
Court.  The Registry shall place the  file  before  the  Chief  Justice  for
constitution of an appropriate Bench.
                                                          ……………………….……..……J.
                                                               (T.S. THAKUR)


                                                          ………………………….…..……J.
                                                          (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)
New Delhi
April 3, 2012

