
Supreme Court of India
Bhagel Singh vs Swaran Singh And Ors on 22 January, 1992Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR  682, 1992 SCR  (1) 338
Author: K Singh
Bench: Kuldip Singh (J)
           PETITIONER:
BHAGEL SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SWARAN SINGH AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/01/1992

BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH (J)
BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH (J)
SAHAI, R.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR  682		  1992 SCR  (1) 338
 1992 SCC  Supl.  (2)  96 JT 1992 (1)	252
 1992 SCALE  (1)126


ACT:
Indian Penal Code 1860.
     Ss.  34,  302-Free	 fight	between	 rival	 parties-Two
persons	 shot  dead-Whether  participants  responsible	for
their individual acts.
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
     S.	 313-Statement of accused setting up  a	 defence-Not
supported  by  other evidence-Medical  evidence-Contrary  to
defence version-Credibility of statement.



HEADNOTE:
     A	dispute in respect of a drain to be dug through	 the
fields of the appellant-complainant led to a quarrel between
the  complainant party and the respondents no. 1 to  4	(all
brothers  and arrayed as accused nos. 1 to  4  respectively,
before	 the  trial  court)  in	 which,	 according  to	 the
prosecution  case, respondent no 4 received  minor  injuries
whereas	 PW  14	 on the	 complainant's	side  was  seriously
injured;  and while he was being taken to the city  hospital
in  a tractor trolley accused nos. 1 to 4 armed with  rifle,
kirpan, gun and sua respectively, challenged the complainant
party near the village bus stop.  Thereupon deceased-1	with
some  others got down from the tractor and went	 forward  to
persuade accused no. 1 to keep peace while the latter  fired
two  successive shots hitting deceased-1 and deceased-2	 who
died  on  the spot.  Accused no 3 fired	 two  shots  causing
injuries to two other persons of complainant party.  Accused
no 3 gave kirpan blows to PW 16 as also to PW 15, who was in
the  grip of accused no. 4.  In the incident, accused no.  1
also received injuries.	 The case originated with the F.I.R.
lodged by the complainant-appellant (PW 8) and culminated in
the trial of the four accused.
     The prosecution produced the complainant-appellant	 (PW
8) and the three injured (PW 14-16) as eye-witnesses.
     Accused  no. 1 in his statement under s. 313  Cr.	P.C.
set up a defence plea stating that there was a minor quarrel
between the
						       339
parties	 in  the fields in the	presence  of  Sub-Divisional
Officer and on his intervention they returned to the  house.
After some time when they came to know that the other  party
was  causing injuries to accused no 4, accused nos. 1  to  3
armed with rifle, kirpan and gun respectively, went there in
order  to rescue him but PW 15 caught hold of accused no.  1
and  the  complainant started giving him Takwa	blows  while
deceased-2  gave  him stick-blows and in  this	process	 the
rifle  went  off.  He further stated that accused  nos.	 3-4
also suffered injuries.
     The  trial court, accepting the  eye-witness  testimony
and rejecting the defence plea, held that the accused  party
was  aggressor and as such charges against them were  proved
beyond	reasonable doubt.  It convicted accused no. 1  under
s.  302 IPC and each of accused nos. 2-4 under s.  302	read
with  s. 34 IPC, and sentenced all of them  in	imprisonment
for  life.   They were also awarded sentence of	 fine.	 The
trial  court further convicted accused nos. 2 to 4 under  s.
307  & 325 IPC, 326 IPC, and 323 IPC respectively, and	also
convicted all the accused under these sections with the	 aid
of s. 34 IPC. Accused nos. 1 and 3 were also convicted under
the Arms Act.
     On	 appeal,  the  High  Court,  accepting	the  defence
version	 as  more  probable than that  of  the	prosecution,
reversed the findings of the trial court, allowed the appeal
and  acquitted all the accused.	 Aggrieved, the	 complainant
preferred the appeal by special leave to this Court.
     Accepting	the  appeal to the extent  of  acquittal  of
accused no. 1 and setting it  aside, this Court,
     HELD : 1.1 The findings of the High Court	that-accused
No.  4	had  been disabled by the time	the  other  accused,
persons	 reached the spot and as such the accused party	 was
justified  in  acting in self-defence; accused	nos.  1	 was
injured by the complainant party before he had actually used
his rifle; and that accused nos. 1 and 3 fired from a  close
range-apart  from being contrary to the eyewitness  account,
are belied by the medical evidence on record. [345 GH;346 C-
D; 347 A-B]
     1.2  The  doctor (PW 3) who examined respondent  no.  4
found simple injuries on his person. He nowhere stated	that
the  accused became disabled because of the  injuries.	 The
nature of the injuries was such that the conclusion  reached
by the High Court was without any basis. [pp. 345 H; 346 A]
						       340
     1.3  The  injuries	 on the person	of  accused  no.  1,
including  the	one with a sharp edged weapon on  the  head,
were  much  more serious than those of accused nos.  4.	  If
accused	 no. 1 who was armed with a rifle could be given  12
injuries  with	different weapons at the time when  all	 the
four accused persons were present on the spot, there was  no
reason why accused no. 4 could not have been given  injuries
at the same time. [p. 346 BC]
     1.4.  Accused no. 1 in his statement under s. 313,	 Cr.
P.C. specifically stated that accused no 4 suffered injuries
at  the hands of the other party which obviously means	that
he was given beating at the same time when accused no. 1 was
injured. [p. 346 C]
     1.5. Looking at the nature of injuries and the  opinion
of the doctor it cannot be believed that accused no. 1 could
have fired two shots killing deceased-1 and deceased-2 after
receiving  the	injuries.   The trial  court  was  right  in
holding	 that  after  receiving 12  injuries  and  with	 his
condition  as  opined  by the doctor  it  was  difficult  to
believe	 that  accused no. 1 was in a position to  fire	 the
shots.	 He  must  have,  therefore,  used  his	 gun  before
receiving the injuries. [p. 346 H; 347 A]
     1.6.  The doctor who conducted the post-mortem  on	 the
dead body of deceased-1 stated that there was no blackening,
scorching  or tattooing which indicates that the shots	were
not fired from a close range. [p. 347 B]
     2.1  The defence version as given by respondent  no.  1
does not inspire confidence. [p. 347 B-C]
     2.2  If  PW  15 caught hold of accused no.	 1  and	 the
appellant  gave	 Takwa blow on his head he  could  not	have
possibly  fired two shots killing the two deceased.  In	 any
case,  even  if he was in a position to fire  the  shots  he
would  have  first fired at the appellant who was  the	main
enemy  and  was	 hitting  him  with  Takwa.   It  is  highly
improvable that in that situation he would have fired at the
two deceased.  Even otherwise, accused no. 1 had not  stated
how  the  rifle	 held  by him went  off.   No  evidence	 was
produced to further clarify the defence version. [p. 347 CD]
     2.3  The High Court, therefore, erred in accepting	 the
defence	 version  put  forward	by  accused  no.  1  in	 his
statement under s. 313, Criminal Procedure Code. [p. 347 D]
						       341
     3.1  The trial court was not right in holding that	 the
accused party was the aggressor. [p. 347 E]
     3.2 There were bitter feelings between the parties	 and
the  tempers were high.	 The accused party was in favour  of
digging the drain whereas the complainant party was  against
the  proposal  because the drain was passing  through  their
fields.	 On the day of occurrence the complainant party gave
beating	 to accused no. 4 and thereafter the  accused  party
injured	 PW 14 belonging to the complainant  party.   Before
the  main  occurrence took place sufficient  heat  had	been
generated  between the parties and they were itching  for  a
show-down. [pp. 347 E-F]
     3.3  The  only  probable conclusion  is  that  the	 two
parties	 came  across each other and had a free fight  as  a
result of which both sides suffered injuries and two persons
died.  In such a situation the participants are	 responsible
for their individual acts. [p. 347 G]
     4.1  Both the courts below, though	 giving	 conflicting
verdicts,  have rightly come to the conclusion that the	 two
deceased were killed by the gun shots fired by accused no. 1
who  in	 his statement under s. 313, Cr.  P.C.	stated	that
while injuries were being caused to him his rifle went	off.
[pp. 347 GH; 348 A]
     4.2  Accused  no  1 is, therefore,	 guilty	 of  causing
murder	of  the two deceased and  is  accordingly  convicted
under  s. 302 IPC and sentenced to imprisonment for life  on
the  two  counts.   There  is  no  evidence  to	 prove	 the
commission  of any offence by the other participants  beyond
reasonable  doubt.   Accused  nos. 2 to	 4  are,  therefore,
acquitted by giving them benefit of doubt. [p. 348 A-B]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal  Appeal  No
302 of 1980.
     From the Judgment and Order dated the 2.11.1979 of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Crl. A. No. 455 of 1978.
     S.K. Jain for the Appellant.
     R.S. Sodhi for the Respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
						       342
     KULDIP  SINGH, J. Swaran Singh and his  brothers  Avtar
Singh,	Ajmer  Singh and Rajinder Singh were tried  for	 the
murder of Kandhara Singh and Darbara Singh.  They were	also
tried  for  causing injuries to Tarlok	Singh, Sadha  Singh,
Anokh Singh, Sukhdev Singh and Boor Singh.  Swaran Singh and
Ajmer  Singh were further tried under Arms Act.	  The  trial
court  convicted  Swaran Singh under Section  302,  IPC	 and
sentenced  him to imprisonment for life on two counts. Other
accused	 were sentenced with the aid of Section 34,  IPC  to
imprisonment  for life.	 They were also awarded sentence  of
fine.  Ajmer  Singh,  Avtar Singh and  Rajinder	 Singh	were
further convicted under section 307 and 325 IPC, 326 IPC and
323  IPC respectively.	All the four accused  were  inter-se
convicted under these sections with the aid of 34, IPC.	 The
High Court, on appeal, set aside the conviction and sentence
of  all the accused and acquitted them.	 This appeal by	 way
of special leave is by the complainant against the  judgment
of the High Court.
     We may briefly notice the prosecution story as recorded
in the first information report lodged by Baghel Singh PW 8.
A drain was to be dug up through the village. It was to pass
through the fields of Baghel Singh, Complainant Swaran Singh
accused	 was  the sarpanch of the village.   He	 wanted	 the
drain to be dug whereas Baghel Singh was opposed to it.	  On
July 23, 1977 at about 5.15 p.m. the Sub-Divisional  Officer
accompanied  by a police inspector visited the village in  a
Government jeep in order to inspect the site of the proposed
drain.	The jeep was parked at some distance from the  site.
The accused and the complainant parties were present. Swaran
Singh  accused was armed with a pistol, Ajmer Singh  with  a
dang  and Rajinder Singh was having a Neza.  There was	some
altercation  between the groups and Rajinder Singh  received
minor  injuries	 at the hands of the complainants.   At	 the
same  time  Swaran  Singh, Ajmer Singh	and  Rajinder  Singh
accused	 caused	 injuries  to Boor Singh  P.W.	14  who	 was
standing  by the side of the Government jeep.  Baghel  Singh
and  others  raised  an alarm upon  which  the	above  named
accused	 persons left Boor Singh and went away.	 Boor  Singh
who  had  suffered  number of injuries	on  his	 person	 was
brought	 to  the village in the jeep of	 the  Sub-Divisional
Officer.  Boor Singh was put in a tractor trolley for taking
him to the hospital in Ferozepur city.	Baghel Singh P.W.8,
Anokh  Singh P.W. 15. Sukhdev Singh P.W. 16, Kandhara Singh,
Darbara Singh and some others also sat in the trolley.	When
they  reached  near bus stand of the village,  Swaran  Singh
accused armed with a rifle, Ajmer Singh accused armed with a
gun,  Avtar Singh accused armed with a Kirpan  and  Rajinder
Singh armed with a sua came running toward the trolley	from
the village side.  They were raising threats that they would
not  allow  Baghel  Singh and his  companions  to  go.	 The
tractor was stopped and some of the occupants got
						       343
down.	Kandhara  Singh went forward and tried	to  persuade
Swaran	Singh to keep peace.  The latter, however,  fired  a
shot which hit Kandhara Singh on the left side of chest	 and
he  fell  down.	 Swaran Singh fired  again  hitting  Darbara
singh  who also fell down.  Both Kandhara Singh and  Darbara
Singh died on the spot.	 Ajmer Singh accused fired two shots
from  his gun injuring Tarlok Singh and Sadha  Singh.  Avtar
Singh gave a Kirpan blow to Anokh Singh on his head.   Avtar
Singh also gave a Kirpan blow on the right wrist of  Sukhdev
Singh. Rajinder Singh took Anokh singh in his grip.   Baghel
Singh kept on raising alarm while standing near the tractor.
According  to Baghel Singh "Swaran Singh etc. also  received
injuries from us in our self-defence".	All the four accused
thereafter  went away from the place of occurrence.   Baghel
Singh  went  to	 the  police  station  to  lodge  the  first
information report which was recorded at 7.30 p.m.
     Nine  injuries were found on the person of	 Boor  Singh
which included two grievous injuries.  The bones  underneath
left  forearm  were  fractured.	 Swaran	 Singh	accused	 was
examined  by  the doctor at 6.45 a.m. on July 24,  1977	 who
found 12 injuries on his person.  The doctor opined that his
condition  was very serious.  Five of the injuries  were  on
the head.  There was an incised wound 7 cm x 1 cm on the top
of the head which was bone deep.  Rajinder Singh accused had
ten  simple injuries on his person.  It is not necessary  to
note the injuries on the other members of the accused or the
complainant party.
     The  occurrence took place at about 5.25 p.m., the	 FIR
was  lodged at 7.30 p.m. and the special report reached	 the
Magistrate at 11 p.m. the same day.
     The  prosecution  produced Baghel Singh  P.W.  8,	Boor
Singh P.W. 14, Anokh Singh P.W. 15 and Sukhdev Singh P.W. 16
as eye-witnesses.  Except Baghel Singh the other three	were
injured witnesses.
     Swaran  Singh  accused in his statement  under  section
313,  Criminal	Procedure Code set up  the  defence-plea  as
under:
	 "S.D.O.  came to village to inspect the spot  where
	 the  drain was to be dug.  There was minor  quarrel
	 in the fields. S.D.O. intervened and separated	 the
	 parties.    We	 returned  to  the   house.    After
	 sometime, we came to know that the other party	 was
	 causing  injuries  to my  brother  Rajinder  Singh.
	 Myself armed with a rifle, Ajmer Singh armed with a
	 gun, and Avtar Singh armed with a kirpan went there
	 went  there  to rescue Rajinder  Singh.   We  found
	 Baghel Singh, Kandhara Singh, Darbara Singh, Anokh
						       344
	 Singh,	 Sukhdev Singh, Harbhej Singh, Tarlok  Singh
	 and Boor Singh, causing injuries to Rajinder Singh.
	 I  intervened	to rescue Rajinder Singh  but  Anokh
	 Singh caught hold of me.  Baghel Singh gave a takwa
	 blow  hitting on my head.  Kandhara  Singh  started
	 giving	 stick blows to me.  When the injuries	were
	 being	caused, the rifle went off, Avtar Singh	 and
	 Rajinder  Singh  also	suffered  injuries  in	 the
	 meantime at the hands of the other party.  We	were
	 medically  examined.  My statement was recorded  by
	 the police in the hospital".
     The  trial	 court accepted the  eye-witness  testimony,
rejected  the defence-plea and came to the  conclusion	that
the  accused  party was aggressor and as  such	the  charges
against them were proved beyond reasonable doubt.  The	High
Court  without	adverting  to  the  testimony  of  the	eye-
witnesses  reversed the findings of the trial court  on	 the
ground	that  the defence-plea was more	 probable  than	 the
prosecution  version.  The High Court accepted the  defence-
plea and acquitted the accused.	 The High Court accepted the
defence version on the following reasoning :
	 "According to the eye-witnesses, there was a  minor
	 altercation in the presence of the S.D.O. in  which
	 Rajinder  Singh appellant had	received  some	fist
	 blows.	  They have also stated that Rajinder  Singh
	 appellant  was	 armed	with a	sua  when  the	main
	 occurrence  took place near the bus stand.   Baghel
	 Singh	PW  8  has,  however,  admitted	 that	this
	 appellant did not wield his neza at the time of the
	 main occurrence.  This is a tell-tale	circumstance
	 which goes to establish that probably by that	time
	 this  appellant  had been disabled because  of	 the
	 injuries  received  by	 him at	 the  hands  of	 the
	 complainant party.  Otherwise, there appears to  be
	 no  earthly  reason  for  this	 appellant  to	have
	 refrained from using the sua when his real  brother
	 Swaran	 Singh	was  being  seriously  beaten,	even
	 though	  he   was  armed  with	  a   rifle.	This
	 circumstance  goes a long way to make	the  defence
	 version  more	probable.   The	 type  of   injuries
	 received by this appellant clearly show that he had
	 been attacked by more than one person who had	been
	 armed	with  lathis or takwas which had  been	used
	 from wrong side.  This could only have happened  if
	 he  had  come across the complainant party  in	 the
	 absence  of  Swaran Singh, Avtar  Singh  and  Ajmer
	 Singh-his  real  brothers.  It appears to  us	that
	 while	Boor  Singh  PW 14 was being  taken  on	 the
	 tractor-trolley   to the hospital,  Rajinder  Singh
	 appellant happened to come across them when some of
	 the members of the complainant party started giving
	 him a
						       345
	 beating.   It matters little whether he was  coming
	 on  a	loaded	or an empty  cart.   On	 receipt  of
	 injuries  he  might  have  raised  an	alarm  which
	 attracted the other three appellants who came there
	 armed	as suggested by the  prosecution  witnesses.
	 Furthermore   if  Swaran  Singh  and  Ajmer   Singh
	 appellants  had entertained  aggressive  intentions
	 from the very beginning, they would have fired from
	 their	respective fire-arms at the complaint  party
	 from  some  distance.	On the other hand,  we	find
	 that  Swaran  Singh  appellant had as	many  as  12
	 injuries  on his person and Avtar  Singh  appellant
	 had  three injuries on his person.  These  injuries
	 could	 have  been  inflicted	upon  Swaran   Singh
	 appellant  before he had actually put his rifle  to
	 use.	It is somewhat difficult to reconstruct	 the
	 original scene but the probabilities are that	even
	 when  he  came armed with a rifle on  the  spot  he
	 exercised  discretion	in the hope that  the  other
	 party	would  perhaps leave  his  brother  Rajinder
	 Singh	appellant on seeing him armed with a  rifle.
	 This  however, did not happen and on the other hand
	 he  was  also	subjected  to  an  attack.   It	 was
	 probably at that time that he fired two shots	from
	 his rifle hitting both the deceased.  He might have
	 received  some	 injuries before he  fired  the	 two
	 shots	and some injuries thereafter but that  again
	 is  immaterial.   Once	 it is	held  that  Rajinder
	 Singh	appellant was being beaten by more than	 one
	 person,  this appellant did have the right to	save
	 his  life  and	 also  his  own	 life  when  he	 was
	 attacked.   Ajmer Singh appellant also	 appears  to
	 have fired two shots from his gun when he saw	that
	 Swaran	 Singh appellant, in spite of his holding  a
	 rifle,	 had  been  disabled.	In  any	 event,	 the
	 defence  plea	is  not	 of  that  type	 as  can  be
	 dismissed  on first sight.  On the other hand,	 the
	 circumstances	enumerated  by us show that  it	 was
	 somewhat more probable."
     We	 are  of the view that the High Court  reasoning  is
based  on surmises and conjectures.  The main  reason  which
weighed with the High Court was that Rajinder Singh  accused
had been disabled by the time other accused persons  reached
on  the	 spot and as such they were justified in  acting  in
self-defence.	According  to the High Court,  had  Rajinder
Singh  not been disabled he would have come forward to	help
his  brother  Swaran Singh who was being  seriously  beaten.
Apart  from the eye-witnesses, the medical  evidence  belies
the  conclusion reached by the High Court.   Rajinder  Singh
was examined by the doctor at 1.00 a.m. on July 24, 1977 and
found  ten simple injuries on his person. Dr. Amarjit  Singh
who  examined  Rajinder Singh was produced as DW 3.  He	 was
only asked to give the details of the injuries.	 He  nowhere
stated that Rajinder Singh became
						       346
disabled  because  of  the injuries received  by  him.	 The
nature	of the injuries is such that the conclusion  reached
by  the	 High Court is without any basis.   The	 High  court
finding	 that  the  nature  of injuries	 on  the  person  of
Rajinder Singh were such that the same could only be  caused
when  the  other three accused were not present	 is  further
based on conjectures.  The injuries on the person of  Swaran
Singh  were much more serious than that of  Rajinder  Singh.
There  were 12 injuries on the person of Swaran Singh  which
included one grievous injury on the head with a sharp  edged
weapon.	 If Swaran Singh who was armed with a rifle could be
given  12 injuries with different weapons at the  time	when
all the four accused persons were present on the spot  there
is  no reason why Rajinder Singh could not have	 been  given
injuries at the same time.  In any case Swaran Singh in	 his
statement   under  section  313,  Criminal  Procedure	Code
reproduced above has specifically stated that Rajinder Singh
was  given  beating at the same time when Swaran  Singh	 was
injured.   The finding of the High Court that  Swaran  Singh
accused	 was given injuries by the complainant party  before
he  had actually used his rifle is contrary to	the  medical
evidence  on the record.  Admittedly there were 12  injuries
on the person of Swaran Singh. Dr. Sandhu, Medical  Officer,
Civil Hospital, Ferozpur examined as DW 2 stated as under:
	 "General condition.
	 Pulse.	 130 per minute.  B.P.	70/40  M.M.  of	  MG.
	 Respiratory  rate 24 per minute. Pupils  equal	 and
	 reacted to light, the patient delirious and  talked
	 irrelevant.	The  general  condition	  was	very
	 serious.   Injuries  No. 1 to 6 and  8	 kept  under
	 observation.	Rest all simple.  Injury no.  1	 was
	 caused by sharp edged weapon. Rest were caused by a
	 blunt	weapon.	  The duration of the  injuries	 was
	 within	 24  hours.   I have  brought  the  original
	 medico legal report which is in my hands and  bears
	 my signatures.	 Injury no. 1 was declared  grevious
	 after X-ray report.
	 XXXn
	 Q. Was the condition of the patient serious because
	 of the injuries ?
	 A. Yes."
     Looking  at the nature of injuries and the	 opinion  of
the  doctor  it is difficult to believe	 that  Swaran  Singh
could  have  fired  two shots  killing	Kandhara  Singh	 and
Darbara	 Singh after receiving the injuries.  We agree	with
the  trial court that after receiving 12 injuries  and	with
his condition
						       347
as  opined  by the doctor it is difficult  to  believe	that
Swaran	Singh  was in position to fire the shots.   He	must
have, therefore, used his gun before receiving the injuries.
The finding reached by the High Court that Swaran Singh	 and
Ajmer Singh fired from a close range is again belied by	 the
medical evidence.  Dr. Birender Pal Singh PW3 who  conducted
the  post mortem on the dead body of Kandhara  Singh  stated
that  there was no blackening, scorching or tattooing  which
indicates that the shots were not fired from a close range.
     The  defence  version as given by Swaran Singh  to	 our
mind  does  not inspire confidence.  If Anokh  Singh  caught
hold of Swaran Singh and Baghel Singh gave Takwa blow on his
head  he  could not have possibly fired	 two  shots  killing
Kandhara  Singh and Darbara Singh.  In any case, even if  he
was  in	 a position to fire the shots he  would	 have  first
fired at Baghel Singh who was the main enemy and was hitting
him  with  Takwa.   It is highly  improbable  that  in	that
situation  he  would have fired at Kandhara  Singh  who	 was
holding	 a  stick and Darbara Singh who was  no	 where	near
Swaran Singh. Even otherwise Swaran Singh had not stated how
the rifle held by him went off.	 No evidence was produced to
further	 clarify  the  defence	version.   The	High  Court,
therefore,  erred  in  accepting  the  defence	version	 put
forward	 by  Swaran  Singh accused in  his  statement  under
section 313, Criminal Procedure Code.
     While  rejecting the plea of self-defence	and  setting
aside  the High Court verdict we are not inclined  to  agree
with  the  trial  court	 that  the  accused  party  was	 the
aggressor.   There were bitter feelings between the  parties
and the tempers were high.  The accused party was in  favour
of  digging  the  drain whereas the  complainant  party	 was
against	 the proposal because the drain was passing  through
their fields.  It is the prosecution case that on the day of
occurrence  the complainant party gave beating	to  Rajinder
Singh accused and thereafter the accused party injured	Boor
Singh  belonging to the complainant party.  Before the	main
occurrence took place at 5.25 p.m. sufficient heat had	been
generated  between the parties and they were itching  for  a
show-down.   The  only probable conclusion is that  the	 two
parties	 came  across each other and had a free fight  as  a
result of which both sides suffered injuries and two persons
died.  In such a situation the participants are	 responsible
for their individual acts.
     Both  the	courts	below,	though	giving	 conflicting
verdicts,  have come to the conclusion that  Kandhara  Singh
and  Darbara  Singh were killed by the gun  shots  fired  by
Swaran Singh.  In his statement under section 313,  Criminal
Procedure  Code	 he stated that while  injuries	 were  being
caused	to him the rifle with which he has armed  went	off.
Swaran Singh is,
						       348
therefore,  guilty of causing murder of Kandhara  Singh	 and
Darbara	 Singh.	  We, therefore, convict him  under  section
302,  IPC and sentence him to imprisonment for life  on	 the
two  counts.  So far as the other participants in  the	free
fight  are  concerned  there is no  evidence  to  prove	 the
commission  of any offence by them beyond reasonable  doubt.
We therefore, give them benefit of doubt and acquit them.
     The  appeal is, therefore, accepted to the extent	that
the  acquittal	of  Swaran Singh by the High  Court  is	 set
aside.	 We convict Swaran Singh under section 302, IPC	 and
sentence  him to life imprisonment.  The appeal is  disposed
of  in	these  terms.	Swaran Singh is	 on  bail. He  shall
surrender to his bail-bonds and undergo the sentence of life
imprisonment.
R.P.					 Appeal disposed of.
						       349




