
Supreme Court of India
Sau. Kamal Shivaji Pokarnekar vs The State Of Maharashtra on 12 February, 2019Author: L N Rao
                                                                          Non-Reportable


                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    Criminal Appeal No. 255 of 2019
                              (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 7513 of 2014)

                  SAU. KAMAL SHIVAJI POKARNEKAR
                                                                  .... Appellant(s)
                                               Versus

                  THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.
                                                                  ….Respondent(s)
                                           JUDGMENT

                  L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.

                         Leave granted.

                  1.     The Trial Court issued process to the Respondents in the

                  complaint filed by the Appellant.     The Writ Petition filed by the

                  Respondents against the issuance of process was allowed. The

                  High Court set aside the process issued by the Trial Court as

                  affirmed by the Revisional Court in the Criminal Writ Petition

                  filed by the Respondents.      Aggrieved thereby, the Appellant

                  has filed this appeal.

                  2.       It was alleged by the complainant that her father

                  Shamrao Nalavade expired on 17.01.1994. The Respondents
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by

                  were accused of forgery and preparing false documents on the
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2019.02.12
15:54:03 IST
Reason:


                  basis of which a development agreement dated 11.12.2002

                  came into existence.     On the basis of the above facts, the

                                                      1
complainant alleged that the Respondents made themselves

liable for being prosecuted under Sections 420, 465, 467, 468,

471 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860

(hereinafter referred to as ‘the IPC’). The complaint that was

filed on 18.11.2008 was sent for investigation under Section

156 (3) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.       The police

submitted a report stating that the matter appeared to be of a

civil nature.

3.   The Trial Court recorded the statement of the husband of

the Appellant and directed issuance of process to the

Respondents.    The Respondents filed a revision challenging

the issuance of process against them which was dismissed.

The High Court allowed the Writ Petition filed by the

Respondents, holding that the dispute is of a civil nature, and

criminal proceedings against the Respondents would be an

abuse of the process of law. The High Court recorded a finding

that the disputed document cannot be stated to be a sham

document, as Shamrao during his lifetime stated on oath that

he had handed over the possession of the land to the

Respondents.     The submission made on behalf of the

Respondents that the matter is entirely of a civil nature was

accepted by the High Court.


                                 2
4.       The only point that arises for our consideration in this

case is whether the High Court was right in setting aside the

order by which process was issued.                 It is settled law that the

Magistrate, at the stage of taking cognizance and summoning,

is required to apply his judicial mind only with a view to taking

cognizance of the offence, or in other words, to find out

whether a prima facie case has been made out for summoning

the accused persons. The learned Magistrate is not required to

evaluate the merits of the material or evidence in support of

the complaint, because the Magistrate must not undertake the

exercise to find out whether the materials would lead to a

conviction or not1.

5.       Quashing the criminal proceedings is called for only in a

case where the complaint does not disclose any offence, or is

frivolous, vexatious, or oppressive. If the allegations set out in

the      complaint      do    not   constitute     the      offence   of   which

cognizance has been taken by the Magistrate, it is open to the

High Court to quash the same.                    It is not necessary that a

meticulous analysis of the case should be done before the Trial

to find out whether the case would end in conviction or

acquittal.       If it appears on a reading of the complaint and

consideration of the allegations therein, in the light of the

statement made on oath that the ingredients of the offence are
1
Sonu Gupta v. Deepak Gupta and Ors. 2015 (3) SCC 424.

                                             3
disclosed, there would be no justification for the High Court to

interfere2.

6.       Defences that may be available, or facts/aspects which

when established during the trial, may lead to acquittal, are

not grounds for quashing the complaint at the threshold. At

that      stage,     the    only     question       relevant     is   whether   the

averments in the complaint spell out the ingredients of a

criminal offence or not3.

7.       Relying upon the aforementioned judgments of this Court,

Mr. M. N. Rao, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

Appellant submitted that the High Court acted in excess of its

jurisdiction in setting aside the order of the Trial Court by which

process for summoning the accused was issued.                            He further

submitted that the evaluation of the merits of the allegations

made on either side cannot be resorted to at this stage.

8.       Mr. R. Basant, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

Respondent Nos.2 to 6 and 8 to 11 submitted that a proper

evaluation of the material on record would disclose that the

complaint is frivolous.               He submitted that the dispute is

essentially of a civil nature and the ingredients of the offences

that are alleged against the Respondent are not made out. By

making the above statement, Mr. Basant commended to this

2
State of Karnataka v. M. Devendrappa and Anr. 2002 (3) SCC 89
3
Indian Oil Corporation v. NEPC India Ltd. and Others, 2006 (6) SCC 736

                                                4
Court that there is no warrant for interference with the

judgment of the High Court.

9.   Having heard the learned Senior Counsel and examined

the material on record, we are of the considered view that the

High Court ought not to have set aside the order passed by the

Trial Court issuing summons to the Respondents. A perusal of

the complaint discloses that prima facie, offences that are

alleged against the Respondents. The correctness or otherwise

of the said allegations has to be decided only in the Trial.         At

the initial stage of issuance of process it is not open to the

Courts to stifle the proceedings by entering into the merits of

the contentions made on behalf of the accused.               Criminal

complaints cannot be quashed only on the ground that the

allegations made therein appear to be of a civil nature. If the

ingredients of the offence alleged against the accused are

prima facie made out in the complaint, the criminal proceeding

shall not be interdicted.

10. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the judgment of

the High Court is set aside.

                                       ..…................................J
                                         [L. NAGESWARA RAO]


                                       ..…................................J
                                         [M.R. SHAH]
New Delhi,
February 12, 2019.

                                  5

