
Supreme Court of India
B.S.N.L. vs Pramod V. Sawant on 19 August, 2019Author: Navin Sinha
Bench: Navin Sinha, B.R. Gavai
                                                                          NON­REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 503 OF 2010

                         BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM LIMITED
                         AND OTHERS                   ..........APPELLANT(S)


                                                         VERSUS
                         PRAMOD V. SAWANT
                         AND ANOTHER                                ......RESPONDENT(S)



                                                        JUDGMENT

                         NAVIN SINHA, J.

                                        The appellants are aggrieved by the dismissal of

                         their   writ    application,   rejecting   the   challenge   to   their

                         prosecution for lack of sanction under Section 197 of the Code

                         of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter called as “Cr.P.C.”).

                         2.      A criminal complaint case no.14/S/2003 was filed by
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
                         respondent no.1 before the Additional Chief Metropolitan
Date: 2019.08.19
14:27:04 IST
Reason:


                         Magistrate under clauses 26(2)(3) and 39 read with clause 27


                                                          1
of the Private Security Guards (Regulation of Employment and

Welfare) Scheme, 1981 read with Section 3(3) of Maharashtra

Private Security Guards (Regulation of Employment and

Welfare) Act, 1981 (hereinafter called as “the Act”).        The

complaint stated that the appellant – Corporation was

registered with the respondent ­ Security Guards Board. The

Corporation was under obligation to engage security guards

registered with respondent no.1 only. An inspection revealed

engagement of unregistered guards.       The Magistrate issued

process against the appellants in 2003. The appellants prayed

for recall of the process, which was rejected on 06.04.2004. A

criminal revision preferred against the rejection was allowed on

07.09.2004.   The matter was remanded for reconsideration,

which was again rejected by the Magistrate on 07.06.2005. The

writ petition preferred by the appellants against the issuance of

process was also rejected on 22.12.2006.     The fresh revision

against order dated 07.06.2005 assailed the prosecution on

grounds of being barred by limitation, that the Act was not

applicable to the appellants’ establishment, and that the


                             2
issuance of process was bad in absence of sanction under

Section 197, Cr.P.C., appellants nos.2 to 4 being ‘public

servants’.   The revision application was again dismissed on

05.09.2007 leading to the impugned order assailed in the

present appeal.   In the writ petition, the appellants gave up

their challenge on grounds of limitation and inapplicability of

the Act which has therefore attained finality. The challenge in

the writ petition is confined to the question of sanction only.


3.    The High Court relying on Mohd. Hadi Raja vs. State of

Bihar and another, (1998) 5 SCC 91, held that the protection

of sanction under Section 197, Cr.P.C. was not available to

officers of Government companies or public undertakings even

if it fell within the definition of ‘State’ under Article 12 of the

Constitution.

4.    Shri R.D. Agarwal, learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellants, submitted that appellants nos.2 to 4

fell within the definition of ‘public servant’ as they were

discharging public duty in pursuance of the policy of the

Central Government.     Appellants nos.2 to 4, belonged to the
                              3
Central Civil Service – Class­I, having been appointed by

Hon’ble the President of India to the Indian Telecommunication

Service, were removable by orders of the President only. The

fact that they may have been sent on deputation to the

appellant Corporation is inconsequential mandating sanction

under Section 197, Cr.P.C. before their prosecution. The High

Court     erred   in   distinguishing   Dr.   Lakshmansingh

Himatsingh Vaghela vs. Naresh Kumar Chandrashanker

Jah and another, (1990) 4 SCC 169, considering that the

appellants nos.2 to 4 were removable by orders of the President

of India only.

5.      Learned counsel for the respondents acknowledged the

original appointment of appellants nos.2 to 4 in Central Civil

Services Class­1. It was however submitted that the appellant

Corporation was established on 01.10.2000.     The appellants

nos.2 to 4 were sent on deputation initially. Option was given

for absorption in the appellant Corporation. Appellants nos.3

and 4 opted for absorption and thus became employees of the

appellant Corporation with effect from 01.10.2000 and ceased

                             4
to be government employees in the Central Civil Services Class­

1. Appellant no.2 appears to have retired from the appellant

Corporation while on deputation, but his status is not clear.

6.    The appeal raises a short and pure question of law for

consideration with regard to the protection under Section 197,

Cr.P.C. available to employees of public sector corporation

claiming the status of a ‘public servant’. The relevant extract of

Section 197, Cr.P.C., reads as follows:

        “197. Prosecution of Judges and public
        servants.
        (1) When any person who is or was a Judge or
        Magistrate or a public servant not removable
        from his office save by or with the sanction of
        the Government is accused of any offence
        alleged to have been committed by him while
        acting or purporting to act in the discharge of
        his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance
        of such offence except with the previous
        sanction­
        (a) in the case of a person who is employed or,
        as the case may be, was at the time of
        commission of the alleged offence employed, in
        connection with the affairs of the Union, of the
        Central Government;
        (b) in the case of a person who is employed or,
        as the case may be, was at the time of
        commission of the alleged offence employed, in
        connection with the affairs of a State, of the
        State Government.”

                              5
           The term ‘public servant’ has been defined in Section 21

     of the Indian Penal Code, the relevant portion for the present

     case reads as follows:

             “21. “Public servant”.—The words “public
             servant” denote a person falling under any of
             the descriptions hereinafter following; namely:
             —
                                xxxxxxx

             Twelfth —Every person—
             (a) in the service or pay of the Government or
             remunerated by fees or commission for the
             performance of any public duty by the
             Government;
             (b) in the service or pay of a local authority, a
             corporation established by or under a Central,
             Provincial or State Act or a Government
             company as defined in section 617 of the
             Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).”



7.   At the very outset, we are of the opinion that the question for

grant of sanction for prosecution under Section 197, Cr.P.C. on the

ground of being a ‘public servant’ is not available to appellants

nos.3 and 4 on account of their ceasing to be employees of the

Indian Telecommunication Service after their absorption in the

appellant Corporation on 01.10.2000, prior to the complaint. The

fact that their past service may count for purposes of pension in

                                  6
case    of    removal     or   dismissal   by   the   Corporation    or    that

administrative approval of the concerned ministry may be formally

required before any punitive action will not confer on them the

status of ‘public servant’ under the Cr.P.C.

8.     The necessary facts with regard to status of appellant no.2 are

not very clear from the pleadings. It appears that at the relevant

point of time before superannuation he was on deputation to the

Corporation. The allegations related to discharge of his duties in the

appellant Corporation. We are therefore required to consider if

sanction under Section 197, Cr.P.C. was a prerequisite with regard

to him in a status as a ‘public servant’. The question is no more

res integra and stands authoritatively settled that employees of

public sector corporations are not entitled to the protection under

Section 197 Cr.P.C. as ‘public servant’.


9.     In Mohd. Hadi Raja (supra), the court was considering the

need    for    sanction    for   prosecuting    officers   of   public    sector

undertakings or government companies falling within the definition

of ‘State’ under Article 12 of the Constitution and who were

removable from office save by sanction of the Government. Holding

                                       7
that protection under Section 197, Cr.P.C. was not available to

such persons, it was held as follows:

           “27. Therefore, in our considered opinion, the
           protection by way of sanction under Section 197
           of the Code of Criminal Procedure is not
           applicable to the officers of government
           companies or the public undertakings even when
           such public undertakings are “State” within the
           meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution on
           account of deep and pervasive control of the
           Government….”



10.   In N.K. Sharma vs. Abhimanyu, (2005) 13 SCC 213,

rejecting the challenge for requirement of sanction under Section

197, Cr.P.C., it was observed as follows:

           “13. Admittedly the salary of the appellant is not
           paid by the Government. He at the relevant time
           was not in the service of the State. Prosecution
           against an officer of a government company or a
           public undertaking would not require any
           sanction under Section 197 CrPC.”



11.   The question again fell for consideration in Chandan Kumar

Basu vs. State of Bihar, (2014) 13 SCC 70, involving an officer of

an    Indian   Administrative   Service   serving   on   deputation   as

Administrator­cum­Managing Director of Bihar State Housing
                                   8
Cooperative Federation Ltd.      Elucidating the requirements to be

fulfilled for the applicability of the protection under Section 197,

Cr.P.C., it was observed as follows:

        “8. A reading of the provisions of Section 197(1) of
        the Code reveals that there are three mandatory
        requirements under Section 197(1) of the Code,
        namely:
           (a) that the accused is a public servant;
           (b) that the public servant can be removed from
               the post by or with the sanction either of the
               Central or the State Government, as the case
               may be;
           (c) the act(s) giving rise to the alleged offence had
               been committed by the public servant in the
               actual or purported discharge of his official
               duties.”



12.   We are of the opinion that sufficient evidence is not available

on record at this stage with regard to the status of appellant no.2 in

all aspects for us to unhesitatingly hold that the protection under

Section 197 Cr.P.C shall be available to him. These are matters to

be considered by the Magistrate on basis of the evidence that may

be placed before him during the course of trial.




                                   9
13.   Mohd. Hadi Raja (supra) has been noticed more recently in

Punjab State Warehousing Corporation vs. Bhushan Chander

and another, (2016) 13 SCC 44, holding that the High Court erred

in providing the protection under Section 197, Cr.P.C. to an

employee of the appellant Corporation which was fully government

owned and financed by the State Government, and therefore,

respondent fell within the definition of a ‘public servant’. Setting

aside the orders of the High Court, this Court observed as follows:


        “23. In Mohd. Hadi Raja v. State of Bihar the
        question arose whether Section 197 CrPC was
        applicable for prosecuting officers of the public
        sector undertakings or the government companies
        which can be treated as State within the meaning of
        Article 12 of the Constitution of India. The Court
        referred to Section 197 CrPC, noted the
        submissions and eventually held that the
        protection by way of sanction under Section 197
        CrPC is not applicable to the officers of government
        companies or the public undertakings even when
        such public undertakings are “State” within the
        meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution on
        account of deep and pervasive control of the
        Government.
        24. The High Court has not accepted the
        submission of the Corporation in this regard. We
        are constrained to note that the decision in Mohd.
        Hadi Raja has been referred to in the grounds in
        this appeal. There is nothing on record to suggest


                                 10
        that the said decision was cited before the High
        Court…”



14.   Dr. Lakshmansingh Himatsingh Vaghela (supra), on which

the appellants have placed reliance, is completely distinguishable

on its own facts. The appellant was employed in the Municipal

Corporation as a Laboratory Officer. He was only entrusted with

discharge of duties as a public analyst. His remuneration was not

paid by the Government, but by the Corporation. The observations

in Paragraph 5 have to be understood in that context:

          “5. Section 197, CrPC clearly intends to draw a
          line between public servants and to provide that
          only in the case of the higher ranks should the
          sanction of the government to their prosecution
          be necessary. While a public servant holding an
          office of the kind mentioned in the section is as
          such public servant appointed to another office,
          his official acts in connection with the latter
          office will also relate to the former office. The
          words “removable from office” occurring in
          Section 197 signify removal from the office he is
          holding. The authority mentioned in the section
          is the authority under which the officer is serving
          and competent to terminate his services. If the
          accused is under the service and pay of the local
          authority, the appointment to an office for
          exercising functions under a particular statute
          will not alter his status as an employee of the
          local authority.”

                                 11
15.   It is therefore, held that the question of sanction under

Section 197, Cr.P.C. with regard to appellants nos.3 and 4 treating

them to be ‘public servant’ simply does not arise because of their

absorption in the Corporation. With regard to appellant no.2,

considering   his   status   as   on    deputation   to   the   appellant

Corporation at the relevant point of time and in absence of

necessary evidence with regard to his status in the appellant

Corporation throughout the litigation being ambiguous, we leave

that question open for consideration in the trial after necessary

evidence is available.

16.   The trial has turned out to be stillborn since 2003, with the

appellants filing one application after another.          We are of the

considered opinion that the trial needs to be expedited and

concluded at an early date. It is ordered accordingly. The Magistrate

shall endeavour to conclude the trial within a period of one year.

The parties are directed to cooperate for its early disposal.




                                   12
17.   The appeal is dismissed.


                                      ………………………………….J.
                                             (NAVIN SINHA)



                                      ……….………………………..J.
                                            (A.S. BOPANNA)
      New Delhi,
      August 19, 2019.


                                 13

