
Supreme Court of India
Seema Singh vs Central Bureau Of Investigation ... on 18 April, 2018Author: A Sikri
Bench: A Bhushan, A Sikri
                                                                                    REPORTABLE


                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 569 OF 2018
                                     [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 5611 OF 2017]


                         SEEMA SINGH                                              .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                VERSUS

                         CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION &                     .....RESPONDENT(S)
                         ANR.


                                                                  WITH

                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 570 OF 2018
                                      (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 3511 OF 2018
                                        ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 26339 OF 2017)




                                                        JUDGMENT

                         A.K. SIKRI, J.

                                       Delay condoned in Diary No. 26339 of 2017.


                         2)     Leave granted.
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA

                         3)     In the Criminal Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.)
Date: 2018.04.18
17:39:02 IST
Reason:




                                No. 5611 of 2017, the appellant, on whose complaint case is

                         Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
                         @ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                            Page 1 of 23
       registered against respondent No.2 herein under Sections 498-A,

       302 and 120-B IPC, has challenged order dated March 09, 2017

       passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, whereby

       respondent No. 2 has been enlarged on bail subject to the

       following conditions:


              “(a) The applicant shall not tamper with the prosecution
              evidence.

              (b) The applicant shall not pressurize the prosecution
              witnesses.

              (c) The applicant shall appear on the date fixed by the trial
              court.

              (d) The applicant shall not commit an offence similar to
              the offence of which he is accused, or suspected of the
              commission, of which he is suspected.

              (e) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any
              inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted
              with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
              disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or
              tamper with the evidence.

                    In case of default of any of the conditions
              enumerated above, it would be open to the opposite party
              to approach the Court concerned for cancellation of bail.

                     However, it is directed that the aforesaid case
              pending before the court below be decided expeditiously, if
              possible within a period of one year strictly, on day to day
              basis in accordance with Section 309 Cr.P.C. and also in
              view of principle as has been laid down in the recent
              judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Vinod
              Kumar v. State of Punjab; 2015 (3) SCC 220 if there is no
              legal impediment.
                   It is made clear that in case, the witnesses are not
              appearing before the court concerned, liberty is being

Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 2 of 23
              given to the concerned court to take necessary coercive
              measures in accordance with law for ensuring the
              presence of the witnesses.

                     Apart from the aforesaid conditions, it is further
              provided that the applicant shall surrender his passport
              within a period of two weeks’ from the date of his release
              before the concerned court and shall co-operate with the
              investigation. It is further provided that the applicant shall
              present himself before the court concerned on each and
              every date and will not seek any adjournment whatsoever
              and in case any adjournment is sought on any exceptional
              circumstances, the court concerned shall specify the
              reasons in the order itself while granting such
              adjournment. It is also provided that in case, there is any
              change of address, the concerned S.S.P. and the Court
              shall be immediately informed.

                     Liberty is also being given to the learned counsel for
              the complainant to file a bail cancellation application
              before the court concerned itself, in case, there is any
              violation on the part of the applicant of the aforesaid
              conditions.”


4)     Other appeal is preferred by the Central Bureau of Investigation

       (CBI) for the same relief as CBI also feels aggrieved by the same

       very order granting bail to respondent No. 2, who is facing trial in

       the aforesaid case.


5)     The gravamen of the charge against respondent No. 2 is that he

       has murdered his wife Smt. Sara Singh. The allegations in the

       chargesheet are that respondent No. 2 got married to the

       deceased at Arya Samaj Mandir, Lucknow on July 27, 2013

       where after the deceased went to live at her mother’s place due



Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 3 of 23
       to the social non-acceptance of their marriage by the family

       members of respondent No. 2. She used to live at her mother’s

       place when suddenly respondent No. 2 started behaving cordially

       with his wife and planned a trip in July, 2015 along with her to

       New Delhi/Leh. During the course of their journey, the Maruti

       Swift Car allegedly met with an accident on July 09, 2015 near

       Sirsaganj, District Firozabad. It was not an accident but a pre-

       planned plot to get rid of the deceased and subsequently a FIR

       dated July 18, 2015 was registered by the appellant herein who is

       the mother of the deceased. Consequently the Case Crime No.

       387 of 2015 under Sections 498-A, 302 and 120-B IPC, Police

       Station Sirsaganj, District Firozabad was registered. The State

       Government transferred the case to the CBI vide notification

       issued on July 24, 2015 and another notification was issued by

       the Department of Personnel & Training, Government of India,

       New Delhi on October 14, 2015.       In pursuance of the above

       notifications, the CBI registered a case bearing No. RC No.

       6(S)/2015/ SCU.V/SC.II/CBI dated October 19, 2015 and

       accordingly the CBI commenced the investigation of the aforesaid

       case on October 19, 2015.         Subsequently, on the basis of

       evidence collected by the CBI, respondent No. 2 was arrested on

       November 25, 2016. Thereafter, respondent No. 2 filed his bail

Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                          Page 4 of 23
       application      before      the   Special   Judicial   Magistrate,   CBI,

       Ghaziabad which was rejected vide order dated December 15,

       2016.     Another bail application was rejected vide order dated

       January 13, 2017. Eventually the bail application was filed before

       the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad which has been allowed

       vide impugned order dated March 09, 2017 and bail is granted.


6)     It becomes clear from the above that respondent No. 2 maintains

       that incident in question was merely an accident in which his wife

       died. On the other hand, the prosecution alleges that in reality,

       respondent No. 2 murdered his wife and thereafter stage

       managed the said accident in order to project that Sara Singh

       died in the said accident.


7)     According to respondent No.2, when their car met with an

       accident on July 09, 2015 which was being driven by him and his

       wife Sara Singh was also sitting therein, she got badly injured and

       while she was taken to the hospital, she expired and was

       declared brought dead by the District Hospital, Ferozabad.

       Postmortem of the body was conducted and as per the report, the

       cause of death was due to the injuries received in the said

       accident.      Sara Singh was cremated thereafter.          However, on

       July 18, 2015, the FIR was lodged doubting the postmortem

Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 5 of 23
       report and alleging that Sara Singh was murdered. After the

       investigation of the case was transferred to the CBI, CBI has

       obtained the report from Central Road Research Institute (CRRI),

       report of the Medical Board constituted by the All India Institute of

       Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, report from Central

       Forensic Science Laboratory (CFSL), New Delhi as well as from

       Indian Institute of Technology (IIT). On the basis of these reports

       and further investigation, chargesheet was prepared and

       submitted to the CBI court, Ferozabad.


8)     Respondent No. 2 was arrested on November 25, 2016 and was

       granted bail on March 09, 2017. He, thus, remained in custody

       for three and half months.


9)     The case set up by respondent No. 2 in support of his plea for bail

       in the High Court was that the accused and his wife had planned

       a trip to Leh and when they reached Ferozabad, the accused

       found that a small school girl was coming on her bicycle from the

       other side. In order to save her, the accused had to apply sudden

       brakes on his vehicle which was being driven at a high speed and

       diverted the stearing as a result of which the car went out of

       control and fell in a ditch alongside road. The result was that the

       car skidded and over-turned. It was also pleaded that there were

Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                              Page 6 of 23
       no eye-witnesses of the incident and no evidence whatsoever

       which could show the participation of respondent No. 2 as per the

       role assiged by the CBI. The prosecution, while opposing the

       bail, had drawn the attention to the reports of CRRI, AIIMS, CFSL

       and IIT. On the basis of these reports, it was contended that

       there was clear evidence to show that it was not an accident as

       narrated by respondent No. 2 and, therefore, it was the result of a

       pre-planned murder. Referring to the report of the AIIMS, it was

       argued that Sara Singh was initially strangulated and thereafter

       crime scene was created in which the accident became the

       culminating point. It was also emphasised that respondent No. 2

       had a criminal history of three cases.


10)    The order of the High Court shows that in coming to the

       conclusion that respondent No. 2 was entitled to bail, pending

       trial, following factors weighed with it:


       (a)    Videography of the postmortem was not done.


       (b)    After the alleged accident, respondent No. 2 had informed

       about the same to the family members of the deceased.            On

       receiving this information, mother of the deceased had arrived

       and postmortem was done in her presence and other family


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                            Page 7 of 23
       members. At that time, certain doctors who were close and well-

       known to the family of the deceased were also present at the spot

       and they had taken certain photographs of the body before the

       postmortem was done. At that time, none of these persons raised

       any objection with regard to the videography of the postmortem

       not being done. They did not demand second postmortem either

       in case they had suspicion.

       (c)    Insofar as the report of AIIMS is concerned, it is solely

       based on photographs which were provided to the panel of

       doctors and, thus, doctors never conducted any postmortem on

       the body of the deceased.

       (d)    There is no eye-witness account which may show that the

       girl was either tortured or threatened on the way or she was

       injured, though vague allegations have been made in this behalf

       but without any supporting documents.
       (e)    After investigation, the chargesheet had been filed by the

       CBI. The main crux of the chargesheet is only the documentary

       evidence and not any eye-witness account.           Documentary

       evidence is already available with the CBI. Therefore, there is no

       possible apprehension of respondent No. 2 in either hampering


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                           Page 8 of 23
       with the investigation or tampering with the evidence or

       threatening anybody in case he is released on bail.


       (f)    There is no likelihood of accused absconding as well.


11)    Mr. Prashant Bhushan, who argued on behalf of the complainant,

       and Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General,

       who argued for CBI, read out extensively from the aforesaid

       reports of the expert bodies, namely, CRRI, AIIMS, CFSL and IIT.

       It was submitted by them that the report of the CRRI clearly

       depicted that there was no likelihood of any such accident as

       narrated by respondent No. 2 having regard to the condition of

       the car and the place of accident. It was, thus, a make-belief

       story putforth by the accused. From the report submitted by the

       doctors from the AIIMS, it was pointed out that cause of death

       was fatal pressure over neck by ligature and this would indicate

       Sara Singh had not died in the accident but was strangulated to

       death by the accused. Reports of CFSL and IIT, likewise, were

       read out to support the aforesaid case put up by the prosecution,

       namely, alleged accident as projected by respondent No. 2 could

       not have happened and, therefore, he was making a false case

       that Sara Singh had died in an accident. It was also argued that

       the defence set up by respondent No. 2 was false inasmuch as

Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                            Page 9 of 23
       both were sitting in the said car when the alleged incident took

       place and how it was possible that insofar as one passenger

       (namely, Sara Singh) is concerned, she died and the other one

       (namely, respondent No. 2) did not suffer even minor injuries. It

       was, thus, pleaded that when there was nothing to show that

       chargesheet was false and it has also come on record that

       accused is a history-sheeter and belongs to influential political

       family, bail should not have been granted by the High Court. Mr.

       Bhushan also referred to the following judgments of this Court in

       support of his contention that it was a fit case for setting aside the

       order of the High Court granting bail:


       (i)    Neeru Yadav v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.1

              “15. This being the position of law, it is clear as cloudless
              sky that the High Court has totally ignored the criminal
              antecedents of the accused. What has weighed with the
              High Court is the doctrine of parity. A history-sheeter
              involved in the nature of crimes which we have reproduced
              hereinabove, are not minor offences so that he is not to be
              retained in custody, but the crimes are of heinous nature
              and such crimes, by no stretch of imagination, can be
              regarded as jejune. Such cases do create a thunder and
              lightning having the effect potentiality of torrential rain in an
              analytical mind. The law expects the judiciary to be alert
              while admitting these kind of accused persons to be at
              large and, therefore, the emphasis is on exercise of
              discretion judiciously and not in a whimsical manner.

                                xxx         xxx          xxx


1   (2016) 15 SCC 422


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                     Page 10 of 23
              18. Before parting with the case, we may repeat with profit
              that it is not an appeal for cancellation of bail as the
              cancellation is not sought because of supervening
              circumstances. The annulment of the order passed by the
              High Court is sought as many relevant factors have not
              been taken into consideration which includes the criminal
              antecedents of the accused and that makes the order a
              deviant one. Therefore, the inevitable result is the
              lancination of the impugned order [Budhpal v. State of
              U.P., 2014 SCC OnLine All 14815].”


       (ii)   Prasanta Kumar Sarkar v. Ashis Chatterjee & Anr.2

              “9. We are of the opinion that the impugned order is
              clearly unsustainable. It is trite that this Court does not,
              normally, interfere with an order passed by the High Court
              granting or rejecting bail to the accused. However, it is
              equally incumbent upon the High Court to exercise its
              discretion judiciously, cautiously and strictly in compliance
              with the basic principles laid down in a plethora of
              decisions of this Court on the point. It is well settled that,
              among other circumstances, the factors to be borne in
              mind while considering an application for bail are:

                 (i)     whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
                         ground to believe that the accused had committed
                         the offence;

                 (ii)    nature and gravity of the accusation;

                 (iii)   severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;

                 (iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if
                      released on bail;

                 (v)     character, behaviour, means, position and standing
                         of the accused;

                 (vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;

                 (vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being
                       influenced; and

                 (viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by grant
                        of bail.

2   (2010) 14 SCC 496


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                        Page 11 of 23
              [See State of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi (SCC p.31, para
              18), Prahlad Singh Bhati v. NCT of Delhi, and Ram Govind
              Upadhyay v. Sudarshal Singh.]

              10. It is manifest that if the High Court does not advert to
              these relevant considerations and mechanically grants
              bail, the said order would suffer from the vice of non-
              application of mind, rendering it to be illegal. In Masroor, a
              Division Bench of this Court, of which one of us (D.K. Jain,
              J.) was a member, observed as follows: (SCC p. 290, para
              13)

                 “13...Though at the stage of granting bail an elaborate
                 examination of evidence and detailed reasons touching
                 the merit of the case, which may prejudice the accused,
                 should be avoided, but there is a need to indicate in such
                 order reasons for prima facie concluding why bail was
                 being granted particularly where the accused is charged
                 of having committed a serious office.”

                 (See also State of Maharashtra v. Ritesh, Panchanan
                 Mishra v. Digambar Mishra, Vijay Kumar v. Narendra and
                 Anwari Begum v. Sher Mohammad.)

              11. We are constrained to observe that in the instant
              case, while dealing with the application of the accused for
              grant of bail, the High Court completely lost sight of the
              basic principles enumerated above. The accused, in the
              present case, is alleged to have committed a heinous
              crime of killing an old helpless lady by strangulation. He
              was seen coming out of the victim’s house by a neighbour
              around the time of the alleged occurrence, giving rise to a
              reasonable belief that he had committed the murder. We
              feel that under the given circumstances, it was not the
              stage at which bail under Section 439 of the Code should
              have been granted to the accused, more so, when even
              charges have not yet been framed.”


12)    Mr. Manan Kumar Mishra, learned senior counsel appearing for

       the accused, strongly refuted the aforesaid submissions.                 He

       referred to the same very reports of the expert bodies and



Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 12 of 23
       submitted that these very reports when read minutely, would

       indicate that none of these reports have given any final and

       conclusive opinion. He laid much stress on the fact that these

       reports were based on postmortem of the ‘photographs’ of

       deceased and not of the ‘body of the deceased’ and, therefore,

       could not be given much credence in any case. He also pointed

       out that insofar as opinion of doctors of AIIMS is concerned, while

       assigning the cause of death, the Medical Board itself had

       cautioned       that    same      should   be   corroborated   with     the

       circumstantial evidence of the investigation in this case. On that

       basis, he reiterated his submissions which were accepted by the

       High Court, as mentioned above, and argued that the High Court

       had rightly exercised its discretion in granting bail to respondent

       No. 2. He further argued that once such a discretion is exercised,

       unless it is shown that the same is perverse, the Court should not

       interfere with the same. In support, he relied upon the judgments

       of this Court in:


       (i)    Tomaso Bruno and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh3:

              “36. In the second post-mortem report, Ext. Ka-11,
              substantially there were no changes except signs of
              decomposition. The second post-mortem report reiterates
              that cause of death is “asphyxia as a result of
              strangulation”. According to the medical opinion, a hard
3   (2015) 7 SCC 178


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                  Page 13 of 23
              blunt substance appears to have been used to cause
              strangulation leading to the death on account of asphyxia.
              However, no such hard or blunt substance was found or
              seized from the room. Doctors have not found any physical
              signs of internal injuries viz. any extravasation of blood in
              the tissue or any laceration in the underlying muscles.

              37. Considering the post-mortem reports, Exts. Ka-10 and
              Ka-11 and the evidence of PWs 10 and 11, in our view,
              reasonable doubts arise as to the cause of death due to
              asphyxia as a result of strangulation. Let us consider the
              injuries found on the body of deceased Francesco Montis
              vis-à-vis symptoms of strangulation. As per Modi's Medical
              Jurisprudence And Toxicology, 24th Edn. 2011, p. 453 the
              symptoms of strangulation are stated as under:

                 “(b)Appearances due to Asphyxia.—The face is
                 puffy and cyanosed, and marked with petechiae. The
                 eyes are prominent and open. In some cases, they
                 may be closed. The conjunctivae are congested and
                 the pupils are dilated. Petechiae are seen in the
                 eyelids and the conjunctivae. The lips are blue.
                 Bloody foam escapes from the mouth and nostrils,
                 and sometimes, pure blood issues from the mouth,
                 nose and ears, especially if great violence has been
                 used. The tongue is often swollen, bruised, protruding
                 and dark in colour, showing patches of extravasation
                 and occasionally bitten by the teeth. There may be
                 evidence of bruising at the back of the neck. The
                 hands are usually clenched. The genital organs may
                 be congested and there may be discharge of urine,
                 faeces and seminal fluid.

                 (ii) Internal Appearance.—The neck and its
                 structures should be examined after removing the
                 brain and the chest organs, thus allowing blood to
                 drain from the neck to the blood vessels. There is
                 extravasation of blood into the sub-cutaneous tissues
                 under the ligature mark or finger marks, as well as in
                 the adjacent muscles of the neck, which are usually
                 lacerated. Sometimes, there is laceration of the
                 sheath of the carotid arteries, as also their internal
                 coats with effusion of blood into their walls. The
                 cornua of the hyoid bone may be fractured also the
                 superior cornua of thyroid cartilage but fracture of the
                 cervical vertebrae is extremely rare. These should be

Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                  Page 14 of 23
                 carefully dissected in situ as they are difficult to
                 distinguish from dissection artefacts in the neck.”
                                                   (emphasis in original)

                                 xxx       xxx          xxx

              40. The courts, normally would look at expert evidence
              with a greater sense of acceptability, but it is equally true
              that the courts are not absolutely guided by the report of
              the experts, especially if such reports are perfunctory and
              unsustainable. We agree that the purpose of an expert
              opinion is primarily to assist the court in arriving at a final
              conclusion but such report is not a conclusive one. This
              Court is expected to analyse the report, read it in
              conjunction with the other evidence on record and then
              form its final opinion as to whether such report is worthy of
              reliance or not. As discussed earlier, serious doubts arise
              about the cause of death stated in the post-mortem
              reports.”


       (ii)   Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetra v. State of Maharashtra

       & Ors.4:

              “87. The complaint filed against the accused needs to be
              thoroughly examined including the aspect whether the
              complainant has filed a false or frivolous complaint on
              earlier occasion. The court should also examine the fact
              whether there is any family dispute between the accused
              and the complainant and the complainant must be clearly
              told that if the complaint is found to be false or frivolous,
              then strict action will be taken against him in accordance
              with law. If the connivance between the complainant and
              the investigating officer is established then action be taken
              against the investigating officer in accordance with law.
              88. The gravity of charge and the exact role of the accused
              must be properly comprehended. Before arrest, the
              arresting officer must record the valid reasons which have
              led to the arrest of the accused in the case diary. In
              exceptional cases the reasons could be recorded
              immediately after the arrest, so that while dealing with the

4   (2011) 1 SCC 694


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 15 of 23
              bail application, the remarks and observations of the
              arresting officer can also be properly evaluated by the
              court.

              89. It is imperative for the courts to carefully and with
              meticulous precision evaluate the facts of the case. The
              discretion must be exercised on the basis of the available
              material and the facts of the particular case. In cases
              where the court is of the considered view that the accused
              has joined investigation and he is fully cooperating with the
              investigating agency and is not likely to abscond, in that
              event, custodial interrogation should be avoided.

                                 xxx      xxx          xxx

              115. In Joginder Kumar case [(1994) 4 SCC 260 : 1994
              SCC (Cri) 1172] a three-Judge Bench of this Court has
              referred to the 3rd Report of the National Police
              Commission, in which it is mentioned that the quality of
              arrests by the police in India mentioned the power of arrest
              as one of the chief sources of corruption in the police. The
              Report suggested that, by and large, nearly 60% of the
              arrests were either unnecessary or unjustified and that
              such unjustified police action accounted for 43.2% of the
              expenditure of the jails.


              116. Personal liberty is a very precious fundamental right
              and it should be curtailed only when it becomes imperative
              according to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the
              case.
              117. In case, the State considers the following suggestions
              in proper perspective then perhaps it may not be
              necessary to curtail the personal liberty of the accused in a
              routine manner. These suggestions are only illustrative
              and not exhaustive:

              (1) Direct the accused to join the investigation and only
              when the accused does not cooperate with the
              investigating agency, then only the accused be arrested.


              (2) Seize either the passport or such other related
              documents, such as, the title deeds of properties or the
              fixed deposit receipts/share certificates of the accused.

Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                 Page 16 of 23
              (3) Direct the accused to execute bonds.


              (4) The accused may be directed to furnish sureties of a
              number of persons which according to the prosecution are
              necessary in view of the facts of the particular case.


              (5) The accused be directed to furnish undertaking that he
              would not visit the place where the witnesses reside so
              that the possibility of tampering of evidence or otherwise
              influencing the course of justice can be avoided.


              (6) Bank accounts be frozen for small duration during the
              investigation.


              118. In case the arrest is imperative, according to the facts
              of the case, in that event, the arresting officer must clearly
              record the reasons for the arrest of the accused before the
              arrest in the case diary, but in exceptional cases where it
              becomes imperative to arrest the accused immediately, the
              reasons be recorded in the case diary immediately after
              the arrest is made without loss of any time so that the
              court has an opportunity to properly consider the case for
              grant or refusal of bail in the light of reasons recorded by
              the arresting officer.


              119. Exercise of jurisdiction under Section 438 CrPC is an
              extremely important judicial function of a Judge and must
              be entrusted to judicial officers with some experience and
              good track record. Both the individual and society have
              vital interest in orders passed by the courts in anticipatory
              bail applications.


              120. It is imperative for the High Courts through its judicial
              academies      to     periodically    organise     workshops,
              symposiums, seminars and lectures by the experts to
              sensitise judicial officers, police officers and investigating
              officers so that they can properly comprehend the
              importance of personal liberty vis-à-vis social interests.



Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                  Page 17 of 23
              They must learn to maintain fine balance between the
              personal liberty and the social interests.


              121. The performance of the judicial officers must be
              periodically evaluated on the basis of the cases decided by
              them. In case, they have not been able to maintain
              balance between personal liberty and societal interests,
              the lacunae must be pointed out to them and they may be
              asked to take corrective measures in future. Ultimately, the
              entire discretion of grant or refusal of bail has to be left to
              the judicial officers and all concerned must ensure that
              grant or refusal of bail is considered basically on the facts
              and circumstances of each case.


              122. In our considered view, the Constitution Bench in
              Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465] has
              comprehensively dealt with almost all aspects of the
              concept of anticipatory bail under Section 438 CrPC. A
              number of judgments have been referred to by the learned
              counsel for the parties consisting of Benches of smaller
              strength where the Courts have observed that the
              anticipatory bail should be of limited duration only and
              ordinarily on expiry of that duration or standard duration,
              the court granting the anticipatory bail should leave it to
              the regular court to deal with the matter. This view is
              clearly contrary to the view taken by the Constitution
              Bench in Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri)
              465] . In the preceding para, it is clearly spelt out that no
              limitation has been envisaged by the legislature under
              Section 438 CrPC. The Constitution Bench has aptly
              observed that “we see no valid reason for rewriting Section
              438 with a view, not to expanding the scope and ambit of
              the discretion conferred on the High Court or the Court of
              Session but, for the purpose of limiting it”.


              123. In view of the clear declaration of law laid down by
              the Constitution Bench in Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 :
              1980 SCC (Cri) 465] , it would not be proper to limit the life
              of anticipatory bail. When the Court observed that the
              anticipatory bail is for limited duration and thereafter the
              accused should apply to the regular court for bail, that
              means the life of Section 438 CrPC would come to an end
              after that limited duration. This limitation has not been


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 18 of 23
              envisaged by the legislature. The Constitution Bench in
              Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465]
              clearly observed that it is not necessary to rewrite Section
              438 CrPC. Therefore, in view of the clear declaration of the
              law by the Constitution Bench, the life of the order under
              Section 438 CrPC granting bail cannot be curtailed.


              124. The ratio of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in
              Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465]
              perhaps was not brought to the notice of Their Lordships
              who had decided the cases of Salauddin Abdulsamad
              Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra [(1996) 1 SCC 667 : 1996
              SCC (Cri) 198] , K.L. Verma v. State [(1998) 9 SCC 348 :
              1998 SCC (Cri) 1031] , Adri Dharan Das v. State of W.B.
              [(2005) 4 SCC 303 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 933] and Sunita Devi
              v. State of Bihar [(2005) 1 SCC 608 : 2005 SCC (Cri)
              435] .”



13)    We have deliberated on the respective arguments in conjunction

       with the record of the case. Since we are concerned with the

       order of the High Court whereby respondent No. 2 has been

       granted bail, having regard to the limited scope of interference

       with such an order and keeping in mind the parameters on which

       such an order can be interdicted, we are of the view that the

       reasons given by the High Court to grant bail to respondent No. 2,

       cannot be termed as perverse.          It can be discerned from the

       reading of the impugned order, from which we have culled out

       circumstances, that the High Court kept in mind the relevant

       factors while considering the bail application. No doubt, the

       offence with which respondent No. 2 is charged is a serious one.


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                Page 19 of 23
       That by itself cannot be the ground to outrightly deny the benefit

       of bail if there are other overwhelming circumstances justifying

       grant of bail. The High Court has discussed those factors which

       are reproduced above in para 9. No doubt, the counsel for the

       appellants have extensively referred to the reports of CRRI,

       AIIMS, CFSL and IIT. Their evidentiary value is yet to be tested,

       more so, when these reports are given on the basis of studies

       undertaken much after the incident. Report of AIIMS is based on

       the photographs and not on the basis of postmortem of the body

       of the deceased. Moreover, the learned counsel for respondent

       No. 2 has made a submission that AIIMS has not given any

       conclusive opinion. According to him, same is the position qua

       other reports as well. We are not supposed to examine these

       reports in depth at this stage as that exercise has to be done by

       the trial court when these reports are proved by the makers of the

       report and they are cross-examined thereupon. Moreover, in a

       criminal case where respondent No. 2 is charged of committing

       murder, the burden is upon the prosecution to establish, beyond

       reasonable doubts, that the death of Sara Singh was the result of

       a murder and that it is respondent No. 2 who committed the said

       murder. His defence about alleged accident is only one of the

       factors that would be looked into as to whether such a story

Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                          Page 20 of 23
       putforth by him is correct or not and the effect thereof. We have

       to keep in mind that, at this juncture, the limited question is as to

       whether the High Court is rightly used its discretion to grant the

       bail.


14)    We are of the opinon that the High Court has taken into

       consideration relevant factors while granting the bail to

       respondent No.2. The impugned order is also a speaking order

       with reasons that need to be given in brief while deciding as to

       whether the undertrial is entitled to bail or not. Therefore, the

       judgment cited by the learned counsel for the complainant would

       not apply to the facts of this case. We may refer to a recent

       judgment dated February 06, 2018 in the case of Dataram Singh

       v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. 5 wherein this Court (speaking

       through Madan B. Lokur, J.) made the following pertinent

       observations:

               “2. A fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is
               the presumption of innocence, meaning thereby that a
               person is believed to be innocent until found guilty.
               However, there are instances in our criminal law where a
               reverse onus has been placed on an accused with regard
               to some specific offences but that is another matter and
               does not detract from the fundamental postulate in respect
               of other offences. Yet another important facet of our
               criminal jurisprudence is that the grant of bail is the
               general rule and putting a person in jail or in a prison or in
               a correction home (whichever expression one may wish to

5   (2018) 3 SCC 22


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                   Page 21 of 23
              use) is an exception. Unfortunately, some of these basic
              principles appear to have been lost sight of with the result
              that more and more persons are being incarcerated and
              for longer periods. This does not do any good to our
              criminal jurisprudence or to our society.

              3. There is no doubt that the grant or denial of bail is
              entirely the discretion of the judge considering a case but
              even so, the exercise of judicial discretion has been
              circumscribed by a large number of decisions rendered by
              this Court and by every High Court in the country. Yet,
              occasionally there is a necessity to introspect whether
              denying bail to an accused person is the right thing to do
              on the facts and in the circumstances of a case.

                                 xxx       xxx          xxx

              7. However, we should not be understood to mean that
              bail should be granted in every case. The grant or refusal
              of bail is entirely within the discretion of the judge hearing
              the matter and though that discretion is unfettered, it must
              be exercised judiciously and in a humane manner and
              compassionately. Also, conditions for the grant of bail
              ought not to be so strict as to be incapable of compliance,
              thereby making the grant of bail illusory.”


15)    It has not been disputed that after the incident in which Sara

       Singh died, mother of the deceased, other family members as

       well as some doctors who were close to the family had arrived.

       Postmortem was conducted in their presence.               At that stage,

       nobody nurtured any suspicion. FIR was lodged nine days after

       the incident.         The material collected by the CBI during

       investigation is documentary in nature which are given on the

       basis of photographs produced before them and had to be tested

       during trial. Insofar as allegations of threat are concerned, it was


Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                  Page 22 of 23
       argued by Mr. Manan that the police examined the same and

       found to be false. In any case, the High Court has given liberty to

       the prosecution to apply for cancellation of bail in case any such

       threat is extended or there is any violation on the part of

       respondent No. 2 to any of the conditions of the bail. The High

       Court has imposed strict conditions of bail keeping in view the

       interest of the prosecution as well.


16)    We, therefore, do not find any merit in these appeals which are

       accordingly dismissed.


                                              .............................................J.
                                                                          (A.K. SIKRI)


                                              .............................................J.
                                                            (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 18, 2018.




Criminal Appeal No. 569 of 2018 & Anr.
@ SLP (Crl.) No. 5611 of 2017 & Anr.                                        Page 23 of 23

