
Supreme Court of India
Majjal vs State Of Haryana on 2 July, 2013Author: ……………………………………………..J.
Bench: G.S. Singhvi, Ranjana Prakash Desai, S.A. Bobde
                                                                         NON-REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 818   OF 2013
                [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 1300 OF 2013]



Majjal                                  …          APPELLANT

                                   Versus

State of Haryana                  …          RESPONDENT


                                  O R D E R

1.    Leave granted.

2.    This appeal, by grant  of  special  leave,  is  directed  against  the
judgment and order dated 14/2/2012 passed by the High Court  of  Punjab  and
Haryana at Chandigarh dismissing Criminal Appeal No.920-DB of 2009 filed  by
the appellant.

3.    Briefly stated the prosecution case is that the complainant –  Ramjani
(PW-4)  made a complaint with police station Punhana against  the  appellant
and others.  It  was  alleged   in  the  complaint  that  during  the  night
intervening 30/10/1995 and 31/10/1995 the  appellant  along  with  his  sons
namely Harun, Rajak, Khurshid and Bhati and other  persons  arrived  at  the
house of  Deen Dar with common object to  kidnap  Farida  daughter  of  Deen
Dar.  The appellant and his associates were  armed  with  guns  and  country
made pistols.  They tried to take away Farida on  which  she  raised  cries.
Consequently Abdul Karim son of Deen Dar, Lal Khan(PW-3) and Khurshid   sons
of Rojdar, Deen Dar son of Chand Khan and Roshni   arrived at the  house  of
Deen Dar along with the complainant and tried to rescue   Farida.   At  that
time  the appellant fired a shot at Lal Khan, Harun fired a  shot  at  Abdul
Karim  and Khurshid fired a shot at  Deen  Dar.   Injuries  were  caused  to
Roshni with lathis.  Thereafter Mehboob son of Rojdar came. He was  abducted
by the appellant and his son Khurshid.  Abdul Karim expired at the spot  due
to  firearm  injury.    Deen  Dar  also  got  injured.      Thereafter,  the
assailants fled away from the scene of occurrence.

3.    On the basis  of  the  information  given  by  PW-4,  FIR  No.277  was
registered under Sections 148, 149, 302, 307, 364,  323,  120B  of  IPC  and
Section 25 of Arms Act against the appellant  and  investigation  commenced.
On  completion  of  investigation,  charge-sheet  was  filed   against   the
appellant. The appellant pleaded not guilty to the charges  and  claimed  to
be tried. The prosecution, in support of its case, examined as  many  as  16
witnesses  (PW-1  to  PW-16).   The  prosecution  exhibited   29   documents
(Exhibits P1 to P29) in evidence. No defence evidence was adduced.

4.    Upon perusal of the evidence, the trial court convicted the  appellant
under Section 302 read with Section 149 of the  IPC  and  sentenced  him  to
imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of  Rs.  10,000/-,  in  default,  to
further undergo  simple  imprisonment  for  a  period  of  3   months.   The
appellant was directed to pay Rs. 25,000/- as compensation  to  injured  Lal
Khan.  As  already  stated,  the  appeal  preferred  by  the  appellant  was
dismissed by the High Court.  Hence, this appeal by special leave.

5.    We  have  heard  Shri  Dushyant  Parashar,  learned  counsel  for  the
appellant  as well as Shri Narender Hooda, Sr.  Assistant  Advocate  General
for the State.

6.    In this case what strikes  us  is  the  cryptic  nature  of  the  High
Court’s observations on the merits of the case.  The High Court has set  out
the facts in detail.   It  has  mentioned  the  names  and  numbers  of  the
prosecution witnesses.  Particulars of all documents produced in  the  court
along with their exhibit numbers have been  mentioned.  Gist  of  the  trial
court’s observations and findings are set out in  a  long  paragraph.   Then
there is a reference to the arguments advanced by the  counsel.  Thereafter,
without any proper analysis of the evidence almost  in  a  summary  way  the
High Court has dismissed the appeal.  The High Court’s cryptic reasoning  is
contained in two short paragraphs.  We find  such  disposal  of  a  criminal
appeal by the High Court particularly  in  a  case  involving  charge  under
Section 302 of the IPC where the accused is sentenced to  life  imprisonment
unsatisfactory.  It was necessary for the High  Court  to  consider  whether
the trial court’s assessment of  the  evidence  and  its  opinion  that  the
appellant must be convicted deserve  to  be  confirmed.   This  exercise  is
necessary because the personal liberty of an accused  is  curtailed  because
of the conviction.   The High  Court  must  state  its  reasons  why  it  is
accepting the evidence on record.  The High  Court’s  concurrence  with  the
trial court’s view would be acceptable only if it is supported  by  reasons.
In such appeals it is a court of first appeal.  Reasons cannot  be  cryptic.
By this, we do not mean that the High Court is expected to write  an  unduly
long  treatise.   The  judgment  may  be  short  but  must  reflect   proper
application of mind to vital evidence and important submissions which go  to
the root of the matter.  Since this exercise is not conducted  by  the  High
Court, the appeal deserves to be remanded for a fresh hearing after  setting
aside the impugned order.

7.    Hence, we set aside the impugned judgment and  order  dated  14/2/2012
and remand the appeal to the High Court.  We request the High Court to  hear
the appeal afresh and deliver judgment in light of  our  above  observations
as expeditiously as possible as the appellant is in jail and  he  is  stated
to be 84 years of age.  We make it clear that we  have  not  considered  the
merits of the case. The appeal shall be disposed  of  independently  and  on
merits.

8.    The appeal is disposed of in the aforestated terms.

                                                       ……………………………………………..J.
                               (G.S. SINGHVI)


                                                       ……………………………………………..J.
                                                     (RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI)


                                                       ……………………………………………..J.
                                                       (SHARAD ARVIND BOBDE)
NEW DELHI,
July 2, 2013.

-----------------------
5
