
Supreme Court of India
Sarasamma @ Saraswathiyamma vs The State Rep. By Deputy ... on 9 May, 2018Author: N V Ramana
                                                            Non-Reportable


                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                       Criminal Appeal No.713 of 2018
                 (arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 1878 of 2018)


     SARASAMMA @ SARASWATHIYAMMA                             Appellant(s)

                                   VERSUS

     THE STATE REP. BY DEPUTY                               Respondent(s)
     SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE AND OTHERS

                                     With

                       Criminal Appeal No.714 of 2018
                 (arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 1896 of 2018)


                                JUDGMENT

N. V. RAMANA, J.


1.   Leave granted.


 Criminal Appeal No. 713 of 2018
 (arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.1878 of 2018)

       2. This Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.1878 of 2018 is

          filed, being aggrieved by the impugned order passed by the

          High Court, wherein it has rejected the prayer seeking

          transfer of Sessions Case No.81 of 2016 from Hosur to

          Salem in Tamil Nadu.
       3. The brief facts of the case, including its genesis, which are


                                       1
  necessary for the purpose of disposal of the case are that in

  the year 1992, one N. C. Raman, who was alleged to be the

  head man of Nagamangalam village, was murdered by

  certain persons. The aforesaid case was registered, as Crime

  No. 302 of 1992, before the jurisdictional police station. In

  the context of the aforesaid case N.C.Chandrashekran,

  husband of the appellant herein, was alleged to have been

  murdered    at     Hosur     Bus       Stand   (Tamil   Nadu),    as

  N.C.Chandrashekran was an eye witness to the earlier

  murder of his deceased brother (N. C. Raman).



4. Accordingly, a First Information Report, being FIR No.614 of

  1995, dated 15-8-1995, was initially registered under

  Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code [IPC] at Hosur Police

  Station     but      after     the        death    of     deceased

  (N.C.Chandrashekran), Section 307 was altered into Section

  302 IPC. In the year 1997, one Ramachandran, son of

  Marappa,    a    different   person     than   respondent   no.   3

  (Ramachandran son of Thimmaiya), along with another

  accused surrendered before the Magistrate with reference to

  FIR No.614 of 1995. Thereafter, first Charge-sheet was filed

  against the said Ramachandran son of Marappa and in the

                                     2
  year 2012, the complainant who is the present appellant

  herein, gave a representation to the concerned Police Station

  indicating that the original accused viz. Ramachandran son

  of Thimmaiya (respondent no. 3 herein) was not arrested

  and in his place, Ramachandran son of Marappa (an alleged

  imposter) was shown as an accused. Therefore, she

  requested that the original accused Ramachandran son of

  Thimmaiya (respondent no. 3) be arrested and tried.

5. In the context of the representation, the police investigated

  into the matter and found that certain police men were

  involved in the active concealment of the real accused.

  Thereafter, on 30-4-2015, a supplementary charge-sheet

  was    filed,   against   the   present     Respondent      No.2,

  Ramachandran son of Thimmaiya (respondent no.3) along

  with two accused Police officials who were alleged to have

  actively connived in suppressing the identity of the true

  accused.    It was   brought    to   our   notice   that   further

  investigation was carried out and proceedings before the

  Sessions Court have been inordinately delayed. After filing

  the supplementary Charge-sheet, the Court took cognizance

  and committed the case to the Sessions Court at Hosur in

  Sessions Case No.81 of 2016.

                                  3
6. Learned senior counsel, Mrs. Indira Jaising, appearing on

  behalf of the Appellant has vehemently contended that said

  accused Ramachandran son of Thimmaiya (respondent no. 3

  herein) was earlier an M.L.A. from the Thalli Constituency

  and there are about 14 criminal cases pending against him.

  He is alleged to be a very influential and was being an

  impediment for the witnesses to depose freely.



7. Learned Senior counsel appearing for the Appellant drew

  our attention to the fact that one of the witnesses filed a

  Criminal Original Petition No.8000 of 2017 before the

  Madras High Court under Section 482 of the Code of

  Criminal Procedure, 1973 seeking expeditious completion of

  the trial, accordingly, on 14-6-2017, the High Court has

  directed the trial court to complete the trial within a period

  of six months. In this context she argues that, even though

  such directions were passed by the High Court, the Trial

  Court has not yet completed the trial.        Thereafter, the

  Appellant apprehended threat to her life and sought transfer

  of Sessions Case No.81 of 2016 from Additional Sessions

  Court, Hosur to Principal Sessions Court at Salem, Tamil

  Nadu.

                                4
8. The High Court by the impugned order while rejecting such

  a request on the ground that the transfer may not be a

  solution for ameliorating the apprehensions of the Appellant,

  as such apprehension may continue even after a transfer,

  but granted liberty to the appellant to approach the

  concerned jurisdictional police seeking necessary protection

  for the purpose of deposing evidence.

9. Learned   Senior   counsel   appearing   for   the   Appellant

  submitted that the transfer, which they are seeking, is

  essentially on the ground that the manner in which three

  murders have taken place and the adverse circumstances

  under which the trial is being conducted. According to the

  Appellant, the genesis of this criminal case concerning death

  of a witness (N. C. Chandrashekaran) for the earlier criminal

  case is indicative of the nature of apprehension the

  Appellants are reeling under.

10. It is stated by the appellant that the accused had earlier

  threatened the deceased, husband of the complainant, not

  to give evidence and if he gives evidence against the

  accused, he will meet the same fate. As the deceased did not

  oblige the accused, the deceased (N. C. Chandrashekaran),


                                  5
who is the husband of the Appellant herein, was done to

death. It was also submitted that the same accused has

murdered another person i.e., the husband of the Appellant

in the other Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.1896 of 2018

and in addition to this, learned senior counsel appearing for

the Appellant submitted that the accused – respondents are

very influential in the locality and according to her, the

allegations which are substantiated are supported from the

counter affidavit filed by the State of Tamil Nadu. She has

relied on the principles enunciated in Abdul Nazar Madani

v. State of Tamil Nadu and Anr., (2000) 6 SCC 204, and

submitted that there is a reasonable apprehension that

there cannot be a fair trial, more so when the witnesses are

not coming forward to depose and are turning hostile due to

the pressure tactics of the accused. According to her, there

are 24 witnesses still to be examined and so far 20

witnesses are examined out of them 16 witnesses already

turned hostile. It is further submitted that most of official

witnesses turned hostile. In the circumstances, she submits

that there is no way that proper and fair trial can be held

and justice will be done to the Appellant. Therefore, it is a fit

case to transfer under Section 407 of the Code of Criminal

                               6
    Procedure, 1973.
11. On the other hand, Mr. Kapil Sibal and Mr. Sanjay R. Hegde,

  learned senior counsels appearing for the respondents

  submitted that there is no reason for transferring the case.

  They further submitted that the appellant has expressed her

  apprehension for her life and security, which was properly

  considered by the High Court and taken care of. They

  further contended that the respondent no. 3 is no more an

  M.L.A. and there is no evidence on record concerning the

  pressure exerted on any of the witnesses. On the aspect of

  delay, they contend that the trial is being delayed due to the

  fact that the appellants herein herself is not deposing. So far

  as the hostile witnesses are concerned, they submit that it is

  a matter which the Court will examine and even though the

  witnesses have turned hostile, they can be cross-examined.

  They further submitted that the statements which sought to

  be relied upon by the appellants, are filed before this Court

  for the first time and the same cannot be taken into

  consideration as they are of questionable veracity. They

  suggested that respondents can be directed to stay out of

  the District till the trial is concluded and there is no ground

  made out for transfer.


                                7
12. Heard the learned counsels appearing for the parties and

  perused the material available on record.

13. In this case at hand, there is no dispute that the F.I.R. was

  registered way back in the year 1995 and initially the first

  charge-sheet was filed against Ramachandran son of

  Marappa. Subsequently, in 2012, the appellant herein had

  submitted a representation, which ultimately led to the

  further   investigation   and   filing   of   the   supplementary

  charge-sheet against the present respondents. A perusal of

  the affidavit filed by State make it apparent that certain

  Police officials, who are now arraigned as accused nos. 8

  and 9, in collusion with respondent no.3 had wrongly

  portrayed the other Ramachandran as accused instead of

  the present respondent no.3.

14. Coming to the manner of conduction of trial, it is not in

  dispute that as per the information provided before this

  Court, almost 21 witnesses so far have been examined and

  out of which 16 witnesses have turned hostile. It is

  surprising to note that some of the official witnesses have

  also turned hostile being P.W. 9, 10 and 11. Still, there are

  24 witnesses who are yet to be examined. We cannot ignore


                                  8
  that   several   criminal    cases,   where    the   accused    –

  respondents are involved, are pending before the Court.

  Apart from that, in the affidavit filed on behalf of the State

  by Respondent No.1, it is admitted that the Village

  Administrative Officer and the Village Assistant who are

  punch witnesses have turned hostile.

15. It is also stated in the affidavit by the State that the accused

  Ramachandran son of Marappa who surrendered before the

  concerned Court was not the real accused and basing on

  that, District Judge directed the respondents to conduct

  further investigation, accordingly, the case was transferred

  to District Crime Branch. After the investigation, it was

  found that the real accused i.e., Accused Nos. 1 and 2 in

  this case are alleged of colluding with the investigating

  officer and swapping the real accused for an imposter. It is

  in this context that the police officials have also been added

  as accused in the supplementary charge-sheet.

16. Taking into consideration the aforesaid allegation which

  prima facie indicates that the investigation officer at that

  point of time has not properly conducted the investigation.

  At this juncture it may be relevant to extract the counter

  affidavit filed by the State concerning the influence of the

                                  9
   respondent no. 3-
          MLA Tr. Ramachandran and his associates who
          had maintained an iron grip over 15 villages and
          had not allowed any political rivals to set up a
          base were infuriated by the challenge posed by
          the PDK Party of which the deceased was a
          prominent local leader.

It is apparent from the affidavit filed by the State that the

members of the respondents – accused group being public

representatives have significant influence in these villages so

the apprehension expressed by the appellant cannot be

brushed aside. Taking into consideration of the facts and

circumstances of this case, we conclude that the apprehension

of the complainant – appellant that there is no possibility for

conduction of fair and impartial trial at Hosur is reasonable.

Further, by transferring the case, the respondents – accused

are not prejudiced in any manner. Accordingly, the case

(Sessions Case No.81 of 2016) is transferred from Additional

Sessions Court, Hosur to Principal Sessions Court at Salem,

Tamil Nadu.

17. Taking into consideration the long pendency of the case, we

   direct the Principal Sessions Judge, Salem, Tamil Nadu to

   conduct and conclude the trial expeditiously. It may be

   noted that we have not expressed anything on the merits of



                                10
    the case and trial court is directed to independently consider

    the case uninfluenced by any observations passed herein.



Criminal Appeal No. 714 of 2018
(arising out of SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO.1896        OF
2018)


  18. This case is filed seeking transfer of the criminal case being

    SC NO. 1/2013, pending before the Additional Sessions

    Court, Hosur to anyplace outside Hosur.

  19. A brief factual matrix is that the husband of the appellant

    herein was murdered on 05.07.2012 by respondent no. 2 to

    26 herein. It may not be out of context to note that

    respondent no. 2 and respondent no. 3 (ex-MLA) are

    common accused in both the petitions. A FIR, being Crime

    No. 143 of 2012, was registered under Sections 147, 148,

    341, 120 (B), 307, 302 of IPC, Section 25(1)(B) of Arms Act

    and Section 5 of Explosives Act, by the Appellant’s son.

    Thereafter, a charge-sheet was filed before the Additional

      District Court, Hosur in SC No. 1 of 2013 on 03.10.2012.
  20. It is brought to our notice that on the earlier occasions the

    Appellant’s son had approached the High Court seeking

    transfer of the case which was dismissed. As the trial was

    being stalled, the Appellant filed Crl. O.P. No. 28217 of

                                   11
   2017, before the High Court on 20.12.2017. It is apparent

   from the record in the present case 19 witnesses have been

   examined since the filing of the transfer petition before the

   High Court.

21. By the impugned order dated 23.01.2018, the High Court

   dismissed the transfer petition on the ground that transfer

   of the case at the belated stage of the trial would be

   prejudicial instead directed the trial court to dispose of the

   case expeditiously. Aggrieved by the same the Appellant is in

   appeal before this Court.

22. Mr.   Gopal Shankar Narayan, learned counsel for the

   Appellant, has contended that the Appellant apprehends

   that there may not be possibility of fair trial as apparent

   from the facts of the other case, wherein the witnesses are

   being pressurized. He adopts the arguments of the learned

   Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant in the

   other case, to contend that the apprehension in the present

   case are reasonable as apparent from the affidavit filed by

   the State.

23. Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of both

   parties and perusing the documents available on record, we

   may note that from the day when the transfer petition has

                                12
  been filed, about 19 witnesses have been examined and 13

  among them have turned hostile. Interestingly, nine official

  witnesses have turned hostile in this case. We are further

  apprised of the fact that Witness No. 36 to 124 are still to

  depose. Moreover, it is apparent from the affidavit filed by

  the State that the accused (respondent no. 3) is supposed to

  have an iron grip over 15 villages around the area which is

  indicative of possible influence over the men and machinery

  in the area.

24. As justice should not only be done, but also seem to have

  been done, it would be necessary that the trial should take

  place in a fair and transparent manner, wherein there

  should be no element of bias or witness tampering. As the

  appellant has clearly made out a case for transfer, we are

  inclined to accept the prayer sought by the Appellant in this

  case. Accordingly, the case being SC No. 1 of 2013 pending

  before the Additional Sessions Court, Hosur is directed to be

  transferred to Principal Sessions Court at Salem, Tamil

  Nadu. Further the trial court is directed to conduct the trial

  in an expeditious     manner and uninfluenced by any

  observations made herein.

25. Accordingly, the appeals stand allowed in the above terms


                               13
    and pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed

    of.


                                           …………………………….J.
                                             (N. V. Ramana)




                                          ……………………………..J.
                                            (S. Abdul Nazeer)

NEW DELHI
MAY 09, 2018




                                14

