
Supreme Court of India
Devidas Suryavanshi & Ors vs State Of Maharashtra on 10 March, 2010Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 463 OF 2010
              arising out of SLP(Crl.) 8365 of 2009




       DEVIDAS SURYAVANSHI & ORS.              .....        APPELLANTS

                                 VERSUS

       STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                    .....        RESPONDENT




                             O R D E R

1.     Leave granted.


2.     The   appellants   four   in   number    were   convicted

under Section 326 read with Section 34 of the Indian

Penal Code and Section 324 read with Section 34 of the

IPC   and were sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment

for one year and fine of Rs. 500/- each in default to

suffer rigorous imprisonment for one month and simple

imprisonment for six months and fine of Rs. 200/- each

in default to suffer simple imprisonment for one month

respectively.


3.     The incident arose out of a dispute during the

panchayat elections held in the year 1992 wherein the

complainants were the successful party and the accused
appellants'     party   was   defeated.   It   is   this   rivalry

which led to the incident on 7th November, 1993.



4.     During the course of the incident, three persons

P.W. 1 -       Haribhau, P.W. 3 Namdev and P.W. 9 Vittal

were injured.      While the matter has been pending in

this Court, the parties appear to have compromised the

dispute and a joint affidavit setting out the terms of

the compromise has been filed.


5.     It is the contention of Mr. A.K. Shrivastava,

the learned senior counsel for the appellants that in

the light of the judgments of the Court in Surendra

Nath Mohanty & Anr. v. State of Orissa (1999) 5 SCC 238

and Bankat and Another v. State of Maharashtra (2005) 1

SCC 343, the sentence awarded to the appellants should

be reduced to that already undergone although the fine

may be suitably enhanced in the background of the fact

that admittedly the offence under Section 326 of the

IPC was non-compoundable under Section 320 of the Code

of Criminal Procedure.


6.     We have gone through the judgments aforesaid and

also heard the learned counsel for the complainant who

is   present   before   us.     The   judgments     do   suggest   a

decision in terms suggested by Mr. Shrivatava.                 The
complainant's    counsel   has   also   stated   that   as   the

parties have compromised, he would have no objection if

the appeal is disposed of in the suggested terms.

7.    We, accordingly, direct that the sentence of the

appellants shall be reduced to that already undergone

as we are told that they have undergone between 1= to

three months.     We also direct that the appellants will

pay a sum of Rs. 3,000/- each as fine and that the

aforesaid amount of Rs. 12,000/- will be paid to P.Ws.

1, 3 and 9in equal shares.            The fine be deposited

within a period of three months from today. In case of

failure   to   deposit   the   fine   within   the   stipulated

period, the appeal will be deemed to be dismissed.




                                          ..................J
                                          [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                          ..................J
                                          [C.K. PRASAD]

NEW DELHI
MARCH 10, 2010.

