
Supreme Court of India
Rajendra Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 23 October, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                                  NON­REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 863 OF 2012


                          RAJENDRA SINGH                              …..Appellant(s)

                                                 VERSUS

                          STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                    ….Respondent(s)


                                   
                                             J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.


                          1.      This appeal is filed by the accused against the

                          final   judgment   and   order   dated   3.11.2003   passed

                          by   the   High   Court   of   Allahabad   in   Government

Signature Not Verified    Criminal Appeal No. 377 of 1999 whereby the High
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.10.23

                          Court reversed the judgment of the Sessions Judge
17:25:48 IST
Reason:


                                                                                        1
and  convicted the appellant for the commission of

offence of murder of Satyapal Singh under Section

302 of Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as

“the IPC’) read with Sections 25/27 of the Arms Act.

2.    Few   facts   need   mention   for   disposal   of   the

appeal infra.

3.    The appellant was prosecuted for commission

of   the   offence   of   murder   of   one   Satyapal   Singh

Chauhan   by   firing   a   bullet   from   his   revolver   on

01.12.1994.   Due   to   gunshot   injury   caused   to

Satyapal   Singh   from   the   short   distance,   he   died

while he was being taken to the hospital after the

incident.

4.    By order dt 13.11.1998, the learned Sessions

Judge, Farrukhabad acquitted the appellant under

Section 302 of IPC read with Section 25/27 of the

Arms Act. However, in an appeal filed by the State




                                                                  2
against his acquittal, the High Court by impugned

order reversed the judgment of the Sessions Judge

and   convicted   the   appellant   for   commission   of

offence of murder of Satyapal Singh under Section

302 of IPC read with 25/27 of the Arms Act giving

rise to filing of this appeal by the accused.

5.   We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties   and   have   also   perused   the   evidence,

impugned   order   and   the   order   of   the   Sessions

Judge. 

6.   Having   scanned   the   evidence   and   keeping   in

view the fact that it is a case of the reversal of the

acquittal order, we are inclined to concur with the

reasoning and the conclusion arrived at by the High

Court rather than to concur with the reasoning and

the conclusion arrived at by the Sessions Judge. 




                                                               3
7.    In other words, having gone through the entire

evidence   on   record, we  are  of the  considered  view

that the High Court was right in concluding that the

prosecution was able to prove the case against the

appellant   beyond   reasonable   doubt.     The   High

Court,   therefore,   rightly   held   that   it   was   the

appellant  and  no one else who fired a bullet from

his revolver within a short range to Satypal Singh,

which   caused   his   death   immediately   after   the

incident. This finding of the High Court is based on

appreciation of  evidence which was well within its

jurisdiction   to   do   in   its   first   appellate   jurisdiction

and which it did rightly.

8.    It was, however, brought to our notice that the

appellant has so far undergone more than 14 years

of   jail   sentence   and   he   still   remains   in   Jail

undergoing his sentence.


                                                                       4
9.    In our opinion, if that were the case then the

State   can   be   directed   to   consider   the   appellant's

case   for   his   remission   in   terms   of   the   relevant

provisions   of   the   Criminal   Procedure   Code

(hereinafter   referred   to   as   the   “Cr.P.C.”)   read   with

Rules.    In other words, the appellant is eligible for

his   release   by   the   State   in   terms   of   the   Rules   in

accordance with law depending upon a case made

out by him. The State can always pass appropriate

orders on appellant's release provided a case to that

effect as provided in the Rules is made out.

10.   We, therefore, grant liberty to the appellant to

apply to the State Government for consideration of

his case for release as provided in Cr.P.C. read with

the   Rules   provided   the   appellant   is   able   to   prove

that he has completed the mandatory period of his

sentence   as   prescribed   in   the   Cr.P.C./Rules   and




                                                                        5
satisfy all necessary conditions to the satisfaction of

the State.

11.   The   Jail  Authorities would do the needful on

behalf of the appellant and will accordingly forward

his application along with necessary details to the

Competent Authority of the State. 

12.   The   Jail   Authorities   will   complete   the

formalities and send the appellant's application as

directed   above   to   the   concerned   Competent

authority of the State within three months from the

date of this order. 

13.   On   receipt   of   the   application,   the   competent

authority   of   the   State   will   pass   appropriate   order

within 3 months strictly in accordance with law.




                                                                   6
14.     The Registry to send a copy of this order to the

appellant and the concerned Jail Authorities where

the appellant is presently undergoing jail sentence

within a week as an outer limit to enable them to

process the application as directed above.

15.     With   the   aforesaid   discussion   and   the

direction,   the   appeal   fails   and   is   accordingly

dismissed.  


                         ………...................................J.
                           [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]

           
                                                  
                         …...……..................................J.
                           [INDU MALHOTRA]
New Delhi;
October 23, 2018 




                                                                      7

