
Supreme Court of India
Paras Nath Singh & Ors vs State Of Bihar on 15 December, 2009Bench: Dalveer Bhandari, A.K. Patnaik
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2408        OF     2009
            (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.8393/2009)


PARAS NATH SINGH AND ORS.                   Appellant(s)
                         :VERSUS:
STATE OF BIHAR                              Respondent(s)




                            O R D E R

         Delay condoned. Leave granted.

         We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the appellants and learned counsel appearing for the

State.

         The appellants have been convicted by the Trial

Court and the judgment of the Trial Court has been upheld

by the High Court.

         Accused     Rajendra    Singh,   Paras     Nath    Singh

(Appellant No.1 herein) and Ranjan Singh (Appellant No.5

herein) were convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for two years under Sections 324 of the

Indian Penal Code. They were further sentenced to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for two years under Section 148 of

the I.P.C.    It is stated that Rajendra Singh has died.




                                -2-
       Accused Ajay Singh, Vinay Singh and Ram Naresh

Singh, Appellant Nos.2, 3 & 4 herein, were convicted and

sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year

for the offence under Section 323 of I.P.C. and they were

further directed to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one

year under Section 147 of the I.P.C.



       Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that

the parties are very close relations. During the pendency

of   the    matter,   the   parties    have   also    arrived     at   an

amicable      settlement.     The     parties       have   filed       an

application for compounding of the offences under Section

324 of the I.P.C.


       It     is   not   disputed     that    the    appellants    have

undergone imprisonment for more than 4=              months.    Looking

to the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, in

our considered view, ends of justice would meet if, while

upholding the conviction of the appellants their sentence

is reduced to the period already undergone by them. We

direct accordingly.


                               -3-
        The    appellants       are   directed   to    be    released

forthwith, if not required in connection with any other

case.   The appeal is disposed of accordingly.



        In    view   of   the   aforesaid   order,    no   orders   are

necessary on the application for impleadment which stands

disposed of.


                                       .....................J
                                       (DALVEER BHANDARI)




                                       .....................J
                                       (A.K. PATNAIK)
New Delhi;
December 15, 2009.

