
Supreme Court of India
Vinay Kanodia vs J.P.Singh & Ors on 10 January, 2013Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Ranjan Gogoi
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 89-90  OF 2013
            (SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NOS.4664-4665 OF 2011)


VINAY KANODIA                                           APPELLANT

                                   VERSUS

J.P. SINGH & ORS.                                 RESPONDENTS


                                  O R D E R

            Application for impleadment is allowed.

      1.    Leave granted.

      2.    These appeals are directed against the judgment and order passed
      by the High Court of Delhi in Criminal Miscellaneous Case  No.4308  of
      2009 & Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.4232 of 2009, dated  01.03.2011.
      By the impugned judgment and order, the High  Court  has  quashed  the
      entire  prosecution  proceedings  for  the   offence   under   Section
      323/348/365/368/506 read with 34 and 120-B of the Indian  Penal  Code,
      1860 (“ the IPC” for short).

      3.    The  facts  in  brief  as  stated  in  the  complaint  are:  the
      proceedings under the Excise Act  for  evasion  of  excise  duty  were
      instituted by the officers  of  the  Directorate  General  of  Central
      Excise Intelligence (“DGCEI” for short) wherein search  was  conducted
      and summons were served in the name of the appellant i.e. Director  of
      M/s. Vinay Wires.  After the service of summons  were  unattended  for
      quite some time, the appellant was forcibly held by  the  officers  of
      DGCEI from Balaji Delux Hotel, Paharganj, where  the  appellant  along
      with the other directors had lodged, and wrongly  confined  them  from
      12.00 midnight of 10th November, 2009 till 1.30pm  of  11th  November,
      2009 and thereafter the arrest of the appellant was brought on record.
      Subsequent to the arrest, the appellant filed a complaint through  his
      father-  Hanuman  Prasad  Kanodia,  before  the  Ld.  Magistrate.  The
      appellant before the Ld. Magistrate had brought to the notice that the
      respondents herein,  who  are  the  officers  of  the  Central  Excise
      Department, had illegally detained and further brutally assaulted him.
       This allegation of the Complainant  was  denied  by  the  respondent-
      officers.  However, the learned Magistrate thought it fit to refer the
      complainant to be examined by a competent doctor on the same date.

      4.    The doctor, after examining  the  Complainant  and  after  going
      through the number of injuries on the body  of  the  Complainant,  has
      observed that the Complainant has suffered multiple  injuries  on  his
      body. Therefore, the learned Magistrate after examining  the  injuries
      reflected on the Medico legal Case Report (“MLC Report” for short) was
      of the opinion that the  appellant was tortured and beaten mercilessly
      while in custody, and therefore has taken  cognizance  under  Sections
      323, 348, 365, 368, 506 read with 34 and 120-B of the IPC.

      5.    Aggrieved by the order so passed by the learned Magistrate  with
      respect to the issue of cognizance  of  the  complaint  filed  by  the
      complainant, the  respondents-  herein  had  filed  a  petition  under
      Section 482 of the Criminal  Procedure  Code,  1973  before  the  High
      Court, inter alia, requesting the  High  Court  to  quash  the  entire
      proceedings initiated by the Complainant.

      6.    The High Court, in our opinion, though has noticed the number of
      injuries sustained by the Complainant, but on a very technical ground,
      has allowed the petition and set aside the entire proceedings.

      7.    We have carefully  perused  the  order  passed  by  the  learned
      Magistrate in taking cognizance of the complaint and  also  the  order
      passed by the High Court while setting aside the proceedings initiated
      by the Complainant before the learned Magistrate.  In our opinion, the
      learned Judge of the High Court  was  not  justified  in  passing  the
      impugned judgment and order.  Therefore, while allowing these appeals,
      we set aside the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court.
      Now, we  direct  the  learned  Magistrate  to  complete  the  criminal
      proceedings as early as possible, at any rate, within six months  from
      the date of receipt of a copy of this Court's order.  Any  observation
      made by us in the course of this order is  only  for  the  purpose  of
      disposal of this  appeal.  We  clarify  further,  that,  we  have  not
      expressed any opinion on the merits or demerits of the stand taken  by
      both the parties.

      All the legal pleas are kept open.

      Ordered accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)








                                                   .......................J.
                                                              (RANJAN GOGOI)


      NEW DELHI;
      JANUARY 10, 2013.

