
Supreme Court of India
Savitaben vs The State Of Gujarat on 11 March, 2019Author: Banumathi
Bench: R S Reddy, R Banumathi
                                                    1

                                                                        NON-REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL No(s). 467 OF 2019
                              (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No(s).10562 of 2018)

     SAVITABEN                                                         Appellant(s)

                                                   VERSUS

     THE STATE OF GUJARAT                                              Respondent(s)




                                             J U D G M E N T

     BANUMATHI, J.:

     (1)                 Leave granted.

     (2)                 This appeal arises out of the judgment dated 24.06.2014

     passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Criminal

     Appeal No.1389 of 2007 in and by which the High Court affirmed

     the conviction of accused No.1-Manaharbhai Ambalal Rohit and

     accused No.2-Savitaben under Section 302 IPC read with Section

     114 IPC and sentenced them to undergo imprisonment for life and

     also imposed a fine of Rs.500/- each with default clause. They

     were also convicted under Section 452 IPC read with Section 114

     IPC and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two

     years along with a fine of Rs.100/- each with default clause.

     Accused No.1-Manaharbhai Ambalal Rohit was also convicted u/s
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2019.03.15

     504 IPC and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one
17:53:39 IST
Reason:


     month.
                                              2

(3)    Case of the prosecution is that on 04.06.2005 at 12.00

Noon, complainant-Bhikhabhai Mithabhai Rohit (PW-4) went to his

field. At about 02.30 PM, Narmadaben, wife of the complainant

was at her house and she was admonishing her son Bharat (PW-12)

regarding    some    work.     At    that     time,     accused     No.2-Savitaben

thought that Narmadaben was telling the same to her only which

resulted in wordy quarrel between them. Accused Manaharbhai

Ambalal Rohit and his wife Savitaben started abusing deceased

Narmadaben.       Thereafter,       accused        Manaharbhai      Ambalal      Rohit

chased Narmadaben with stick to beat her and Narmadaben went

inside the house and closed the door of the house. Accused

Manaharbhai Ambalal Rohit and his wife Savitaben are alleged to

have    broken    the   door       and    thereafter,       accused      Manaharbhai

Ambalal Rohit took Narmadaben to the last room catching hold of

her braid and made her to lie down in the cot. Thereafter,

accused   No.1-Manaharbhai          Ambalal        Rohit    asked   accused      No.2-

Savitaben    to    bring   kerosene.          It   is   alleged     that      accused-

Savitaben    brought    the    jar       of   kerosene      and   gave   it    to   her

husband Manaharbhai Ambalal Rohit and thereafter, accused No.1

poured the kerosene on deceased Narmadaben and set her on fire

and thereafter, both the accused ran away. When Narmadaben fell

down, Rajesh Kumar Makwana (PW-15) and Gunvantsinh Makwana (PW-

16) came there and covered Narmadaben with mattress. Bharat

(PW-12)-son of the deceased went to the field and informed his

father Bhikhabhai Mithabhai Rohit (PW-4) about the incident.

PW-4 went to the house and found his wife lying in burnt

condition.    According       to    PW-4,     he    asked    Narmadaben       how   the
                                                 3

occurrence took place and deceased Narmadaben is said to have

narrated    the      whole    occurrence         to    him.    Thereafter,        deceased

Narmadaben was taken to the Civil Hospital, Ahmedabad and she

succumbed to injuries at 07.00 PM.

(4)   On the complaint lodged by Bhikhabhai Mithabhai Rohit (PW-

4) on 04.06.2005, case was registered under Sections 302 and

452 IPC read with Section 114 IPC. Dr. Bhargav Jhaveri (PW-1)

conducted     the      post-mortem          on   the     dead     body      of    deceased

Narmadaben and found injuries viz. first to third degree burn

injuries      on     the     face     and    frontal       scalp       hair      including

eyelashes, eyebrows, chest, abdomen, both the hands, both the

legs except sole of left leg, back and private part of the

body. As per post-mortem certificate (Ex.17) issued by PW-1,

there were ninety-five percent burn injuries on the body of

deceased and also opined that the death was due to extensive

burns over the body. Upon completion of investigation, charge

sheet was filed against accused under Sections 302, 452 and 509

IPC read with Section 114 IPC.

(5)   To bring home the guilt of the accused, in the trial court

the   prosecution          examined    Bharat         (PW-12)    who     witnessed       the

occurrence,        Rajesh     Kumar     Makwana         (PW-15)       and     Gunvantsinh

Makwana (PW-16) who covered the deceased with mattress, doctor

(PW-3) who admitted the deceased in the hospital, doctor (PW-1)

who   conducted       the    post-mortem         and    other     witnesses.            Upon

consideration of oral evidence and medical evidence and other

facts   and        circumstances,       the      Trial        Court    held      that   the

prosecution has established the guilt of the accused beyond
                                            4

reasonable doubt and convicted both the accused under Sections

302 and 452 IPC read with Section 114 IPC and sentenced them to

undergo imprisonment as aforesaid in para (1). In appeal, the

High Court affirmed the conviction and sentence of imprisonment

of both the accused.

(6)   The special leave petition qua accused-Manaharbhai Ambalal

Rohit was dismissed by this Court on 3 rd December, 2018 and

notice was issued qua appellant-accused, Savitaben.

(7)   We have heard Mr. A. Sirajudeen, learned senior counsel

appearing for the appellant and Ms. Hemantika Wahi, learned

counsel appearing for the respondent-State and also perused the

impugned judgment and the evidence/materials on record.

(8)   The prosecution mainly relies on the evidence of Bharat

(PW-12) son of the deceased.           As per evidence of Bharat (PW-12)

overt   act   is   mainly     attributed        to    accused      no.1-Manharbhai

Ambalal Rohit.       Bharat (PW-12) has stated that the accused-

Manharbhai Ambalal Rohit abused the deceased-Narmadaben due to

which she rushed from the spot.             Accused-Manharbhai chased the

deceased-Narmadaben      with       stick   to       beat    her   due   to    which

Narmadaben    went   inside     the    house     along      with   her   two   sons,

Bharat (PW-12) and Mehul and closed the door of the house from

inside.   Bharat (PW-12) further stated that the said accused

broke the door and caught hold of his mother and told the

appellant-Savitaben to bring kerosene.                      Upon which Savitaben

brought the jar of kerosene and gave the same to her husband-

Manaharbhai    Ambalal      Rohit     who   poured       the    kerosene      on   the

deceased-Narmadaben and set her ablaze with matchstick.
                                                 5

(9)    Though Bharat (PW-12) has attributed bringing of kerosene

can    to     the        appellant-Savitaben,            learned      senior     counsel

appearing for the appellant submitted that the same is not

corroborated by other evidence.                  In this regard, our attention

was drawn to the evidence of Dr. Chandrakant (PW-3) who was on

duty in the Emergency Ward of the Civil Hospital, Ahmedabad, on

4th June, 2005.            In his evidence Dr. Chandrakant (PW-3) has

stated that Narmadaben was brought to the hospital at 5:15 p.m.

on    04th    June,       2005    and     on     being      questioned,      Narmadaben

personally gave the case history to him i.e. “On 04-06-2005 at

02:00 hrs in the noon, my neighbour Manharbhai Ambalal set me

ablaze by pouring kerosene.                    Incident occurred at Ghodasar,

Mehmdabad, Kheda.”               The statement of the deceased-Narmadaben

before       Dr.       Chandrakant        (PW-3)      was     the     earliest    dying

declaration in which deceased-Narmadaben attributed the overt

act    only       to   accused-Manharbhai            Ambalal    and    the     deceased-

Narmadaben         has    not     stated       anything     about     the    appellant-

Savitaben.         So far as the evidence of Dr. Manish (PW-2) is

concerned, who was on duty in the burns ward, it is seen from

the evidence of Dr. Manish that the case history was narrated

to    him    by    the    husband    of    the     deceased-Narmadaben.           It   is

pertinent to note that the prosecution has not examined the

other son of the deceased-Narmadaben, namely, Mehul.                              It is

also brought in evidence that there was long-standing enmity

between the family of the deceased and the accused.                               It is

further to be noted that there was also delay of six hours in

registration of FIR.
                                 6

(10) Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and

that the name of the appellant has not been stated by the

deceased-Narmadaben in her earliest dying declaration before

Dr. Chandrakant (PW-3), in our view, the prosecution has not

established the guilt of the accused and benefit of doubt has

to be given to the accused-Savitaben.

(11) In the result this appeal is allowed.    The conviction of

the appellant-Savitaben is set aside and she is acquitted of

the charge under Section 302 I.P.C. and Section 452 read with

Section 114 I.P.C.   The appellant-Savitaben is ordered to be

released forthwith unless her presence is required in any other

case.


                                        .........................J.
                                        (R. BANUMATHI)



                                        .........................J.
                                        (R. SUBHASH REDDY)
NEW DELHI,
MARCH 11, 2019.

