
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Manga Singh on 28 November, 2018Author: Banumathi
Bench: I Banerjee, R Banumathi
                                                            1

                                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL No(s). 1481    OF 2018
                                (Arising out of SLP(Crl.)No.4177 of 2015)

     THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                                                Appellant(s)

                                                                VERSUS

     MANGA SINGH                                                                  Respondent(s)




                                                   J U D G M E N T

     BANUMATHI, J.:

     (1) Leave granted.


     (2) This appeal arises out of judgment and order of the

     High                Court   of        Himachal   Pradesh     at     Shimla    in   Criminal

     Appeal No.523 of 2010 dated 22nd October, 2014 in and by

     which                the    High        Court    has    reversed       the     verdict   of

     conviction                  of    the       respondent-accused       under    Section    376

     I.P.C. to acquittal and also set aside the sentence of

     imprisonment                     of    10    years   imposed   upon    the     respondent-

     accused.
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.12.11
10:59:59 IST
Reason:

     (3) Briefly stated the case of the prosecution is that

     the prosecutrix (PW-4), who was aged about 9 years at the
                                            2

relevant      point    of     time,   was       studying   in   Class-III    in

Government Primary School.                  The prosecutrix (PW-4) was

staying in her aunt’s house along with her brother.                         The

respondent-accused is the cousin (son of the aunt) of the

prosecutrix (PW-4).


(4)   On     4th    March,    2010,   after       the   school    hours,    the

prosecutrix (PW-4) was very reluctant to go to her aunt’s

house where she was staying; and she came back to the

school.      On being asked by Pooja Mahajan (PW-1) the school

teacher      and     other     teachers,         the    prosecutrix      (PW-4)

informed the teachers, Pooja Mahajan (PW-1) and Ritubala

(PW-2), that she lives in her aunt’s house and that the

respondent-accused made her sleep with him and during the

nights the respondent-accused used to put off her clothes

and   used     to    commit    sexual   intercourse        with   her.      The

prosecutrix stated that the respondent-accused had been

doing the same for about three years.                   On hearing the same

from the prosecutrix, the school teacher, Pooja Mahajan

(PW-1), informed the president of the Gram Pachayat (PW-3)

who came to the school and made enquiries whereupon the

prosecutrix (PW-4) told the president that the respondent-

accused had been committing sexual intercourse with her

during the night.
                                         3

(5) A complaint was lodged by the teacher, Pooja Mahajan

(PW-1),     and    an    F.I.R.     was       registered      against      the

respondent-accused under Section 376 I.P.C.                     Dr. Neerja

Gupta (PW-6) who medically examined the prosecutrix (PW-4)

found that there was no injury found on her private parts.

Dr. Neerja Gupta (PW-6) gave her opinion in writing (MLC

Ex.PW6/B)    in    which   she     has       opined   that    “in   case   of

slightest or small penetration, hymen will not rupture”.

Dr. Pooja Gupta (PW-7) also examined the prosecutrix (PW-

4).


(6)         To substantiate the case of the prosecution, the

prosecution       has   examined    the       prosecutrix     (PW-4),      the

school teachers, Pooja Mahajan (PW-1) and Ritubala (PW-2),

and the president of the Gram Panchayat (PW-3) and other

witnesses.     Based on the evidence of the prosecutrix (PW-

4) and the medical evidence, the Trial Court convicted the

respondent-accused under Section 376 I.P.C. and sentenced

him   to    undergo     sentence     of       ten     years   of    rigorous

imprisonment and also imposed a fine of Rs.25,000/-.                       In

appeal, the High Court reversed the verdict of conviction

of the respondent-accused only on the ground that the

opinion of Dr. Neerja Gupta (PW-6) and Dr. Pooja Gupta

(PW-7) are not conclusive to hold that the respondent-

accused has forcefully committed sexual intercourse with
                               4

the prosecutrix.   The High Court held that the evidence of

the prosecutrix (PW-4) does not inspire the confidence of

the court to sustain the conviction and the respondent-

accused is entitled to the benefit of doubt and on those

findings the High Court has reversed the judgment of the

Trial Court and set aside the conviction and sentence of

the imprisonment imposed upon respondent-accused.


(7)       Despite service of notice, the respondent has not

entered   appearance.   Accordingly   Mrs.   Manjeet   Chawla,

Advocate, has been nominated by the Supreme Court Legal

Services Committee as amicus to contest the appeal on

behalf of the respondent-accused.


(8)       We have heard Ms. Bihu Sharma, learned counsel

appearing for the appellant-State and Mrs. Manjeet Chawla,

learned amicus.    We have carefully perused the impugned

judgment, the evidence of the witnesses and materials on

record.

(9) The High Court has given the benefit of doubt to the

respondent-accused mainly on two grounds : (i) Evidence of

the prosecutrix (PW-4) does not inspire confidence; and

(ii) the medical evidence of Dr. Neerja Gupta (PW-6) Dr.

Pooja Gupta (PW-7) is not conclusive to hold that the

prosecutrix (PW-4) was subjected to sexual intercourse.
                                               5



(10)          The Trial Court has elaborately referred to the

evidence of the prosecutrix (PW-4) who was studying in

Class III in Kandwal Primary School and was staying in the

house     of        her     aunt.        The        prosecutrix       (PW-4)       has

categorically stated that while she was staying in her

aunt’s house for pursuing her studies, the respondent-

accused made her sleep with him and that the respondent-

accused used to put off her clothes and his own clothes

and    that    he     used    to    touch     her    private        part   with   his

private part and used to insert his private part inside

her private part. The respondent-accused had told her not

to reveal it to anybody otherwise he would do away her

life.     The prosecutrix (PW-4) further stated that she told

the aforesaid facts to her teacher, Pooja Mahajan (PW-1),

and other lady teachers.



(11).         The    conviction         can    be    sustained       on    the    sole

testimony of the prosecutrix, if it inspires confidence.

The     conviction        can      be   based       solely     on    the   solitary

evidence       of     the    prosecutrix           and    no   corroboration        be

required       unless        there      are     compelling          reasons      which

necessitate the courts to insist for corroboration of her

statement.          Corroboration         of        the    testimony        of     the
                                      6

prosecutrix is not a requirement of law; but a guidance of

prudence under the given facts and circumstances. Minor

contractions or small discrepancies should not be a ground

for throwing the evidence of the prosecutrix.

(12)        It is well settled by a catena of decisions of

the Supreme Court that corroboration is not a sine qua

non for conviction in a rape case. If the evidence of the

victim does not suffer from any basic infirmity and the

‘probabilities      factor’   does   not   render    it    unworthy     of

credence.      As   a   general   rule,    there    is    no   reason   to

insist    on   corroboration      except   from    medical     evidence.

However, having regard to the circumstances of the case,

medical evidence may not be available. In such cases,

solitary testimony of the prosecutrix would be sufficient

to base the conviction, if it inspires the confidence of

the court.

(13).       In State of Punjab v. Gurmit Singh and Others -

(1996) 2 SCC 384, it was held as under:-

       “8. The courts must, while evaluating evidence,
       remain alive to the fact that in a case of rape,
       no self-respecting woman would come forward in a
       court just to make a humiliating statement
       against her honour such as is involved in the
       commission of rape on her. In cases involving
       sexual molestation, supposed considerations which
       have no material effect on the veracity of the
       prosecution case or even discrepancies in the
       statement of the prosecutrix should not, unless
       the discrepancies are such which are of fatal
       nature, be allowed to throw out an otherwise
                                     7

       reliable    prosecution    case.   The    inherent
       bashfulness of the females and the tendency to
       conceal outrage of sexual aggression are factors
       which the courts should not overlook. The
       testimony of the victim in such cases is vital
       and unless there are compelling reasons which
       necessitate looking for corroboration of her
       statement, the courts should find no difficulty
       to act on the testimony of a victim of sexual
       assault alone to convict an accused where her
       testimony inspires confidence and is found to be
       reliable. Seeking corroboration of her statement
       before relying upon the same, as a rule, in such
       cases amounts to adding insult to injury. Why
       should the evidence of a girl or a woman who
       complains of rape or sexual molestation, be
       viewed      with      doubt,     disbelief      or
       suspicion?........”.                  (Underlining
       added)

(14).      The prosecutrix was aged only nine years, she had

no reason to falsely implicate her cousin.                   Since the

prosecutrix    has   been    compelled    to   face    the   ordeal   of

sleeping with the respondent-accused everyday night, On

04.03.2010    she    refused   to   go   the   house    of   her   aunt.

Considering the evidence of PW-4 – a girl of tender year,

corroboration from an independent source of the evidence

of the prosecutrix is not required. The evidence of the

prosecutrix    clearly      established    that   the    accused      was

committing rape on her by penetration.



(15)       The Trial Court, which had the opportunity of

observing and hearing the prosecutrix (PW-4), recorded a

finding of fact that the evidence of prosecutrix (PW-4) is

convincing and inspires the confidence of the court.                When
                                          8

the Trial Court which had the opportunity of seeing and

hearing the witness has held that the evidence of the

prosecutrix (PW-4) inspires confidence of the court, in

our considered view, in the absence of any convincing

reason, the High Court ought not to have interfered with

such finding of fact.


(16)          Insofar as the second ground on which the High

Court gave the benefit of doubt to the respondent-accused

that the medical evidence was inconclusive, it is to be

pointed out that Dr. Neerja Gupta (PW-6) in her evidence

has categorically stated that merely because there was no

injury marks it cannot be said that there was no question

of    sexual    intercourse.        In    her    Chief     Examination          Dr.

Neerja Gupta (PW-6) has further stated that in case of

small/slightest penetration the hymen will not rupture;

the    hymen     will     rupture      only      in     case        of   complete

penetration      with     force.         As     discussed       earlier,        the

respondent-accused made the prosecutrix (PW-4) to sleep

with him and inserted his private part in the private part

of the prosecutrix which constitutes rape.                          This may not

have ruptured the hymen.            In the absence of injury on the

private part of the prosecutrix, it cannot be concluded

that    the    incident    had   not     taken    place        or    the    sexual

intercourse      was      committed      with     the     consent          of   the
                                         9

prosecutrix. The prosecutrix being a small child of about

nine years of age, there oculd be no question of her

giving consent to sexual intercourse.                        The absence of

injuries on the private part of the prosecutrix can be of

no   consequence   in     the    facts       and   circumstances       of   the

present case.



(17)       As rightly stated by Dr. Neerja Gupta (PW-6) that

merely because there was no rupture of hymen it cannot be

said that there was penetration.                It cannot be the reason

to disbelieve the testimony of the prosecutrix (PW-4).                       It

is fairly a well-settled principle that in case of rape it

is     not necessary that external injury is to be found on

the body of the prosecutrix.


(18)     Mrs.   Manjeet      Chawla,         learned    counsel       for   the

respondent-accused, has submitted that non-examination of

aunt of the prosecutrix (PW-4) is fatal to the case of the

prosecution and no reason is forthcoming as to why aunt

was not examined.


(19)       Be it noted that the respondent-accused is the

son of the aunt of the prosecutrix.                Nothing prevented the

respondent-accused      to      have   examined        his   mother    as   his

witness.    The non-examination of aunt of the prosecutrix
                                        10

(PW-4) cannot be put against the prosecution.                          In the

light   of   the    evidence       of    the        prosecutrix      and     the

categorical findings recorded by the Trial Court, in our

view the High Court was not justified in reversing the

conviction of the respondent-accused and recording order

of acquittal of the respondent-accused.                    In order to give

the benefit of doubt to the accused, it has to be a

reasonable doubt.



(20)     Observing        that   there       are    number    of     unmerited

acquittals   in    rape    cases   and       that    the    courts    have    to

display a greater sense of responsibility and to be more

sensitive while dealing with the charges of sexual assault

on woman, in State of Rajasthan v. N.K. The Accused –

(2000) 5 SCC 30, this Court has held as under :

   “9.   ...A  Doubt,    as   understood    in   criminal
   jurisprudence, has to be a reasonable doubt and
   not an excuse for a finding in favour of
   acquittal.   An   unmerited    acquittal    encourages
   wolves in the society being on the prowl for easy
   prey, more so when the victims of crime are
   helpless females.    It is the spurt in the number
   of unmerited acquittals recorded by criminal
   courts which gives rise to the demand for death
   sentence to the rapists.        The courts have to
   display a greater sense of responsibility and to
   be more sensitive while dealing with charges of
   sexual assault on women.     In Bharwada Bhoginbhai
   Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat:-(1983) 3 SCC 217
   this Court observed that refusal to act on the
   testimony of a victim of sexual assault in the
   absence of corroboration as a rule, is adding
   insult to injury.     This Court deprecated viewing
                                 11

   evidence of such victim with the aid of spectacles
   fitted with lenses tinted with doubt, disbelief or
   suspicion. We need only remind ourselves of what
   this Court has said through one of us (Dr A. S.
   Anand, J. as his Lordship then was)in State of
   Punjab v. Gurmeet Singh:- (1996) 2 SCC 384:p. 403,
   para 21 )

       “[A] rapist not only violates the victim's
       privacy   and   personal    integrity,  but
       inevitably causes serious psychological as
       well as physical harm in the process. Rape
       is not merely a physical assault- it is
       often destructive of the whole personality
       of the victim. A murderer destroys the
       physical body of his victim, a rapist
       degrades the very should of the helpless
       female. The courts, therefore, shoulder a
       great   responsibility   while   trying  an
       accused on charges of rape. The must deal
       with such cases with utmost sensitivity.
       The courts should examine the broader
       probabilities of a case and not get swayed
       by minor contradictions or insignificant
       discrepancies in the statement of the
       prosecutrix, which are not of a fatal
       nature, to throw out an otherwise reliable
       prosecution case.”

   10. The questions arising for consideration before
   us are: whether the prosecution story, as alleged,
   inspires confidence of the court on the evidence
   adduced? Whether the prosecutrix, is a witness
   worthy of reliance? Whether the testimony of a
   prosecutrix who has been in victim of rape stands
   in need of corroboration and, if so, whether such
   corroboration is available in the facts of the
   present case? What was the age of the prosecutrix?
   Whether she was a consenting party to the crime?
   Whether there was unexplained delay in lodging the
   FIR?”


(21)     In   the   present   case,   the   prosecutrix   (PW-4),

being a young girl aged about nine years, had no reason to

falsely implicate the respondent-accused.         The testimony
                                  12

of the prosecutrix (PW-4) must have been appreciated in

the light of the background of the case; more so, the

prosecutrix (PW-4) was reluctant to go back to the house

of her aunt and complained the act of sexual intercourse

committed by the respondent-accused to her teachers, Pooja

Mahajan (PW-1) and Ritubala (PW-2).         The High Court has

not appreciated the evidence of the prosecutrix (PW-4) in

the light of the well-settled principles and erred in

reversing the conviction of the respondent-accused to the

acquittal.    The impugned judgment of the High Court is not

sustainable and is liable to be set aside.          Since at the

time of incident the victim was at her tender age, we do

not    find   any   reason   to   show   sympathy   towards   the

respondent-accused.


(22)       In the result, the impugned judgment and order of

the High Court is set aside and this appeal is allowed.

The judgment of the Trial Court is restored confirming

conviction of the respondent under Section 376 I.P.C. and

the sentence of imprisonment of ten years.


(23)       The respondent-accused is to surrender to custody

within a period of four weeks from today to serve the

remaining sentence failing which he shall be taken to

custody.
                              13



(24)     A copy of this order be sent to the concerned

trial court for necessary action.


                               .........................J.
                               (R. BANUMATHI)



                               .........................J.
                               (INDIRA BANERJEE)
NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 28, 2018.

