
Supreme Court of India
Yashwant vs The State Of Maharashtra on 4 September, 2018Author: ........................J.
Bench: M M Shantanagoudar, N Ramana
                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION




                                  C
                                    RIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 385­386 OF 2008 


          YASHWANT ETC.                                                    …APPELLANT(S)


                                                  VERSUS


          THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                                  …

          RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    With


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 299 OF 2008 

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 387­388 OF 2008 

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 182­187 OF 2009 



                                               JUDGMENT

     N. V. RAMANA, J. 


                               “With great power comes greater responsibility”
                      1. At the outset it is important to note that our police force need
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2018.09.04
15:24:17 IST
                         to develop and recognize the concept of ‘democratic policing’,
Reason:


                         wherein crime control is not the only end, but the means to

                                                    1
  achieve this order is also equally important. Further the turn

  of events in this case obligates us to re­iterate herein that ‘be

  you ever so high, the law is always above you!’

2. These   criminal   appeals   are   filed   against   the   impugned

  common order and judgment, dated 13.12.2007, passed by

  the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, in

  Criminal   Appeal   Nos.   393,   394,   395,   397,   419   and   420   of

  1995.   As   the   incident   is   same   and   contentions   canvassed

  individually,   being   similar,   we   proposed   to   deal   with   the

  judgment through this common order.


3. The prosecution’s case in brief are that on 23.06.1993, Police

  Inspector   (P.I)   Narule   (A­1)   was   on   duty,   when   one   head

  constable Telgudiya (PW­48), working at the concerned Police

  Station,  Deolapar   came to P.I  Narule (A­1) accompanied by

  three   persons   namely   Ganeshprasad,   Arunkumar   and

  Kashiram.   They   informed   P.I   Narule   (A­1)   that   they   were

  staying at India Sun Hotel and were looted eight days before.

  It may  be  relevant that they informed P.I  Narule (A­1) that

  they had not lodged any complaint concerning the incident. 



                                  2
4. On that night , the accused patrolling party which included

  P.I Narule (A­1), Assistant Police Inspector Yashwant Mukaji

  Karade (A­2), Sub­Inspector Rambhau Vitthalrao Kadu (A­3),

  Police   constables   Jahiruddin   Bashirmiya   Deshmukh   (A­4),

  Nilkanth   Pandurang   Chaurpagar   (A­5),   Namdeo   Nathuji

  Ganeshkar   (A­6),   Ramesh   Tukaram   Bhoyar   (A­7),   Ashok

  Bhawani Gulam Shukla (A­8), Sudhakar Marotrao Thakre (A­

  9)   and   Raghunath   Barkuji   Bhakte   (A­10),   along   with

  Ganeshprasad, Arunkumar and Kashiram, went to the house

  of   H.C.P   Telgudiya   (PW­48)   at   Police   Lines,   Ajni.   In   the

  meanwhile,   H.C.P   Telgudiya   (PW­48)   is   supposed   to   have

  found out that a Christian male by the name of ‘Anthony’ was

  responsible   for   the   looting.   Although,   the   H.C.P   Telgudiya

  (PW­48)   confirmed   that   there   was   no   ‘Anthony’,   but   he   is

  supposed   to   have   revealed that  one Joinus (deceased)  lives

  nearby, who was a known suspect from earlier robbery case.

  H.C.P.   Telgudiya,   took   the   police   party   to   the   residential

  quarters   of   Joinus   (deceased),   who   had   already   slept   after

  having his dinner and consuming some alcohol. 



                                  3
5. It was around 1:00 AM in the night, the police party reached

   the  house of  Joinus (deceased). He was taken into custody

   and his residential quarters were searched. It is alleged that

   during this process, some of the police men are supposed to

   have   molested   Zarina   (PW­1),   wife   of   Joinus   (deceased).

   Thereafter,   the   police   party   tied   Joinus   (deceased)   to   an

   electric pole outside and was beaten by the police personnel

   with   sticks.   Later   Joinus   (deceased)   and   his   other   family

   members   were   taken   to   various   locations   including   Rani

   Kothi,   Hill   Top   restaurant   wherein   he   was   given   beatings

   intermittently. At about 3:55 AM he was brought back to the

   police Station, wherein he was locked­up with two other cell

   mates. 

6. In   the   morning   of   24.06.1993   at   7:30   AM,   on   duty   police

   constables found Joinus (deceased) to be motionless and on

   examination  he   was found to be not breathing. Meanwhile,

   Magistrate   was   requested   to   conduct   an   inquest   and

   chemical analysis. The case was handed over to the State CID

   for   investigation   into   the   matter.   A   complaint   came   to   be

   registered   against one Anthony, being Crime No. 238/1993

   under Section 420 of IPC at 10:20 PM on 24.06.1993 after
                                   4
the death of Joinus. Thereafter, post­mortem was conducted,

and investigation was conducted by P.I. Oza. After requisite

sanction was granted by the Government for prosecuting the

accused,   the   investigating   officer   laid   charges   against   ten

erring officers in the following manner­
     1.) That   you   all   the   accused   on   23.06.1993   at   about
      23.00   hours   made   an   entry   in   the   Movement   Register   of
      Crime Branch at Sr. No. 26 that you left the Crime Branch
      Office   for   Night   Patrolling   and   thereafter   along   with
      Ganeshprasad   Thakur,   Arunkumar   Gupta,   Kashiram
      Barethia, Head Constable Madhorao Tenguriya drove in the
      police   van   Bearing   No.   MH­12/9887   and   forcibly   entered
      the house of the deceased Joinus Adam Yelamati at about
      00.45 hours on 24.06.1993. The deceased was wearing his
      underwear and banian and was sleeping in his house. You
      all   the   accused   in   furtherance   of   your   common   intention
      pulled the deceased out of his house and took him on the
      road and tied him to the electric pole with a rope and he
      was   given   merciless   beating   with   the   stick.   The   deceased
      was made to sit in the said Crime Branch Vehicle and he
      was brought to the office of Crime Branch. You made him
      naked and also gave a heavy beating to the deceased with
      the stick in the Crime Branch office. At that time you all
      were   aware   that   such   merciless   beating   would   cause   the
      death of the deceased. You kept him in the lock up at about
      3.55   a.m.   without   registering   any   offence   in   the   Crime
      Branch. In the morning, the deceased found dead. You did
      commit murder of Joinus Adam Yellamati and thereby you
      all committed an offence punishable u/s. 302 r/w. Sec. 34
      of the Indian Penal Code and within my cognizance. 
      2.)      Secondly, that you all the accused in furtherance of
      your   common   intention   entered   the   house   of   deceased
      Joinus Adam Yellamati at about 00.45 hours on 24.06.1993
      and pretended to take the personal search of the wife of the
      deceased   namely   Zarina   and   under   the   pretext   of   taking
      search, touched the breasts of Zarina. Thereafter, you made
      her to sit in your police van and also took pinches on her
      body with an intention to outrage her modesty. Thereafter,
      she   was   brought   to   your   Crime   branch   office   and   you
      inserted   your   hand   in   the   petticoat   of   Zarina   with   an
      intention to outrage her modesty and by such assault you


                                    5
         all thereby committed an offence punishable u/s 354 r/w
         Sec. 34 of the Indian Penal Code and within my Cognizance.
         3.)       Thirdly, that you all the accused in furtherance of
         your common intention, wrongfully confined two children of
         the deceased namely Kumari Stenlos aged 10 years and boy
         Jorge   aged   8   years   and   the   brother   of   Zarina   by   name
         Richard   Abraham,   aged   19   years   and   another   cousin
         brother by name Stenly Patrik, aged 19 years and thereby
         committed   an   offence   punishable   u/s.   342   of   the   Indian
         Penal Code, and within my cognizance.
         4.)     Fourthly, that you all the accused in furtherance of
         your   common   intention,   on   the   aforesaid   day,   date,   time
         and   place,   voluntarily   caused   hurt   to   Joinus   Adam
         Yellamati, aged 42 years and Zarina w/o Joinus Yellamati
         for the purpose of extorting from the said Joinus Yellamati
         and Zarina w/o Joinus Yellamati certain information which
         might lead to detection of offence of cheating committed at
         Hotel “India Sun”, Nagpur, in respect of one Ganeshprasad
         Babulal   Thakur   and   one   Arunkumar   Gupta   and   thereby
         committed an offence punishable u/s. 330 r/w  Sec 34 of
         the Indian Penal Code and within my cognizance. 
         5.)     Fifthly,   that   you   all   the   accused   in   furtherance   of
         your common intention on the aforesaid day, date, time and
         place,   assaulted   Joinus   Adam   Yellamati   and   Zarina   w/o
         Joinus   Yellamati,   intending   by   such   assault   to   dishonor
         said   Joinus   Adam   Yellamati   and   Zarina   w/o   Joinus
         Yellamati   and   thereby   committed   an   offence   punishable
         u/s. 355 r/w Sec. 34 of the Indian Penal Code and within
         my cognizance.

7. All   the   accused   pleaded   not   guilty   and   claimed   trial.   The

   Sessions Court in Sessions Case No. 416 of 1993, by order

   dated 22.09.1995, passed following order­



   ACCUSED         SECTION                      PUNISHMENT/ACQUITTAL
   Accused        302 of IPC                             Acquitted
   No. 1­10
   Accused       330 r/w. 34        Each   of   them   was   convicted   to   suffer
   No. 1­10        of IPC           rigorous imprisonment for three years and
                                    to pay a fine of Rs. 500/­, in default three
                                    months further rigorous imprisonment.
   Accused       354 r/w. 34        Each   of   them   was   convicted   to   suffer

                                        6
       No. 1­10        of IPC      rigorous imprisonment for six months and
                                   to pay a fine of Rs. 300/­, in default three
                                   months further rigorous imprisonment.
       Accused      355 r/w. 34    Each   of   them   was   convicted   to   suffer
       No. 1­10       of IPC       rigorous imprisonment for three years and
                                   to pay a fine of Rs. 300/­, in default one
                                   month further rigorous imprisonment.
       Accused      342 r/w. 34    Each   of   them   was   convicted   to   suffer
       No. 1­10       of IPC       rigorous imprisonment for three years and
                                   to pay a fine of Rs. 300/­, in default one
                                   month further rigorous imprisonment.

       The sentence was ordered to run concurrently.

     8. The   reasons   provided   by   the   trial   court   for   the

       acquittal/conviction in short, are as follows­
            i. That   reliance   is   placed   on   the   evidence   of   Dr.
               Kewalia/PW­49 (Ex. 296), to conclude that there was
               a possibility of death of the deceased, may have been
               due to asphyxiation.
           ii. That the post mortem report or the medical evidence
               clearly indicates that the injuries in the Column No.
               17 did not correlate with the asphyxial death.
         iii. That the injuries sustained simple injuries and were
               not sufficient to cause death of an individual.
          iv. That   the   presence   of   the   accused­officers   are
               admitted   and   the   same   cannot   be   dislodged   as   the
               same is proved by the movement register.
           v. From   the   conspectus   of   other   evidence   it   was   clear
               that   injuries   were   caused   by   the   police   officer   to
               extract information, which would squarely fall under
               the four corners of Section 330 of IPC.

9.     Aggrieved by the order of the trial court, accused­Bhaskar [A­

       1], Yashwant [A­2], Raghunath [A­10]) filed Criminal Appeal

       No.   393   of   1995,   Jahiruddin   [A­4],   Nilkanth   [A­5]   and

       Namdeo [A­6] filed Criminal Appeal No. 394 of 1995, Ramesh

                                       7
      [A­7],   Ashok   Bhavani   Gulam   Shukla   [A­8],   Sudhakar   [A­9]

      filed Criminal Appeal No. 395 of 1995, Rambhau [A­3] filed

      Criminal Appeal No. 397 of 1995, before the High Court. On

      the   other   hand,   State   of   Maharashtra   also   filed   Criminal

      Appeal   being   Criminal   Appeal   No.   419   of  1995   against   the

      judgment of acquittal and Criminal Appeal No. 420 of 1995

      for enhancement of sentence.

10.   By   order   dated   13.12.2007,   the   High   Court   dismissed   the

      appeal preferred by the State being Criminal Appeal No (s).

      419   and   420   of   1995,   but   partly   allowed   the   appeals

      preferred by the accused officer by acquitting accused no. 1

      to 9 of the offences punishable under Sections 354, 355, 342

      read   with   34   of   IPC, however, upheld  the conviction  under

      Section 330 of IPC. Moreover, Raghunath Barkuji Bhakte (A­

      10) was acquitted of all the offences. The High Court passed

      the aforesaid order on the following grounds­
          i. That the injuries to the deceased are established by
              the   Post­mortem   report,   corroborated   by   the
              photographs taken during the investigation.
         ii. That the benefit of doubt as to the cause of death
              was   not   result   of   the   injuries   sustained   by   the
              accused,   should   enure   to   the   accused   appellants
              herein.


                                     8
         iii.   Even   though   there   are   many   discrepancies   in   the
                evidence  of   PW­1 [Zarina], the court separated the
                falsehood from the truth.
         iv.    That offence under Section 355 of IPC is not proved
                beyond   reasonable   doubt   as   there   are   stark
                discrepancies in this regard.
          v.    That the accused A­10’s presence is not proved and
                the   benefit   of   doubt   needs   to   be   given   to   him,
                thereby mandating his acquittal.

11.   Still   aggrieved   by   the   High   Court   order,   accused­Yashwant

      [A­2]   and   Bhaskar   [A­1]   filed   Criminal   Appeal   No.   385   of

      2008, Rambhau [A­3] filed Criminal Appeal No. 386 of 2008,

      Jahiruddin   [A­4],   Nilkanth   [A­5]   and   Namdeo   [A­6]   filed

      Criminal Appeal No. 387 of 2008, Ramesh [A­7] and Ashok

      Bhavani Gulam Shukla [A­8] filed Criminal Appeal No. 388 of

      2008,   Sudhakar   [A­9]   filed   a   Criminal   Appeal   No.   299   of

      2008, State of Maharashtra filed Criminal Appeals No. 182­

      187   of   2009.   This   Court   by   order   dated   22.02.2008,   while

      issuing notice in these cases, the appellant­accused were also

      issued   show   cause   notice   for   enhancement   of   sentence.   It

      may not be out of context to note that accused A­1 is said to

      have  passed  away after filing of these appeals, accordingly,

      the name of accused A­1 was struck off and the conviction

      against him stands abated.


                                       9
12.    When the matter was argued, learned senior counsel, Mr. R.

      Basant and Mr. S. Nagamuthu, together contended that­
        a. That   the   concurrent   opinion   of   the   court   below,   w.r.t
           non   applicability   of   Section   302   of   IPC,   need   not   be
           disturbed.
        b. The   defence   of   superior   orders were  applicable  for   the
           other accused subordinate officers.
        c. That in any case the charge under Section 330 of IPC
           could have been attracted in this case.
        d. In   alternative,   he   pleads   that   only   Section   323   of   IPC
           may be maintainable which would suffice a punishment
           of the period already undergone.
        e. In any  case  they plead that acquittal of Accused A­10
           should not be interfered with.

13.   On   the   other   hand,   Mr.   Nishant   Ramakantrao

      Katneshwarkar, leaned counsel for the State of Maharashtra

      has brought to our notice that the evidence of PW­49, who

      has   categorically   stated   that   the   effect   of   death   was   the

      cumulative   effect   of   the   injuries   caused.   Further,   it   is

      contended that the number of injuries are sufficient to prove

      the causal connection. In the end, the State has argued that

      the   custodial   torture   needs   to   be   taken   seriously   and

      punished appropriately. Alternatively, State seeks to press for

      charges under Section 304 Part II of IPC, in case Section 302

      of IPC is not made out.

14.   Having   heard   learned   counsels   for   both   the   parties   and

      perusing the documents on record, we are of the opinion that
                                      10
      we need to address only four questions herein, as the High

      Court has sufficiently considered other questions, which we

      need   not   interfere   with.   The   first   question   is   whether   the

      incident narrated above amounted to murder so as to attract

      Section 302 of IPC?

15.   A   brief   narration   of   background   facts   may   be   necessary   to

      understand   the   circumstances   in   which   this   contention

      arose.   That   it   has   been   established   by   PW­21   (Kishan

      Khadode),  that the  lock­up in which Joinus (deceased) was

      found   was   suffocating,   dirty   and   bottle   guard   seeds   were

      found vomited in the place where the body of the deceased

      was found. PW­49 (Dr. Kewaliya), the doctor who conducted

      post­mortem,   opines   that   the   cause   of   death   was   due   to

      asphyxia,   as   there   were   indications   for   the   same   such   as

      defecation,   urethra   discharge   etc.   Even   though   PW­49   was

      not subjected to detailed cross­examination on the aspect of

      choking due to vomiting, However, the doctor does accept the

      possibility   of   asphyxiation   due   to   such   choking   from   the

      contents   of   vomit.   The   other   circumstance   was   that   the

      deceased was found to be in an inebriated condition, which

      as   per   the   medical   evidence   decreases   the   resistance   to
                                      11
      stress. Moreover, it is on record that the deceased was earlier

      suffering from Tuberculosis. 

16.   It is a matter of record that both the courts below have taken

      a   concurrent   view   that   the   crime   narrated   above   did   not

      amount   to   culpable   homicide   as   the   cause   of   death   was

      asphyxiation and there was nothing on record to prove that

      the injuries were the cause of the death. It is well settled that

      in   order   to   be   called   a   murder,   it   needs   to   be   culpable

      homicide   in   the   first   place,   that   is   to   say   all   murders   are

      culpable   homicides,   but   the   vice   versa   may   not   true   in   all

      cases.   Therefore,   we   need   to   ascertain   whether   a   case   of

      culpable   homicide   is  made out herein in the  first place. In

      this   context,  we   need to  observe Section  299 of IPC  at the

      outset­



                   299.   Culpable   homicide.—  Whoever   causes
                   death by doing an act with the intention of causing
                   death, or with the intention of causing such bodily
                   injury   as   is   likely   to   cause   death,   or   with   the
                   knowledge   that   he   is   likely   by   such   act   to   cause
                   death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.
                                                       (emphasis supplied)




                                         12
17.    As   noted   above,   causation   is   an   important   ingredient   to

       determine as to whether a person commits culpable homicide

       in   the   first   place.   Causation   simply   means   “causal

       relationship between conduct and result”. In this respect we

       need to assess whether the contentions of the parties could

       stand the scrutiny of the law of the land. Section 299 of IPC

       indicates two types of causations, one the factual causation

       and   the   second   the   legal   causation.   Coming   to   the   factual

       causation, it is a matter of fact as to whether the action of the

       accused caused death of the person. But the second aspect

       concerns itself, whether the death can be sufficiently imputed

       to  the   accused’s   action  as being  responsible legally. In  our

       considered   opinion   this   case   turns   on   the   second   leg   of

       causal relationship wherein, could the injuries caused by the

       police officers be sufficiently imputed to be the cause of death

       of Joinus herein?

18.    It is settled under common law wherein the principle of ‘take

       their victim as they find them’ is followed,1 meaning ‘A person

       who   does   any   act/omission   which   hastens   the   death   of

       another person who, when the act is done or the omission is

1 R v Blaue, [1975] 3 All ER 446 (CA)
                                        13
      made,   is   labouring   under   some   disorder   or   disease   arising

      from   another   cause,   is   deemed   to   have   killed   that   other

      person.’   This principle has been expressly ingrained under

      the Explanation 1 to the Section 299 of IPC. Without going

      into details on this aspect as this is not a case of multiple

      causation   requiring   us  to   consider  the   same,  rather  it  is  a

      case   wherein   the   deceased   died   of   asphyxiation   due   to

      contents   of   his   vomit,   hours   later   from   the   time   when   the

      injury   was   inflicted,   which   is   an   independent   reason   for

      cause of death herein.  


19.   As elucidated above, various other circumstances which dis­

      associate the cause of death to the actions of the appellant

      officers are available. It is on record that the injuries noted in

      the   post­mortem   report   clearly   indicate   that   the   nature   of

      these injuries were not grievous. The head injury noted does

      not show any internal fracture to the skull bone. Therefore,

      when, on facts, it is concurrently inferred by the courts below

      that the cause of death was due to asphyxiation, we do not

      see   any   reasons   for   accepting   a   different   factual   inference

      herein, as the same is not perverse. 

                                      14
20.   Further, we agree with the reasoning of the High Court on the

      aspect that the PW­1 (Zarina) has not been completely honest

      in her statements. She has at times deposed over­zealously,

      thereby   mandating   us   to   be   cautious   in   accepting   her

      evidence.   Further   no   witness   has   clearly   deposed   on   the

      aspect of injuries and how they happened to be, except for

      blank  statements that ‘beatings were given to the deceased

      Joinus’.   Further   we   may   note   that   the   surrounding

      circumstances   also   strengthen   our   conclusions   such   as

      firstly, the condition of the deceased was said to be good as

      per the statements of PW­21 (cell­inmate) and PW­42 (head

      constable) although he was suffering from tuberculosis, when

      he was admitted in the lock­up. Secondly, Joinus (deceased)

      was heavily inebriated when he was arrested and thirdly, the

      aspect of asphyxiation which is a significant cause to break

      the chain of causal link between the death of Joinus and the

      injuries inflicted by the appellants herein.

21.   As   discussed   above,   the   causal   link   between   the   injuries

      caused to the deceased by the erring officers and the death is

      not connected, therefore, Section 299 of IPC is not attracted.


                                    15
      Accordingly, there is no question of attracting Section 302 or

      304 of IPC.

22.   In any case this Court in catena of cases has taken a view

      that, as regards the inference of facts, when two Courts have

      acquitted the accused­appellant of charges under Section 302

      of IPC, then it would not be appropriate upon this Court to

      overturn   the   factual   finding,   unless   the   view   taken   by   the

      lower courts is shown to be highly unlikely or unreasonable

      or perverse. Although the learned counsel for the State has

      tried to argue that the cumulative effect of the injuries was

      responsible for the death, but the medical evidence itself, on

      the   other   hand   affirms the high possibility  of death due to

      asphyxiation. Further there is no material brought before us

      to portray that the courts below had taken a perverse view. In

      this   light,   when   two   reasonable   views   are   possible,   then

      reversal   of   concurrent   acquittal   would   not   be   appropriate

      herein [refer  Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka, (2007) 4

      SCC   415;  Mahtab   Singh   v.   State   of   U.P,   (2009)   13   SCC

      670].

23.   It   may   not   be   out   of   context   to   note   that   it   is   generally

      difficult   to   prosecute   the   custodial   torture   cases   as   the
                                     16
       evidence available on record may not sufficient. It is in this

       context that Law Commission in its 113 th Report published in

       1985   had   recommended   inclusion   of   Section   114­B   to   the

       Evidence   Act,   but   the   same   was   never   materialized   into   a

       statutory   law.     Further   this   Court   in  State   of   M.P.   v.

       Shyamsunder Trivedi, 1995 (4) SCC 262, appealed to the

       Parliament for considering such amendment. 

24.    The   Second   question   is   with   respect   to   the   defence   of

       superior order or infamously known as ‘Nuremburg defence’

       pleaded by the accused­appellants (subordinate officers). The

       earliest known example, wherein such defence was pleaded

       was before an international ad hoc tribunal, can be traced to

       the trial of Peter Von Hagenbach for occupation of Breisach

       on the orders of Duke of Burgundy in the year 1474. 2 We are

       aware of the fact that IPC allows such a defence if conditions

       provided under Section 76 of IPC are fulfilled. A three­Judge

       Bench   of   this   Court   in  State   of   West   Bengal   v.   Shew

       Mangal   Singh   and   Ors.,   AIR   1981   SC   1917,   observed   as

       under­


2 Y. Dinstein, “The Defence of Obedience to Superior Orders in International Law”, Leyden, 
1965.
                                            17
            Section 76 of the Penal Code provides that nothing
            is an offence which is done by a person who is, or
            who   by   reason   of   a   mistake   of   fact   and   not   by
            reason   of   a   mistake   of  law   in   good  faith   believes
            himself   to   be,   bound   by   law,   to   do   it.   The
            illustration   to   that   section   says   that   if   a   soldier
            fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer,
            in   conformity   with   the   commands   of   the   law,   he
            commits   no   offence.   The   occasion   to   apply   the
            provisions   of   the   section   does   not   arise   in   the
            instant case since the question as to whether the
            accused   believed   in   good   faith   on   account   of   a
            mistake of fact that he was bound by law to do the
            act which is alleged to constitute an offence, would
            arise only if, to the extent relevant in this case, the
            order   or   command   of   the   superior   officer   is   not
            justified or is otherwise unlawful.

25.   It is a matter of record that accused A­1 has passed away and

      the   matter   against   him   stands   abated.   The   other   accused­

      appellants, with a view to take advantage of this situation, as

      an after­thought have pleaded herein the defence that they

      were   merely   executing   the   orders   of   accused   A­1.   At   the

      outset we may indicate that it is not merely that the accused­

      appellants have to prove that they have followed the order of

      the   superior   officer   (accused  A­1),  rather  they   need  to   also

      prove   to   the   Court   that   the  aforesaid  appellants  bonafidely

      believed   that   the   orders   issued   by   accused   A­1   were   legal.

      However,   our   attention   was   not   drawn   to   any   argument

      before the courts or evidence on record to this effect that the
                                       18
      accused­appellants were merely acting on the orders of their

      superiors on a bonafide belief that such orders were legal. It

      was not even their case from the beginning that the accused­

      appellants were not aware of facts and circumstances, rather

      all   of   them   started   out   as   a   investigation   party   with   full

      knowledge and participation. On the perusal of the record, we

      may note that this argument is only taken before this court,

      to   seek   a   re­trial   and   such   attempt   cannot   be   taken   into

      consideration herein.

26.   The third question concerns about the acquittal of Accused

      A­10 (Raghunath Bhakte). It would be necessary to deal with

      the individual liability of accused A­10, as he states that he

      was not present with the investigation party. Although some

      evidence points to his presence with the investigation party,

      but   the   fact   remains   that   all   the   other   accused   have

      unanimously stated that A­10 did not accompany them as he

      fell sick during the investigation and accordingly, went home.

      We   need  to  examine  the liability  of accused A­10, with the

      above premise in mind.

27.   It   is   wrought   in   our   criminal   law  tradition   that   the  Courts

      have the responsibility to separate chaff from the husk and
                                       19
      dredge out truth. It may not be out of context to note that the

      legal   maxim   ‘falsus   in   uno,   falsus   in   omnibus’  is   not

      applicable   in   India,   thereby   the   courts   are   mandated   to

      separate   truth   from   falsehood.   [refer  Kulwinder   Singh   v.

      State of  Punjab,  (2007) 10 SCC 455;  Ganesh v. State of

      Karnataka,  (2008)   17   SCC   152;  Jayaseelan   v.   State   of

      Tamil Nadu, (2009) 12 SCC 275] It is not uncommon that in

      some   cases   witnesses   in   the   jealousness   to   see   all   the

      accused get conviction, may stretch the facts or twist them.

      In   those   instances,   it   is   necessary   for   the   Courts   to   be

      cautious   enough   to   not   ‘rush   to   convict’   rather   uphold

      justice. It is clear from the statements of all the accused as

      well as the evidence of PW­41 (Driver Vijay Thengde), PW­48

      (HC Telgudiya)  and PW­66 (I.O Dy. SP. Godbole) that there

      exists a reasonable doubt as to the presence of A­10, during

      the   patrolling   party   and   thereafter.   Therefore,   we   are   not

      inclined   to   disturb   the   findings   of   the   High   Court   on   this

      aspect as well.

28.   The fourth question, which we need to consider, concerns the

      punishment under Section 330 of IPC. At the outset, we need


                                       20
       to state that we do not find any material on record to interfere

       with   the   conviction   of   the   accused   under   the   aforesaid

       Section,   except   for   the   quantum   of   punishment,   which   we

       need to determine.

29.    Recently, this Bench in  State of Rajasthan v. Mohan Lal

       and  Anr3,   following  Soman  v.  State  of Kerala, (2013) 11

       SCC   382   and  Alister   Anthony   Pareira   v.   State   of

       Maharashtra, (2012) 2 SCC 648 observed as under­

              From   the   aforementioned observations,  it is clear
              that   the   principle   governing   the   imposition   of
              punishment   will   depend   upon   the   facts   and
              circumstances of each case. However, the sentence
              should   be   appropriate,   adequate,   just,
              proportionate and commensurate with the nature
              and gravity of the crime and the manner in which
              the  crime is committed. The gravity of the crime,
              motive  for  the  crime, nature of the crime and all
              other attending circumstances have to be borne in
              mind   while   imposing   the   sentence.   The   Court
              cannot   afford   to   be   casual   while   imposing   the
              sentence,   inasmuch   as   both   the   crime   and   the
              criminal   are   equally   important   in   the   sentencing
              process. The Courts must see that the public does
              not   lose   confidence   in   the   judicial   system.
              Imposing inadequate sentences will do more harm
              to the justice system and may lead to a state where
              the  victim loses confidence in the judicial system
              and resorts to private vengeance.




3 Criminal Appeal No. 959 of 2018
                                      21
30.   From the facts portrayed it is clear that the police knew the

      identity of the deceased was different from the person, they

      wanted   to   investigate   initially.   The   manner   in   which   the

      deceased   and   his   family   members   were   taken   into   custody

      reflects   pure   act   of   lawlessness   and   does   not   befit   the

      conduct   of   the   Police.   The   High   Court   of   Lahore   in  Lal

      Mohammad v. Emperor, AIR 1936 Lah 471, had observed

      that there was a requirement to treat the crime under Section

      330   with   stringent   punishments  in   order   to   have  deterrent

      effect, in the following manner­



            In   my   opinion,   however,   conduct   of   this   sort   by
            responsible   police   officers   engaged   in   the
            investigation of a crime, is one of the most serious
            offences   known   to   the   law.   The   result   of   third
            degree methods or of actual torture or beating such
            as   in   this   case   must   be   that   innocent   persons
            might   well   be   convicted,   confession   being   forced
            from them which are false. In almost every case in
            which a confession is recorded, in criminal Courts,
            it   is   alleged   by   the   defence   that   the   police   have
            resorted   to   methods   such   as   these.   It   is   seldom,
            however, that an offence of this nature is or can be
            proved. It clearly is the duty of the Courts when a
            case of this kind is proved to pass sentences which
            may have a deterrent effect.


                                       22
31.   In  Ratanlal and Dhirajlal’s Law of Crimes  (27th  Ed.), the

      author while discussing the sentencing under Section 330 of

      IPC notes as under­
           The   causing   of   hurt   by   a   responsible   police
           officer   engaged   in   investigation   of   a   crime   is
           one of the most serious offences known to law
           and   deterrent   punishment   should   be   inflicted
           on the offender.
                                                    (emphasis supplied)

32.   The factual narration of the events portrayed herein narrate a

      spiteful events of police excessiveness. The motive to falsely

      implicate Joinus for a crime he was alien to was not befitting

      the police officers investigating crimes. The manner in which

      Joinus   was   taken   during   late   night   from   his   house   for

      investigation   ignores   the   basic   rights   this   country   has

      guaranteed its citizen. It is on record that injuries caused to

      the individual were in furtherance of extracting a confession.

      The  mala fide  intention of the officers­accused to undertake

      such  action  are  writ large from  the above narration, which

      does not require further elaboration. 

33.   As the police in this case are the violators of law, who had the

      primary   responsibility   to   protect   and   uphold   law,   thereby

      mandating   the   punishment   for   such   violation   to   be


                                    23
    proportionately   stringent   so   as   to   have   effective   deterrent

    effect and instill confidence in the society. It may not be out

    of   context   to   remind   that   the   motto   of   Maharashtra   State

    Police   is   "Sadrakshnāya   Khalanīghrahanāya"   (Sanskrit:   "To

    protect   good   and   to   Punish   evil"),   which   needs   to   be

    respected.   Those,   who   are   called   upon   to   administer   the

    criminal law, must bear, in mind, that they have a duty not

    merely to the individual accused before them, but also to the

    State and to the community at large. Such incidents involving

    police usually tend to deplete the confidence in our criminal

    justice   system   much   more   than   those   incidents   involving

    private   individuals.   We   must   additionally   factor   this   aspect

    while   imposing   an   appropriate   punishment   to   the   accused

    herein.

34. In the facts and circumstances of this case, the punishment

    of three­year imprisonment imposed by the Trial Court under

    Section   330   of   IPC,   would   be   grossly   insufficient   and   dis­

    proportional. We deem it appropriate to increase the term of

    sentence to maximum imposable period under Section 330 of

    IPC   i.e.,   seven   years   of   rigorous   imprisonment,   while



                                    24
      maintaining the fine imposed by the Trial Court. Accordingly,

      we modify the sentence to this limited extent.

35.   In   light   of   the   afore­said   discussion,   we   partly   allow   the

      Criminal   Appeal   Nos.   182­187   of   2009   in   the   afore­stated

      terms.   Further   Criminal   Appeal   Nos.   385­386   of   2008,

      Criminal Appeal Nos. 387­388 of 2008, Criminal Appeal No.

      299 of 2008 stand dismissed.

36.   The appellants­accused are directed to surrender before the

      authorities for serving out the rest of the sentence forthwith.




                                                             ........................J.
                                                                 (N.V. RAMANA)



                                                      ........................J.
                                          (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)


New Delhi,
September 04, 2018  




                                      25

