
Supreme Court of India
Gopal vs State Of M.P on 19 May, 2011Author: ..........................J.
Bench: Asok Kumar Ganguly, Deepak Verma
                                                     1



                                                                REPORTABLE
                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1710 OF 2007

GOPAL                                                  ....APPELLANLT

         VERSUS

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                ....RESPONDENT

                               WITH

                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1711 OF 2007

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                ....APPELLANT

         VERSUS

SHANKARLAL AND OTHERS                                  ....RESPONDENTS



                           O R D E R 

         This order shall dispose of Criminal Appeal No.1711 of 2007 

also   as   both   the   appeals   arise   out   of   the   common   judgment   and 

order   passed   by   the   Division   Bench   of   the   High   Court   of   Madhya 

Pradesh at Indore, in Criminal Appeal No. 328 of 1995, preferred 

by accused Gopal and Criminal Appeal No. 429 of 1998 preferred by 

accused Shankarlal, Nandlal, Dinesh and Chhote @ Chhotalal decided 

on 19.10.2005.

2.       Five accused were charged and prosecuted for commission of 

offences  punishable  under  Section  147,  148,  302/149,  323/149  IPC 

in   the   court   of   3rd  Additional   Sessions   Judge,   Ratlam,   Madhya 

Pradesh   in   Sessions   Case   No.   227   of   1992.     The   Trial   Court 


                                        2



pronounced   the   judgment   on   31.3.1995,   holding   the   accused   Gopal 

guilty for commission of offences under Sections 148, 302,323/149 

IPC, accused Shanker Lal and Nand Lal under Sections 148,302/149, 

323   IPC,   accused   Chhotelal   and   Dinesh   under   Sections 

148/302/149,323/149   IPC     and     awarded   punishment   together   with 

fine as described in its judgment.

3.      Against   the   said   judgment   and   order,   as   mentioned 

hereinabove,   two   criminal   appeals   were   preferred   before   the 

Division   Bench  of   the  High   Court,  which   were  disposed   of  by   the 

common impugned judgment.

4.      The   High   Court,   in   the   appeal   of   Gopal,   has   found   him 

guilty for commission of offence under Section 304 Part-I IPC and 

awarded rigorous imprisonment for 10 years, whereas in the other 

Criminal   Appeal,   accused   Shankarlal,   Nandlal   and   Chhotelal   were 

found guilty for commission of offence under Section 324 IPC and 

awarded sentence to the period already undergone by them with fine 

of Rs. 200/- each.   The accused Dinesh was not found guilty for 

any of the offences and was, accordingly, acquitted.

5.      State has preferred   appeal only against that part of the 

judgment   and   order,   whereby   accused   Shankarlal,   Nandlal   and 

Chhotelal have been found guilty under Section 324 IPC and accused 

Dinesh has been acquitted.  Accused Gopal has preferred appeal  on 

the ground that in view of the free fight between accused and the 

complainant party and the nature of injuries sustained by some of 

the accused persons, he deserves to be acquitted.


                                          3
6.       It   is   pertinent   to   mention   here   that   State   has   not 

preferred   any   appeal   against   the   judgment   of   the   High   Court 

wherein and whereunder conviction and sentence  awarded to accused 

Gopal  under Section 302 IPC was altered to one under Section 304 

Part-I   IPC.     In   this   view   of   the   matter,   the   State   cannot 

challenge   that   accused   Gopal   should   have   been   convicted       under 

Section 302 IPC.

7.       The prosecution story, in short, is as under:

         That   on   30.6.1992,   a   meeting   of   a   Patidar   Community   was 

convened   wherein   Ramchandra   was   not   present.     On   1.7.1992,   a 

panchayat   meeting   was   also   convened   by   Ramchandra   wherein 

Shankarlal was present but, due to some reason, the meeting could 

not   be   held.     Thereafter,   on   the   same   day,     when   Tulsiram, 

Ramchandra, Mitthulal and Shantilal were passing from the house of 

Shankarlal, accused Gopal           abused them and inflicted knife blow 

on the chest of Mitthulal, accused Shankarlal inflicted sword blow 

on   Ramchandra   and   Nandram   inflicted   sword   blow   on   Kalu.   Accused 

Chhotelal inflicted blow by cycle-chain on Tulsiram.    On account 

of injury sustained by Mitthulal on his chest, caused by accused 

Gopal,   with   the   aid   of   knife,   he   fell   on   the   ground   and   died 

instantaneously. Accused Dinesh was pelting stones on the injured 

persons.

8.       A report of the incident was lodged by Tulsi Ram vide Exb 

P-12.     Investigation   commenced   on   the   strength   of   the   report 

lodged   by   Tulsi   Ram.     Police   prepared   spot   map   and     arrested 


                                           4



accused   persons   and   at   their   instance,   weapons   of   offence     were 

recovered.     Dead   body   of   Mitthulal   was   sent   for   post-mortem 

examination   and   the   injured   were   sent   to   hospital   for   their 

medical examination and treatment.

9.       PW-4 Dr. Deep Vyas conducted post-mortem on the body of the 

deceased.     He   had   found   stab   wound   measuring     2"   x   =   "   on   the 

abdomen.     Omentum   was   coming   out   with   profuse   bleeding.   On 

internal examination, he found a wound on liver measuring 2" x 1". 

The   diaphragm   was   found   out.   In   the     opinion   of   Dr.   Deep   Vyas, 

Mitthulal died   due to syncope on account of shock and hemorrhage 

caused by stab injury.  Exb. P-8 is the post-mortem report.

10.      On   account   of   the   aforesaid   evidence,   it   could   not   be 

disputed before us that Mitthulal had met with homicidal death.

11.      After completion of the investigation, all the accused were 

charge-sheeted.     They   pleaded   not   guilty   to   the   charges   and 

pleaded that they were falsely implicated in this case.  They had 

taken a specific defence to the effect that  Ramchandra, Tulsiram, 

Mitthulal,   Kaluram   and   Shantilal   had   come   to   their   house   and 

abused   them   and   started   beating   accused   Shankarlal   and   on   the 

intervention   of   accused   Gopal,   he   too   was   assaulted   by   knife. 

According to them complainant party was the aggressor.

12.      The   prosecution,   in   order   to   bring   home   the   charges 

levelled against the accused, examined 13 witnesses.   In defence, 

the   accused   had   also   examined   two   witnesses.   However,   on 

appreciation   of   the   evidence,   available   on   record,   Trial   Court 


                                           5



found them guilty for  the offences as mentioned hereinabove.

13.      In   appeal   before   the   High   Court,   accused   Gopal   has   been 

found   guilty   under   Section   304   Part-I   IPC   and   was   sentenced   to 

undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10 years, whereas other accused 

namely; Shankarlal, Nandlal and Chhotelal   have been found guilty 

only   under   Section   324   IPC   and   have   been   let   off   on   the   period 

already undergone which varies  from 77 to 79 days with fine, and 

accused Dinesh has been completely acquitted of all the charges. 

Hence, these appeals by accused Gopal and State of Madhya Pradesh.

14.      We have accordingly heard learned counsel appearing for the 

parties and gone through the lengthy record.

15.      Mr.   Subhash   Kaushik,   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the 

appellant   Gopal   contended   that   from   record   it   proved   that   the 

complainant   party   was   not   residing   in   village   Harthali.     They 

along with other persons were called by one Poonamchand to attend 

the Panchayat of their community but on the date of incident, the 

Panchayat could not be convened and the complainant party, while 

returning back to Ratlam, attacked accused Shankarlal in front of 

his house causing injury to him as well as to the accused  Gopal. 

Since,   injuries   were   sustained   by   Shankarlal   and   Gopal.     They, 

therefore, had acted in self defence.     It was also contended by 

learned   counsel   for   the   accused     Gopal   that   the   prosecution   has 

failed to explain the injuries sustained by Shankarlal and Gopal 

and the complainant party was  aggressor.

16.      On the other hand, Mr. S.K. Dubey, learned senior counsel 


                                          6



appearing for the State has strenuously contended  before us that 

the evidence has not been read properly inasmuch as accused Gopal 

deserves   to   be   convicted   under   Section   302   IPC,   even   though   he 

might have inflicted only single injury on the chest of Mitthulal. 

It was further contended   that Mitthulal had died instantaneously 

which shows the nature and the force with which the   injury was 

caused by accused Gopal on the chest of Mitthulal.  It was further 

contended that other accused persons could not have been convicted 

only under Section 324 IPC, whereas the injuries sustained by the 

complainant party were serious in nature.  It was also argued that 

the sentence of period already undergone with fine of Rs.200/- of 

each was too lenient and deserves to be enhanced.

17.      As   mentioned   hereinabove,   since   there   is   no   appeal 

preferred by the State against that part of the judgment whereby 

the accused Gopal has been found guilty for commission of offence 

under Section 304 Part-I IPC and acquitted under Section 302 IPC, 

we   are   afraid,   there   cannot   be   any   scope   for   considering   the 

conviction of accused Gopal from Section 304 Part-I to 302 IPC.

18.      As   regards   other   accused,   the   High   Court   has   assigned 

cogent and valid reasons as to why they have been found guilty for 

commission of offence under Section 324 IPC.   The High Court has 

also noted that the injuries sustained by the accused persons have 

not   been   explained   by   the   prosecution   at   all.     Apart   from   the 

above,   from   the   evidence   of   PW-5   Dr.   B.E.   Boriwal,   it   has   also 

come   on   record   that   the   injuries   sustained   by     injured   persons 


                                         7



were simple in nature. This aspect of the matter has   been dealt 

with by the High Court in paras 8 & 9 of the impugned judgment.

19.      In   the     light   of   aforesaid   contentions,   we   are   of   the 

considered   opinion   that   the   appeal   of   accused   Gopal   can   only   be 

allowed in part to the extent that his conviction has to be upheld 

under   Section  304   Part-I  IPC   but  sentence   can  be   reduced  to   the 

period already undergone by him,   which is   more than six years. 

This, according to us, would meet the end of justice.  However, in 

Criminal Appeal No.  1711 of 2007, we find absolutely no merit or 

substance and the same deserves to be  dismissed.

20.      In  the   result,  Criminal   Appeal  No.   1710  of   2007  filed   by 

accused Gopal is partly allowed inasmuch as his conviction under 

Section 304 Part-I IPC is upheld   but sentence is reduced to the 

period   already   undergone   by   him.     He   be   released   from   the   jail 

immediately if not required in   any other case.   Criminal Appeal 

No. 1711 of 2007 filed by the State is hereby dismissed.




                                    ............................J.
                                    [ ASOK KUMAR GANGULY ]




                                    ..........................J.
                                    [ DEEPAK VERMA ]
NEW DELHI
MAY 19, 2011.



