
Supreme Court of India
Arun Kumar Yadav vs State Of U.P. Thru Dist. Judge on 29 May, 2013Bench: B.S. Chauhan, Dipak Misra
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CRIMINAL  APPEAL  NO. 1430 OF 2010


Arun Kumar Yadav                             ...Appellant

                                   Versus

State of U.P. Thru Dist. Judge                       ...Respondent









                                  O R D E R

      This appeal has been filed under Section 19 of the Contempt of  Courts
Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) against  the  judgment  and
order dated 17.08.2007 passed by the High Court of Judicature  at  Allahabad
in Criminal Contempt No. 13 of 2006, by way of  which  the  High  Court  has
convicted the appellant for committing the contempt of court  under  Section
12 of the Act and sentenced him to suffer simple imprisonment for one  month
and to pay a fine of Rs.2,000/- in default, to undergo  simple  imprisonment
for a further period of two weeks.

      On 5.9.2005 the appellant moved an application to  surrender  Chhandra
Pal @ Badara s/o Shri Mathura under various sections  of  the  Indian  Penal
Code in pursuance of the order passed  under  Section  82  of  the  Code  of
Criminal  Procedure  (for  short  “the  Code”)  by  the   learned   Judicial
Magistrate.  As the offences mentioned in the application  and  the  process
issued under Section 82 of the  Code  were  different,  the  court  asked  a
report from the police station concerned fixing the next date for  disposal.
 About 3.45 p.m., when the Presiding Officer of the Court was in  the  midst
of dictation of the  order  to  his  stenographer  in  another  case,  i.e.,
Original Suit No. 200/90  titled  Balraj  V.  Rangpal,  the  appellant  came
inside the Court and shouted loudly uttering as under: -

      “As to why you did not take my accused in judicial custody.  You  have
      passed arbitrary orders.  Now, my accused would  be  arrested  and  he
      would be encountered. You have done injustice.  I will  see  you.   If
      you have your official force I am also having my own force.”

      Apart from the aforesaid loud  threatening  utterances  the  appellant
had also used unparliamentary language for the said Judicial  Officer.   The
Judicial Officer sent a complaint to the High Court  against  the  appellant
through proper channel, the cognizance  of  which  was  taken  by  the  High
Court, first on administrative  side  and,  thereafter,  on  judicial  side.
After hearing the parties, the High Court framed  the  charges  against  the
contemnor on 6.10.2006 in respect of this incident dated 5.9.2005  at  Khaga
Court, District Fatehpur, using abusive language  to  Abdul  Qayum,  learned
Civil  Judge,  (Junior   Division/Judicial   Magistrate,   Khaga,   District
Fatehpur) and interrupted him from working and shouting loudly while he  was
dictating the order to his stenographer in other case.  To the said  charge-
sheet, the appellant filed the counter  affidavit  dated  20.7.2006  denying
all the allegations made in the report of the Presiding  Officer.   However,
at a later stage  by  filing  an  affidavit  dated  14.11.2006  he  tendered
unconditional apology to the court.  The matter was heard  at  length.   The
High Court discussed the entire facts and law and  came  to  the  conclusion
that it was not a fit case wherein unconditional  apology  tendered  by  the
appellant should be accepted and,  thus,  considering  the  gravity  of  the
charge against him, he had been  convicted  and  sentenced  as  referred  to
hereinabove.

      We have heard Mr. T.N.  Saxena,  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the
appellant in detail, who has  argued  all  the  legal  and  factual  aspects
before us.  However, we can express our anxiety and displeasure only on  the
issue that we fail to understand how the High Court  could  afford  to  take
such a  lenient  view  sentencing  the  appellant  for  one  month’s  simple
imprisonment only.

      It has been reiterated by this Court time and again that the  Bar  and
the Bench are required to maintain the decorum of the Court,  for  Court  is
the temple of justice for all.  No one has the authority  to  conduct  in  a
manner which would demean and disgrace  the  majesty  of  justice  which  is
dispensed by  a  court  of  law.   The  administration  of  justice  is  the
paramount role of the court and both Bar and the Bench have  an  equal  role
in performance of the said sacrosanct duty.

      In this context, we may refer with  profit  to  the  pronouncement  in
R.K. Garg, Advocate v. State of Himachal Pradesh[1], wherein the  Court  has
observed thus:-
      “The Bar and the Bench are an integral  part  of  the  same  mechanism
      which administers justice to the people. Many members of the Bench are
      drawn from  the  Bar  and  their  past  association  is  a  source  of
      inspiration and pride to them. It ought to be a matter of equal  pride
      to the Bar. It is unquestionably true that  courtesy  breeds  courtesy
      and just as charity has to begin at home, courtesy must begin with the
      Judge. A discourteous Judge is like an  ill-tuned  instrument  in  the
      setting of a court room. But members  of  the  Bar  will  do  well  to
      remember that such flagrant  violations  of  professional  ethics  and
      cultured conduct will only result in the  ultimate  destruction  of  a
      system without which no democracy can survive.”


      In Mahabir Prasad Singh v. M/s.  Jacks  Aviation  Pvt.  Ltd.[2],  this
Court  has  observed  that  judicial  function  cannot  and  should  not  be
permitted to be stonewalled by browbeating or bullying  methodology  whether
it is by litigants or by counsel.  In the said case the two learned  Judges,
after referring to a three-Judge Bench decision in Lt. Col.  S.J.  Chaudhary
v. State (Delhi Administration)[3], has opined thus: -

      “It was further reminded that “having accepted the brief, he  will  be
      committing a breach of his  professional  duty,  if  he  so  fails  to
      attend”.
            “A lawyer is under obligation to do nothing that  shall  detract
      from the dignity of the Court, of which he is himself a sworn  officer
      and assistant.  He should at all times pay deferential respect to  the
      Judge, and scrupulously observe the decorum of the Court room.”

            (Warevelle’s Legal Ethics at p. 182)

            Of course, it is not a unilateral affair.  There is a reciprocal
      duty for the Court also to be courteous to the members of the Bar  and
      to make every endeavour for maintaining  and  protecting  the  respect
      which members of the Bar are entitled to have from  their  clients  as
      well as from the litigant public.  Both the Bench and the Bar are  the
      two inextricable  wings  of  the  judicial  forum  and  therefore  the
      aforesaid mutual respect is sine qua non for the efficient functioning
      of the solemn work carried on in Courts of law.   But  that  does  not
      mean that any advocate or group of them can boycott the courts or  any
      particular Court and ask the Court to desist from discharging judicial
      functions.  At any rate, no advocate can ask the Court to avoid a case
      on the ground that he does not want to appear in that Court.”

      In In Re: Sanjiv Datta, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Information  and
Broadcasting, New Delhi, Kailash Vasdev, Advocate  and  Kitty  Kumaramanglam
(Smt.), Advocate[4] certain observations  were  made,  though  in  different
context, yet we think it apt to reproduce the same:-
      “The legal profession is a solemn and  serious  occupation.  It  is  a
      noble calling and all those  who  belong  to  it  are  its  honourable
      members. Although the entry to the profession can be had by  acquiring
      merely the qualification of technical  competence,  the  honour  as  a
      professional has to be maintained by its members  by  their  exemplary
      conduct both in  and  outside  the  court.  The  legal  profession  is
      different from other professions in that what the lawyers do,  affects
      not only an individual but the administration of justice which is  the
      foundation of the civilised society. Both as a leading member  of  the
      intelligentsia of the society and as a responsible citizen, the lawyer
      has to conduct himself as a model for others both in his  professional
      and in his private and public life. The society has a right to  expect
      of him such ideal behaviour.”

      In M.B. Sanghi v. High Court of Punjab and  Haryana[5],  it  has  been
opined that

      “The tendency of maligning the  reputation  of  judicial  officers  by
      disgruntled elements who fail to secure the desired order is  ever  on
      the increase and it is high time it is nipped in the bud. And, when  a
      member of the profession resorts to such cheap gimmicks with a view to
      browbeating the Judge into submission, it is  all  the  more  painful.
      When there is a deliberate attempt to scandalise which would shake the
      confidence of the litigating public in the system, the  damage  caused
      is not only to the reputation of the Judge concerned but also  to  the
      fair name of the judiciary.”


      From the aforesaid enunciation of law it is clear  as  noon  day  that
the judicial proceeding has its own solemnity and sanctity.  No one has  any
authority to sully the same.  It is the obligation  of  everyone  to  behave
with propriety when  a  judicial  proceeding  is  conducted.   Any  kind  of
deviancy not  only  affects  the  system  but  corrodes  the  faith  of  the
collective at large.  Neither any counsel  nor  a  litigant  can  afford  to
behave in this manner.  This being the position, it is really shocking  that
a counsel who was in his mid fiftees  could  afford  to  behave  like  that.
Hence, we have expressed our displeasure.

      The learned counsel for the appellant has endeavoured had  to  impress
us that when the appellant  had  offered  unconditional  apology,  the  same
should have been accepted.  In L.D. Jaikwal v. State of U.P.[6] it has  been
observed as follows: -
      “We do not think that merely because the appellant  has  tendered  his
      apology we  should  set  aside  the  sentence  and  allow  him  to  go
      unpunished. Otherwise, all that a person wanting to intimidate a Judge
      by making the grossest imputations against him has to  do,  is  to  go
      ahead and scandalize him, and later on tender a formal  empty  apology
      which costs him practically nothing. If such an  apology  were  to  be
      accepted, as a rule, and not as an exception,  we  would  in  fact  be
      virtually issuing a “licence” to scandalize courts and commit contempt
      of court with impunity.  It  will  be  rather  difficult  to  persuade
      members of the Bar, who care for their self-respect, to join  [pic]the
      judiciary if they are expected to pay such a  price  for  it.  And  no
      sitting Judge will feel free to decide any matter as per the  dictates
      of his conscience on account of the  fear  of  being  scandalized  and
      persecuted  by  an  advocate  who  does  not  mind   making   reckless
      allegations if the Judge goes against his wishes.  If  this  situation
      were to be countenanced, advocates who can cow down  the  Judges,  and
      make them fall in line with their  wishes,  by  threats  of  character
      assassination and persecution, will be preferred by the  litigants  to
      the advocates who are mindful of professional ethics  and  believe  in
      maintaining the decorum of courts.”



      In the case at hand, we are absolutely convinced that apology  or  for
that matter the unconditional apology was neither prompt nor  genuine.   The
concept of mercy and compassion is ordinarily attracted keeping in view  the
infirmities of man’s nature and the fragile conduct but in a court of law  a
counsel cannot always take shelter under the canopy of mercy,  for  the  law
has to reign supreme.  The  sanctity  of  law  which  is  sustained  through
dignity of courts cannot be marred by errant behaviour  by  any  counsel  or
litigant.  Even a Judge is required to maintain the decorum and  dignity  of
the court.
      In view of the above, we do not find any force in  the  appeal,  which
is accordingly dismissed.   The  appellant  is  directed  to  surrender  and
deposit the fine within a period of thirty days from  today,  failing  which
the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Fatehpur, shall ensure to give effect to  the
judgment and order passed by the High Court.

                       ...................................................J.
                                                         [Dr. B. S. Chauhan]






                      ....................................................J.
                                                               [Dipak Misra]

New Delhi;
May 29, 2013
-----------------------
[1]    (1981) 3 SCC 166
[2]    AIR 1999 SC 287
[3]    AIR 1984 SC 618
[4]    1995 (3) SCC 619
[5]    (1991) 3 SCC 600
[6]    (1984) 3 SCC 405

-----------------------
9



