
Supreme Court of India
Shanker & Anr vs State Of U.P on 16 July, 2009Author: .................J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, J.M. Panchal
                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 618 OF 2007


           SHANKER & ANR.            .. APPELLANT(S)

                            vs.

           STATE OF U.P.             .. RESPONDENT(S)


                                      ORDER

        We have heard learned counsel for the parties very carefully. We

have also gone through the evidence and examined the site plan with the

help of the learned counsel for the appellants.   We find that the case

against the accused has been proved by the evidence of Chakrapal Singh

- P.W.1 and Smt. Vishuna - P.W.2 an injured witness whose presence at

the spot has even been admitted by the defence. The primary argument

made by the learned counsel for the appellants is that as Smt. Vishuna
was not in a position to see the actual assault on the deceased as she was

in the courtyard whereas the murder had taken place in the shop adjoining

the road, her evidence vis-a-vis the murder has to be discarded.        In

addition it has been urged that Manoj Kumar who had conveyed the

information to the informant Chakrapal Singh PW.1 the first informant that

his brother was being assaulted by the accused had not been examined,

the evidence of Chakrapal Singh PW.1 was also not admissible. We find

no merit in either of the pleas.   Chakrapal Singh PW.1's evidence is




admissible by virtue of Sec.6 of the Evidence Act being res gestae

evidence.


                                   -2-
         P.W.1 clearly stated that when he looked into the shop he found

that the appellant Shankar and Lakhan were holding the deceased by his
limbs whereafter the fatal blow in the neck had been given by Meeru the

husband of PW.2 Smt. Vishuna. We have also examined the site plan and

observe that the distance between the place of murder and the place of

injury to Vishuna was only about 25 feet. To our mind there is a clear

possibility that Vishuna was thus aware of the happenings in the shop.

We thus find no merit in the appeal. It is accordingly dismissed.



                               .................J.


                                              (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)




                                                     .................J.
                      (J.M. PANCHAL)
New Delhi,
July 16, 2009.

