
Supreme Court of India
Sushila Aggarwal vs State (Nct Of Delhi) on 15 May, 2018Author: Kurian
                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                   SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NOS.7281-7282 OF
                                          2017


                  SUSHILA AGGARWAL & ORS.                     PETITIONER (S)


                                               VERSUS


                  STATE (NCT OF DELHI) & ANR.                 RESPONDENT(S)




                                           ORDER
         KURIAN, J.

                  1.     Whether an anticipatory bail should be for a limited

                  period of time is the issue before us on which there are two

                  divergent views.

                  2.     The line of judgments that anticipatory bail should not
Signature Not Verified

                  be for a limited period places its reliance on the Constitution
Digitally signed by OM
PRAKASH SHARMA
Date: 2018.05.15
18:01:46 IST
Reason:

                                                                                    1
    Bench decision of this Court in Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia

    and others v. State of Punjab1.

    3.    Siddharam      Satlingappa      Mhetre     v.   State   of

    Maharashtra and others2 is a very detailed judgment by a

    Bench of two Judges on the scope and object of an

    anticipatory bail. In Mhetre (supra), this Court took the view

    that the Constitution Bench has held that anticipatory bail

    granted by the court should ordinarily continue till the trial of

    the case. To quote:
                 “94. The proper course of action ought
           to be that after evaluating the averments and
           accusation available on the record if the court
           is inclined to grant anticipatory bail then an
           interim bail be granted and notice be issued
           to the Public Prosecutor. After hearing the
           Public Prosecutor the court may either reject
           the bail application or confirm the initial order
           of granting bail. The court would certainly be
           entitled to impose conditions for the grant of
           bail. The Public Prosecutor or the complainant
           would be at liberty to move the same court for
           cancellation or modifying the conditions of
           bail any time if liberty granted by the court is
           misused. The bail granted by the court should
           ordinarily be continued till the trial of the
           case.
                 95. The order granting anticipatory bail
            for a limited duration and thereafter directing

1   (1980) 2 SCC 565
2   (2011) 1 SCC 694
                                                                        2
             the accused to surrender and apply for a
             regular bail is contrary to the legislative
             intention and the judgment of the Constitution
             Bench in Sibbia case.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)


       The decision in Mhetre was recently followed in Bhadresh

Bipinbhai Sheth v. State of Gujarat and another3.

4.     The other line of judgments is that orders of anticipatory

bail should be of a limited duration. Salauddin Abdulsamad

Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra4 is one of the earlier

decisions of a three Judge Bench. True, there is no reference to

the Constitution Bench in Sibbia’s case (supra). However,

discussing the concept of anticipatory bail, this Court took the

view that :-

                  “2. Under Section 438 of the Code of
             Criminal Procedure when any person has
             reason to believe that he may be arrested on
             an accusation of having committed a non-
             bailable offence, the High Court or the Court of
             Session may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the
             event of such arrest, he shall be released on
             bail and in passing that order, it may include
             such conditions having regard to the facts of
             the particular case, as it may deem
             appropriate. Anticipatory bail is granted in
             anticipation of arrest in non-bailable cases, but
3   (2016) 1 SCC 152
4    (1996) 1 SCC 667
                                                                    3
that does not mean that the regular court,
which is to try the offender, is sought to be
bypassed and that is the reason why the High
Court very rightly fixed the outer date for the
continuance of the bail and on the date of its
expiry directed the petitioner to move the
regular court for bail. That is the correct
procedure to follow because it must be
realised that when the Court of Session or the
High Court is granting anticipatory bail, it is
granted at a stage when the investigation is
incomplete and, therefore, it is not informed
about the nature of evidence against the
alleged offender. It is, therefore, necessary
that such anticipatory bail orders should be of
a limited duration only and ordinarily on the
expiry of that duration or extended duration
the court granting anticipatory bail should
leave it to the regular court to deal with the
matter on an appreciation of evidence placed
before it after the investigation has made
progress or the charge-sheet is submitted.

      3. It should be realised that an order of
anticipatory bail could even be obtained in
cases of a serious nature as for example
murder and, therefore, it is essential that the
duration of that order should be limited and
ordinarily the court granting anticipatory bail
should not substitute itself for the original
court which is expected to deal with the
offence. It is that court which has then to
consider whether, having regard to the
material placed before it, the accused person
is entitled to bail.”




                                                  4
       This view has also been followed in K.L. Verma v. State

and another5,           Sunita Devi v. State of Bihar and

another6, Adri Dharan Das v. State of W.B.7. In K.L.

Verma (supra), after referring to Salauddin (supra), this

Court held as follows:

                  “3. We have carefully examined both the
             orders of 9-10-1996 and 11-10-1996 and have also
             heard counsel for the accused as well as counsel
             for the CBI and we are of the opinion that the
             proper course for the High Court was to decide on
             the question of the requirement of sanction and if
             the High Court could not do so, to have stayed
             further proceedings till that vital question was
             answered. On the other question emanating from
             the order dated 9-10-1996, we find that the High
             Court placed reliance on this Court’s decision in
             Salauddin Abdulsamad Shaikh v. State of
             Maharashtra which was a case in which the High
             Court, while granting interim anticipatory bail,
             imposed certain conditions, one of which was that
             the accused should move for regular bail before
             the Court which was in seisin of the case pending
             against him. The High Court also observed that the
             application should be disposed of uninfluenced by
             the observations made in the earlier order. The
             special leave petition was directed against that
             order of the High Court. While dealing with that
             order, this Court observed that under Section 438
             of the Code, when any person has reason to
             believe that he may be arrested on an accusation
             of having committed a non-bailable offence, the
5    (1998) 9 SCC 348
6   (2005) 1 SCC 608
7   (2005) 4 SCC 303
                                                                  5
High Court or the Court of Session may, if it thinks
fit, direct that in the event of such arrest, he shall
be released on bail and in passing that order, it
may include such conditions as it may deem
appropriate. This Court further observed that
anticipatory bail is granted in anticipation of arrest
in non-bailable cases, but that does not mean that
the regular court, which is to try the offender, is
sought to be bypassed. It was, therefore, pointed
out that it was necessary that such anticipatory
bail orders should be of a limited duration only and
ordinarily on the expiry of that duration or
extended duration the court granting anticipatory
bail should leave it to the regular court to deal
with the matter on an appreciation of evidence
placed before it after the investigation has made
progress or the charge-sheet is submitted. By this,
what the Court desired to convey was that an
order of anticipatory bail does not enure till the
end of trial but it must be of limited duration as
the regular court cannot be bypassed. The limited
duration must be determined having regard to the
facts of the case and the need to give the accused
sufficient time to move the regular court for bail
and to give the regular court sufficient time to
determine the bail application. In other words, till
the bail application is disposed of one way or the
other the court may allow the accused to remain
on anticipatory bail. To put it differently,
anticipatory bail may be granted for a duration
which may extend to the date on which the bail
application is disposed of or even a few days
thereafter to enable the accused persons to move
the higher court, if they so desire. This decision
was not intended to convey that as soon as the
accused persons are produced before the regular
court the anticipatory bail ends even if the court is
yet to decide the question of bail on merits. The


                                                         6
             decision in Salauddin      case     has   to   be    so
             understood.”


         In Nirmal Jeet Kaur v. State of M.P. and another8,

K.L. Verma (supra) in so far as it stated that “ ...or even a few

days thereafter to enable the accused persons to move the

higher court, if they so desire ... ” was held to be in conflict

with the statutory requirement under Section 439. To quote:

                “13. The grey area according to us is the
             following part of the judgment in K.L. Verma case
             “or even a few days thereafter to enable the
             accused persons to move the higher court, if they
             so desire”.

                  xxx           xxx        xxx              xxx

                  20. In Salauddin case also this Court observed
             that the regular court has to be moved for bail.
             Obviously, an application under Section 439 of the
             Code must be in a manner in accordance with law
             and the accused seeking remedy under Section
             439 must ensure that it would be lawful for the
             court to deal with the application. Unless the
             applicant is in custody his making application only
             under Section 439 of the Code will not confer
             jurisdiction on the court to which the application is
             made. The view regarding extension of time to
             “move” the higher court as culled out from the
             decision in K.L. Verma case shall have to be
             treated as having been rendered per incuriam, as
             no reference was made to the prescription in
8   (2004) 7 SCC 558
                                                                       7
Section 439 requiring the accused to be in custody.
 In State v. Ratan Lal Arora it was held that where
            in a case the decision has been rendered without
            reference to statutory bars, the same cannot have
            any precedential value and shall have to be
            treated as having been rendered per incuriam. The
            present case stands at par, if not, on a better
            footing. The provisions of Section 439 do not
            appear to have been taken note of.

                xxx       xxx        xxx             xxx

               23. If the protective umbrella of Section 438 is
            extended      beyond    what    was    laid   down
            in Salauddin case the result would be clear
            bypassing of what is mandated in Section 439
            regarding custody. In other words, till the
            applicant avails remedies up to higher courts, the
            requirements of Section 439 become dead letter.
            No part of a statute can be rendered redundant in
            that manner.”


    5.    This Court in HDFC Bank Limited v. J.J. Mannan9 has

    referred to a contention    based on the Constitution Bench

    decision in Sibbia (supra) and yet it has taken the view that

    the protection under Section 438 is only till the investigation

    is completed and chargesheet is filed. To quote paragraphs 14

    and 18 to 20 :-

                “14. Referring to    the decision     of      the
            Constitution    Bench      in Gurbaksh         Singh

9   (2010) 1 SCC 679
                                                                      8
Sibbia v. State of Punjab, wherein the application
of Section 438 CrPC had been considered in
detail, Mr Dutta submitted that the said provision
had been interpreted to be a beneficent provision
relating to personal liberty guaranteed under
Section 21 of the Constitution. Mr Dutta
submitted that the Constitution Bench had
observed that since denial of bail amounts to
deprivation of personal liberty, the court should
lean against the imposition of unnecessary
restrictions on the scope of Section 438 CrPC.

   xxx        xxx        xxx            xxx

      18. Furthermore, it has also been
consistently indicated that no blanket order
could be passed under Section 438 CrPC to
prevent the accused from being arrested at all in
connection with the case. To avoid such an
eventuality it was observed in Adri Dharan Das
case that anticipatory bail is given for a limited
duration to enable the accused to surrender and
to obtain regular bail. The same view was
reiterated in Salauddin case wherein it was, inter
alia, observed that anticipatory bail should be of
limited duration only and primarily on the expiry
of that duration or extended duration, the court
granting anticipatory bail should leave it to the
regular court to deal with the matter on an
appreciation of evidence placed before it after
the investigation has made progress or the
charge-sheet is submitted.
     19. The object of Section 438 CrPC has
been repeatedly explained by this Court and the
High Courts to mean that a person should not be
harassed or humiliated in order to satisfy the
grudge or personal vendetta of the complainant.
But at the same time the provisions of Section
                                                     9
438 CrPC cannot also be invoked to exempt the
             accused from surrendering to the court after the
             investigation is complete and if charge-sheet is
             filed against him. Such an interpretation would
             amount to violence to the provisions of Section
             438 CrPC, since even though a charge-sheet
             may be filed against an accused and charge is
             framed against him, he may still not appear
             before the court at all even during the trial.

                  20. Section 438 CrPC contemplates arrest
             at the stage of investigation and provides a
             mechanism for an accused to be released on bail
             should he be arrested during the period of
             investigation. Once the investigation makes out
             a case against him and he is included as an
             accused in the charge-sheet, the accused has to
             surrender to the custody of the court and pray
             for regular bail. On the strength of an order
             granting anticipatory bail, an accused against
             whom charge has been framed, cannot avoid
             appearing before the trial court.

                  21. If what has been submitted on behalf
             of the appellant that Respondent 1 has never
             appeared before the trial court is to be
             accepted, it will lead to the absurd situation that
             charge was framed against the accused in his
             absence, which would defeat the very purpose
             of sub-section (2) of Section 240 CrPC.”


     6.         In Satpal Singh v. The State of Punjab10 at

     paragraph 14, it has been held:
                “14. In any case, the protection under
              Section 438, Cr.P.C. is available to the

10   (2018) SCC Online SC415
                                                                   10
          accused only till the court summons the
          accused based on the charge sheet (report
          under Section 173(2), Cr.P.C.). On such
          appearance, the accused has to seek
          regular bail under Section 439 Cr.P.C. and
          that application has to be considered by the
          court on its own merits. Merely because an
          accused was under the protection of
          anticipatory bail granted under Section 438
          Cr.P.C. that does not mean that he is
          automatically entitled to regular bail under
          Section 439 Cr.P.C. The satisfaction of the
          court for granting protection under Section
          438 Cr.P.C. is different from the one under
          Section 439 Cr.P.C. while considering regular
          bail.”


7.   It is relevant to point out that placing reliance on Sibbia

(supra), the two-Judge Bench in Mhetre (supra) has taken the

stand that the decisions in Salauddin (supra), KL Verma

(supra), Adri Dharan Das (supra) and Sunita Devi (supra)

are per incuriam. To quote:-

          “123. In view of the clear declaration of law laid
       down by the Constitution Bench in Sibbia case, it
       would not be proper to limit the life of anticipatory
       bail. When the Court observed that the
       anticipatory bail is for limited duration and
       thereafter the accused should apply to the regular
       court for bail, that means the life of Section 438
       CrPC would come to an end after that limited
       duration. This limitation has not been envisaged
       by the legislature. The Constitution Bench in
       Sibbia case clearly observed that it is not
                                                               11
necessary to rewrite Section 438 CrPC. Therefore,
in view of the clear declaration of the law by the
Constitution Bench, the life of the order under
Section 438 CrPC granting bail cannot be curtailed.

  124. The ratio of the judgment of the
Constitution Bench in Sibbia case perhaps was not
brought to the notice of Their Lordships who had
decided the cases of Salauddin Abdulsamad
Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra, K.L. Verma v.
State, Adri Dharan Das v. State of W.B. and Sunita
Devi v. State of Bihar.

   125. In Naresh Kumar Yadav v. Ravindra Kumar
a two-Judge Bench of this Court observed: (SCC p.
632d)

     “the power exercisable under Section
     438 CrPC is somewhat extraordinary in
     character and it [should be exercised]
     only in exceptional cases.”


     This approach is contrary to the legislative
intention and the Constitution Bench’s decision in
Sibbia case.

   xxx         xxx         xxx          xxx

     127. The judgments and orders mentioned in
paras 124 and 125 are clearly contrary to the law
declared by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Sibbia case1. These judgments and orders are also
contrary to the legislative intention. The Court
would not be justified in rewriting Section 438
CrPC.

         xxx         xxx         xxx          xxx
                                                      12
             138. The analysis of English and Indian law
        clearly leads to the irresistible conclusion that not
        only the judgment of a larger strength is binding
        on a judgment of smaller strength but the
        judgment of a coequal strength is also binding on
        a Bench of Judges of coequal strength. In the
        instant case, judgments mentioned in paras 124
        and 125 are by two or three Judges of this Court.
        These judgments have clearly ignored the
        Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in
        Sibbia case which has comprehensively dealt with
        all the facets of anticipatory bail enumerated
        under Section 438 CrPC. Consequently, the
        judgments mentioned in paras 124 and 125 of this
        judgment are per incuriam.”


8.   Shri Harin P. Raval, learned Senior Counsel and Amicus

Curiae submits that in the light of the two conflicting schools

of thought the matter needs consideration by a larger Bench.

According to him even the Constitution Bench in Sibbia

(supra) does not, in so many words, lay down a proposition

that the protection of anticipatory bail is available to an

accused till the conclusion of the trial.
9. Also having heard learned counsel appearing on both

sides, we are of the prima facie view that the Constitution

Bench in Sibbia (supra) has not laid down the law that once

an anticipatory bail, it is an anticipatory bail forever.

                                                                13
10.   In Sibbia (supra), this Court has briefly dealt with the

question of duration of anticipatory bail. It seems to us that

the discussion primarily pertained to grant of anticipatory bail

at the pre-FIR stage (see paragraph 43 quoted below). It

appears that there are indications in Sibbia (supra) that

anticipatory bail may be for a limited period. To quote

paragraphs 19, 40, 42 and 43:-

          “19. …   While granting relief under Section
       438(1), appropriate conditions can be imposed
       under Section 438(2) so as to ensure an
       uninterrupted     investigation.    One    of    such
       conditions can even be that in the event of the
       police making out a case of a likely discovery
       under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, the person
       released on bail shall be liable to be taken in police
       custody for facilitating the discovery. Besides, if
       and when the occasion arises, it may be possible
       for the prosecution to claim the benefit of Section
       27 of the Evidence Act in regard to a discovery of
       facts made in pursuance of information supplied
       by a person released on bail by invoking the
       principle stated by this Court in State of
       U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya to the effect that when
       a person not in custody approaches a police officer
       investigating an offence and offers to give
       information leading to the discovery of a fact,
       having a bearing on the charge which may be
       made against him, he may appropriately be
       deemed so have surrendered himself to the police.
       The broad foundation of this rule is stated to be
       that Section 46 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
       does not contemplate any formality before a
                                                                14
person can be said to be taken in custody:
submission to the custody by word or action by a
person is sufficient. For similar reasons, we are
unable to agree that anticipatory bail should be
refused if a legitimate case for the remand of the
offender to the police custody under Section
167(2) of the Code is made out by the
investigating agency.

  xxx           xxx        xxx             xxx

   40. We have said that there is one proposition
formulated by the High Court with which we are
inclined to agree. That is proposition (2). We agree
that a ‘blanket order’ of anticipatory bail should
not generally be passed. This flows from the very
language of the section which, as discussed
above, requires the applicant to show that he has
“reason to believe” that he may be arrested. A
belief can be said to be founded on reasonable
grounds only if there is something tangible to go
by on the basis of which it can be said that the
applicant's apprehension that he may be arrested
is genuine. That is why, normally, a direction
should not issue under Section 438(1) to the effect
that the applicant shall be released on bail
“whenever arrested for whichever offence
whatsoever”. That is what is meant by a ‘blanket
order’ of anticipatory bail, an order which serves
as a blanket to cover or protect any and every kind
of allegedly unlawful activity, in fact any
eventuality, likely or unlikely regarding which, no
concrete information can possibly be had. The
rationale of a direction under Section 438(1) is the
belief of the applicant founded on reasonable
grounds that he may be arrested for a non-bailable
offence. It is unrealistic to expect the applicant to
draw up his application with the meticulousness of
a pleading in a civil case and such is not

                                                        15
requirement of the section. But specific events and
facts must be disclosed by the applicant in order
to enable the court to judge of the reasonableness
of his belief, the existence of which is the sine qua
non of the exercise of power conferred by the
section.
  xxx           xxx        xxx             xxx

   42. There was some discussion before us on
certain minor modalities regarding the passing of
bail orders under Section 438(1). Can an order of
bail be passed under the section without notice to
the Public Prosecutor? It can be. But notice should
issue to the Public Prosecutor or the Government
Advocate forthwith and the question of bail should
be re-examined in the light of the respective
contentions of the parties. The ad interim order
too must conform to the requirements of the
section and suitable conditions should be imposed
on the applicant even at that stage. Should the
operation of an order passed under Section 438(1)
be limited in point of time? Not necessarily. The
court may, if there are reasons for doing so, limit
the operation of the order to a short period until
after the filing of an FIR in respect of the matter
covered by the order. The applicant may in such
cases be directed to obtain an order of bail under
Section 437 or 439 of the Code within a
reasonably short period after the filing of the FIR
as aforesaid. But this need not be followed as an
invariable rule. The normal rule should be not to
limit the operation of the order in relation to a
period of time.

  43. During the last couple of years this Court,
while dealing with appeals against orders passed
by various High Courts, has granted anticipatory
bail to many a person by imposing conditions set
out in Section 438(2) (i), (ii) and (iii). The court
                                                        16
           has, in addition, directed in most of those cases
           that (a) the applicant should surrender himself to
           the police for a brief period if a discovery is to be
           made under Section 27 of the Evidence Act or that
           he should be deemed to have surrendered himself
           if such a discovery is to be made. In certain
           exceptional cases, the court has, in view of the
           material placed before it, directed that the order of
           anticipatory bail will remain in operation only for a
           week or so until after the filing of the FIR in
           respect of matters covered by the order. These
           orders, on the whole, have worked satisfactorily,
           causing the least inconvenience to the individuals
           concerned and least interference with the
           investigational rights of the police. The court has
           attempted through those orders to strike a balance
           between the individual's right to personal freedom
           and the investigational rights of the police. The
           appellants who were refused anticipatory bail by
           various courts have long since been released by
           this Court under Section 438(1) of the Code.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)

11. In the light of the conflicting views of the different Benches

of varying strength, we are of the opinion that the legal position

needs to be authoritatively settled in clear and unambiguous

terms.    Therefore,   we   refer   the   following   questions    for

consideration by a larger Bench :-
         (1)   Whether the protection granted to a person

               under Section 438 CrPC should be limited to a

               fixed period so as to enable the person to



                                                                    17
              surrender before the Trial Court and seek

              regular bail.
        (2)    Whether the life of an anticipatory bail should

              end at the time and stage when the accused is

              summoned by the court.

12. Accordingly, we direct the Registry to place the papers

before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India.

                              ………………………......................J.
                                [KURIAN JOSEPH]




                              …………………….........................J.
                              [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]




                              …………………….........................J.
                                [NAVIN SINHA]

NEW DELHI;
MAY 15, 2018.

                                                                 18
