
Supreme Court of India
Budhadev Karmaskar vs State Of West Bengal on 2 August, 2011Author: ........................J.
Bench: Markandey Katju, Gyan Sudha Misra
                                                  1



                                                    REPORTABLE



                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 135 OF 2010



Budhadev Karmaskar                                  ..         Appellant

                 -versus-

State of West Bengal                                ..         Respondent



                                  O R D E R

               "Pinha tha daam-e-sakht qareeb aashiyaan ke
           
               Udhne hi na paaye the ki giraftaar hum hue"


                                               Mirza Ghalib




1.      This exercise was initiated by us by our order dated 

14th February 2011. By that order we dismissed the appeal 

of   the   appellant,   who   was   convicted   for   murdering   a   sex 

worker in a red light area in Kolkata by battering her head 

repeatedly   against   the   wall   and   the   floor   of   a   room. 

Having dismissed the appeal we  suo motu  converted the case 

into   a   PIL   by   the   same   order   in   order   to   address   the 

problems of sex workers in the country.  


2.      In our order dated 14th February, 2011 we observed:


                                      2
            "This   is   a   case   of   brutal   murder   of   a   sex 
      worker.  Sex workers are also human beings and no 
      one   has   a   right   to   assault   or   murder   them.     A 
      person   becomes   a   prostitute   not   because   she 
      enjoys it but because of poverty.   Society must 
      have   sympathy   towards   the   sex   workers   and   must 
      not look down upon them.  They are also entitled 
      to a life of dignity in view of Article 21 of the 
      Constitution.

            In   the   novels   and   stories   of   the   great 
      Bengali   writer   Sharat   Chandra   Chattopadhyaya, 
      many prostitutes have been shown to be women of 
      very   high   character,   e.g.,   Rajyalakshmi   in 
      'Shrikant', Chandramukhi in 'Devdas', etc.  

            The plight of prostitutes has been depicted 
      by   the   great   Urdu   poet   Sahil   Ludhianvi   in   his 
      poem   'Chakle'   which   has   been   sung   in   the   Hindi 
      film   Pyasa   "Jineh   Naaz   Hai   Hind   Par   wo   kahan 
      hain"   (simplified   version   of   the   verse   'Sana 
      Khwan-e-taqdees-e-Mashrik Kahan Hain').

            We   may   also   refer   to   the   character   Sonya 
      Marmelodova in Dostoyevsky's famous novel 'Crime 
      and Punishment'.  Sonya is depicted as a girl who 
      sacrifices   her   body   to   earn   some   bread   for   her 
      impoverished family. 

            Reference may also be made to Amrapali, who 
      was a contemporary of Lord Buddha".

3.    We further observed :

            "Although we have dismissed this Appeal, we 
      strongly   feel   that   the   Central   and   the   State 
      Governments through Social Welfare Boards should 
      prepare   schemes   for   rehabilitation   all   over   the 
      country for physically and sexually abused women 
      commonly known as prostitutes   as we are of the 
      view   that   the   prostitutes   also   have   a   right   to 
      live   with   dignity   under   Article   21   of   the 
      Constitution   of  India   since  they   are  also   human 
      beings   and   their   problems   also   need   to   be 
      addressed.  

                  As   already   observed   by   us,   a   woman   is 
      compelled   to   indulge   in   prostitution   not   for 


                                     3


      pleasure but because of abject poverty. If such a 
      woman   is   granted   opportunity   to   avail     some 
      technical   or   vocational   training,   she   would   be 
      able   to   earn   her   livelihood   by   such   vocational 
      training   and   skill     instead   of   by   selling   her 
      body.

                   Hence,   we   direct   the   Central   and   the 
      State   Governments   to   prepare   schemes   for   giving 
      technical/vocational training to sex workers and 
      sexually   abused   women   in   all   cities   in   India. 
      The   schemes   should   mention   in   detail   who   will 
      give   the   technical/vocational   training   and   in 
      what manner they can be rehabilitated and settled 
      by  offering   them  employment.   For  instance,   if  a 
      technical training is for some craft like sewing 
      garments, etc. then some arrangements should also 
      be made for providing a market for such garments, 
      otherwise they will remain unsold and unused, and 
      consequently the woman will not be able to feed 
      herself".

4.    Subsequently   by   another   order   we   constituted   a   panel 

headed by Mr. Pradip Ghosh, Senior Advocate as the Chairman 

and   including   Mr.   Jayant   Bhushan,   Senior   Advocate,   Durbar 

Mahila   Samanwaya   Committee   (DMSC),   Usha   Multipurpose 

Cooperative   Society   (UMCS)   and   Roshni   through   its   founder 

Ms. Saima Hasan.   We also directed the Central Government 

to   provide   some   accommodation   as   well   as   infrastructure, 

staff etc. to the panel, and grant it adequate funds.

5.    Today, an interim report has been submitted to us by 

the panel stating that the panel held its first meeting on 

25th July, 2011 at 04.30 P.M. and discussed various aspects 

of the problems relating to sex workers.   The report shall 

be taken on record.


                                     4
6.    We have perused the report.   It shows that the panel 

has set about the task assigned to it in right earnest.




7.    The   report   has   prayed   for   directions   to   the   Central 

Government   to   make   necessary   funds   available   for   holding 

workshops/meetings   to   be   attended   by   experts,   resource 

persons, organizations etc. who may be invited by the panel 

for   this   purpose   and   to   arrange   their   travel   by   air/rail 

to   and   fro   Delhi,   and   also   to   make   suitable   arrangements 

for   their   accommodation   etc.     Funds   may   also   be   made 

available to the panel so that the members can educate the 

concerned people and also to visit other three metropolitan 

cities   i.e.   Kolkata,   Mumbai   and   Chennai   and   also   other 

cities/towns.     Funds   are   also   required   for   advertisements 

in   newspapers   and   T.V.   inviting   responses   from   social 

organizations and interested individuals who may send their 

suggestions/comments   and   also   for   the   purpose   of   printing 

and publications, as may be necessary. 


8.    We   direct   the   Central   and   the   State   Governments   to 

provide   funds   as   prayed   for   by   the   panel   in   its   report 

after discussions with the Chairman of the panel Mr. Pradip 

Ghosh, Senior Advocate and other members.

9.    In paragraph 10 of the report it has been stated that 

the Central Government has assured that they will arrange a 

place   for   the   meetings   of   the   Panel   with   necessary 


                                       5


infrastructure,   computer,   staff   etc.                  The   Central 

Government   should   also   look   around   for   a   permanent   office 

accommodation   for   the   panel   as   that   will   be   necessary 

sooner or later for the proper functioning of the Panel.




10.    We   have   noted   that   some   of   the   members   of   the   panel 

are from Kolkata and Delhi, but there is no representation 

from   Mumbai   and   Chennai.     Since   we   had   directed   that   we 

shall first take up the problems of sex workers in the four 

metropolitan   cities,   i.e.   Delhi,   Kolkata,   Mumbai   and 

Chennai, we suggest to the Chairman of the panel to co-opt 

some   suitable   NGOs/social     activists   from   Mumbai   and 

Chennai also in this connection.


11.    We   again   reiterate   that   this   exercise   is   because   we 

are of the opinion that sex workers are also human beings 

and hence they are entitled to a life of dignity.   It has 

been   well-settled   by   a   series   of   decisions   of   this   Court 

that   the   word   `life'   in   Article   21   of   the   Constitution 

means a life of dignity and not just an animal life.   We 

are of the opinion that sex workers obviously   cannot lead 

a life of dignity as long as they remain sex workers.





12.    Sex   among   human   beings   is   different   from   sex   among 


                                       6


animals.   Sex in humans has a cultural aspect to it also, 

and is not just a physical act.   A sex worker who has to 

surrender   her   body   to   a   man   for   money   obviously   is   not 

leading   a   life   of   dignity.       Ordinarily,   no   woman   will 

willingly surrender her body to a man unless she loves and 

respects him.   A sex worker is obviously not surrendering 

her   body   to   a   man   because   she   loves   and   respect   him,   but 

just for sheer survival.  As Nancy says in Charles Dicken's 

novel `Oliver Twist', "you adapt or you die".



13.    Apart from that, sex workers are always in danger of 

getting   sexually   transmitted   diseases   (STD),   and   they   are 

often abused and beaten by the proprietors of the brothel 

and   others   who   give   them   a   pittance   out   of   her   earnings. 

A woman becomes a sex worker not because she enjoys it but 

due   to   abject   poverty.     One   estimate   suggests   that   there 

are 3 million sex workers in India, many even from Nepal, 

Bangaldesh, and even the former Soviet Union.   This is due 

to massive poverty in the country, and abroad.




14.    Our effort in this exercise is to educate the public 

and inform them that sex workers are not bad persons, but 

they are unfortunate girls who have been forced to go into 

this   flesh   trade   due   to   terrible   poverty.     Hence   society 

should not look down upon the sex workers but should have 

sympathy   with   them.     In   fact,   in   the   novels   of   the   great 


                                       7


Bengali   writer   Sharat   Chandra   Chattopadhayay   it   has   been 

shown that many of the sex workers were women of very high 

character,   e.g.   Rajyalakshmi,   Chandramukhi,   etc.   and   the 

same has been shown in the novels of many European writers. 

The Russian writer Dostoyevsky's novel `Crime & Punishment' 

has   shown   Sonia   Marmeladova   as   a   woman   of   high   character 

who   became   a   sex   worker   to   feed   her   starving   family. 

Similarly,   in   Charles   Dicken's   novel   `Oliver   Twist',   the 

sex   worker   Nancy   is   shown   to   be   a   girl   of   high   character 

who sacrifices her life to save Oliver.   In Victor Hugo's 

famous novel `Les Miserables', Fantine sacrifices her hair 

and teeth to provide for her daughter Cosette.   Martha in 

`David   Copperfield'   is   also   depicted   as   a   woman   of   noble 

heart. 


15.    We   are   of   the   opinion   that   if   sex   workers   are   given 

proper technical training they will be able to come out of 

sex   work   and   instead   earn   their   livelihood   through   their 

technical skills instead of by selling their bodies.   That 

will enable them to live a life of dignity.


16.   An impleadment application praying for impleadment in 

this   case   has   been   filed.     We   are   of   the   opinion   that 

instead   of   applying   for   impleadment   in   this   case,   the 


                                     8


applicant   should   approach   the   Panel   constituted   by   us   and 

give   whatever   assistance   the   applicant   wishes   to   give   to 

the   Panel.   With   these   observations,   the   impleadment 

application is disposed of.


17.    Learned counsel appearing for the State of Uttarakhand 

has stated that he will file a comprehensive affidavit on 

behalf of the State within two weeks. He may do so.




18.    We may mention here that we are not satisfied with the 

affidavits   already   filed   by   the   State   Governments   before 

us.   Their   contents   are   vague   and   too   general.     We   had 

expected   the   State   Governments   to   come   forward   with 

specific   schemes   for   giving   technical   training   to   sex 

workers but that has not been done.  Hence, we direct that 

the   Secretaries,   Social   Welfare   Departments   of   the   State 

Governments   and   the   Central   Government   to   meet   the   Panel 

constituted   by   us   whenever   the   Chairman   of   the   Panel   so 

desires so as to discuss how proper schemes in the spirit 

of our orders can be prepared.


19.    We are of the opinion that the States should not only 

come out with schemes indicating therein rehabilitation of 

the   sex   workers   but   they   should   also   demonstrate   their 

commitment   to   the   cause   by   coming   out   with   some   concrete 


                                      9


results, at least in phases.  So by the next date we expect 

the State counsels to come out with some effective feedback 

whether   at   least   a   few   sex   workers   have   been   offered   any 

alternative   employment,   in   case   they   were   willing   for 

rehabilitation.   We   also   leave   it   to   the   Chairman   of   the 

Panel constituted by us to come out with some suggestions 

in what way the sex workers through the State Governments 

and the metro cities can come out with effective results in 

this regard and by way of illustration at least they must 

come out with report of rehabilitation of at least some of 

the sex workers in each of the States.   We make it clear 

that   any   rehabilitation   of   the   sex   workers   will   not   be 

coercive   in   any   manner   and   it   shall   be   voluntary   on   the 

part of the sex workers.

20.    The Chairman of the Panel with the assistance of the 

NGOs can provide a list by the next date at least of those 

sex workers who are living under dire circumstances and are 

willing for rehabilitation.   We are informed that some of 

the NGOs have a list of figures and localities of such sex 

workers who are immediately willing for rehabilitation and 

want to get out of the flesh trade.


21.    We are fully conscious of the fact that simply by our 

orders   the   sex   workers   in   our   country   will   not   be 

rehabilitated immediately.   It will take a long time, but 

we have to work patiently in this direction.  What we have 


                                     10


done   in   this   case   is   to   present   the   situation   of   sex 

workers   in   the   country   in   the   correct   light,   so   as   to 

educate   the   public.     It   is   ultimately   the   people   of   the 

country,   particularly   the   young   people,   who   by   their 

idealism   and   patriotism   can   solve   the   massive   problems   of 

sex   workers.     We,   therefore,     particularly   appeal   to   the 

youth   of   the   country   to   contact   the   members   of   the   panel 

and to offer their services in a manner which the panel may 

require so that the sex workers can be uplifted from their 

present degraded condition.   They may contact the panel at 

the email address: panelonsexworkers@gmail.com.

22.    List the case again before this Bench on 24.08.2011 at 

10.30 a.m. by which date the Panel appointed by us should 

submit another report of the progress made.




                                     ........................J.
                                     (MARKANDEY KATJU)





NEW DELHI;                           ........................J.
AUGUST 02, 2011                      (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)



