
Supreme Court of India
Yadu Nandan Mandal & Anr vs State Of Bihar on 6 May, 2009Author: ......................J.
Bench: B.N. Agrawal, G.S. Singhvi
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1104 OF 2002


Yadu Nandan Mandal and Anr.                   ...Appellant(s)

                                       Versus

State of Bihar                                          ...Respondent(s)



                                    O R D E R

          Appellants, Yadu Nandan Mandal and Diwakar Mandal were tried along
with Ganesh Mandal and Shyamdeo Jha for offences under Sections 364/34, 302/34,
201/34 and 379/34 of Indian Penal Code (for short `IPC') on the allegations of having
abducted and murdered Gauri Kant Jha and Aditya Nath Jha, disposed of their dead
bodies and committed theft of their bicycles. The trial Court acquitted Shyamdeo Jha
but convicted the remaining persons under Section 364 read with Section 34 IPC and
sentenced them to undergo imprisonment for life. However, all the accused were
acquitted of the charges under Sections 304/35, 201/34 and 379/34 IPC. All the
convicts preferred appeal against the judgment of the trial Court.         During the
pendency of the appeal, accused, Ganesh Mandal died and, on that account, appeal
filed by him abated. So far as the remaining two appellants are concerned, the High
Court confirmed their conviction and sentence. Hence, this appeal by special leave.
                                                                                ....2/-
                                          -2-
           Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants has pressed this
appeal on the question of sentence and made a prayer that the sentence of
imprisonment awarded against the appellants be reduced to the period already
undergone as appellant No.1 - Yadu Nandan Mandal has remained in custody for a
period of more than five years and appellant No.2 - Diwakar Mandal has remained in
custody for a period of more than seven years.
           Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the parties and
taking into consideration the totality of circumstances, we are of the view that ends of
justice would be met in case the sentence of imprisonment awarded against the
appellants is reduced to the period already undergone.
           Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in-part and while upholding the
conviction of the appellants, the sentence of imprisonment awarded against them is
reduced to the period already undergone.
           The appellants, who are on bail, are discharged from the liability of bail
bonds.

                                                                         ......................J.
                                                 [B.N. AGRAWAL]



                                                                         ......................J.
                                                 [G.S. SINGHVI]
New Delhi,
May 06, 2009.

