
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Dr. Budhikota Subharao on 16 March, 1993Equivalent citations: 1993 SCR  (2) 329, 1993 SCC  (2) 567
Author: R Sahai
Bench: Sahai, R.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DR. BUDHIKOTA SUBHARAO

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/03/1993

BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
PANDIAN, S.R. (J)

CITATION:
 1993 SCR  (2) 329	  1993 SCC  (2) 567
 JT 1993 (3)   389	  1993 SCALE  (2)44


ACT:
Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 : Section 197--Cognizance of
offence	 by  public servants--Nature of power  exercised  by
Courts--Extent	  of   protection   afforded	to    public
servants--Sanction to prosecution--Requirement of.
Words and Phrases--Meaning of 'Official'--Official Duty'.



HEADNOTE:
The  respondent	 in the appeal was an ex-Naval	Captain	 who
achieved  notable success in the field of  computer  science
and  software  during the period be was	 attached  with	 the
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre and had voluntarily opted	 out
of service in 1987.  He was arrested on 30th May, 1988 just,
when  he  was  about to board a plane  for  New	 York.	 His
residence was searched on the next day.	 From the  documents
recovered from search of the hand bag on 30th and  residence
on  31st  and  his interrogation, it appeared  that  he	 was
guilty of violating provisions of the Official Secrets	Act,
1923 and Atomic Energy Act, 1962 and, therefore, a complaint
was  riled,  against him after obtaining  permission,  under
Section	 3(1)(c), 3(1)(c) read with Sections 9, 6(2)(a)	 and
6(2)(b)	 of  the O.S. Act and 24(1)(d) read with  18(2)	 and
24(2)(d) read with Section 19(b) of the A.E. Act before	 the
Metropolitan  Magistrate who being prima facie satisfied  of
the  offences  and their gravity committed  the	 accused  to
stand trial before the Court of Sessions.
The accused assailed the framing of charge contending  that,
on  facts, no offence under either of the Statutes was	made
out, and if any offence for which he could be charge-sheeted
could  be under Section 5 of the O.S. Act.  The Trial  Judge
turned	down the plea by order dated 24/27th February,	1989
and fixed date for framing the charge.
A  revision  against this order was dismissed  by  the	High
Court  on  6th	June, 1989, and was  challenged	 by  way  of
Special	 Leave Petition in this Court, but it was  permitted
to be withdrawn.
312
The accused thereafter invoked the inherent jurisdiction  of
the  High Court seeking review of the order dated 6th  June,
1989  and  although  the application was  rejected  on	18th
September,  1989 but an observation was made that there	 was
no  impediment in the way of the Trial Judge in altering  or
modifying  or reviewing any of the charges or  even  framing
new or additional charge.  This provided an occasion to	 the
accused for starting proceedings, afresh, for his  discharge
and claim in the alternative to framecharge under Section  5
of  O.S. Act instead of under Section 3, for which  purposed
he moved an application which was allowed by the Trial Judge
on  15th January, 1990, and the charges under A.E. Act	were
dropped.   The charge under the O.S. Act was altered to	 one
under  Section	5 of the Act.  This order was set  aside  on
3rd/4th	 April', 1990 by a Single Judge and the Trial  Judge
was directed to frame charges both under Sections 3 and 5 of
the O.S. Act.
The  accused  approached  the  Division	 Bench	against	 the
aforesaid  order  by way of an application speaking  to	 the
Minutes	 for clarification of the order passed by  the	High
Court on 3rd/4th April, 1990 as the Single Judge who  passed
the  order  on 3rd/4th April, 1990 did	not  appreciate	 the
observations made by the Division Bench, but it was rejected
on 24th July, 1990 as there was no system of speaking to the
Minutes	 by  doing  which the order  could  be	reviewed  in
criminal  proceedings.	 The Division Bench  dismissed	this
application  and observed that remedy of the accused was  to
approach the court in proper forum.
When  the  matter 'was thereafter taken up for	framing	 the
charge the accused, once again, claimed that he was entitled
to be heard at stage of Section 227 of the Code of  Criminal
Procedure  and he was entitled to be discharged.  The  Trial
Judge	by  order  dated  6th  August,	1990  rejected	 the
application,  restored	the  earlier charges  and  framed  a
charge under Section 5 as well.
The  validity  of  the	aforesaid  framing  of	charges	 was
challenged  by	way  of a  Writ	 Petition  (Criminal)  under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, and it was claimed
that the entire proceedings being violative of Article 21 of
the Constitution were liable to be quashed.  The High  Court
did  not  find	any substance but by its  order	 dated	24th
March,	1991  directed the ASJ to decide if  sanction  under
Section 197 of the Code was required, and also to  determine
whether the authorisation under Section
313
5  of  the O.S. Act and 7 of the Atomic Energy	Act  was  in
accordance with law.
Pursuant  to  the aforesaid direction the ASJ  examined	 the
material  on record and observed that authorisation was	 not
proper, but refrained from expressing any opinion in view of
the  direction of the High Court to ,decide the	 requirement
of  sanction  under  Section 197 of  the  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure,  first, and the effect, in law, of  its  absence.
It was held that the documents seized from the possession of
the accused indicated that they were inseparably  interwined
with  performance of his official duties and therefore,	 the
prosecution could not have been initiated without sanction.
The  High  Court in revision decided both the  questions  in
favour	of the accused, holding that the  authorisation	 for
institution of prosecution, for offences allegedly committed
under	either	 Statute,  was	invalid	  as   even   though
authorisation  was  issued,  in favour	of  the	 Prosecuting
Inspector  who	was also the Investigating Officer,  but  it
having	been issued by an authority other than	the  Central
Government  it	was  not in accordance	with  law.   On	 the
question of sanction under Section 197 of the Code, the High
Court  agreed  with  the  A.SJ.	 that  the  charges   itself
indicated that the offences were committed during the period
the accused was a serving officer, therefore, in absence  of
the sanction no cognizance of any of the offences could have
been taken.
In  the	 appeal to this Court on the  question	whether	 the
judgment of the High Court, affirming the order of the Trial
Judge  discharging  the	 accused,  is  if  the	absence	  of
sanction,  by the appropriate authority, under	Section	 197
Cr.  P.C. for prosecuting a retired public servant, vitiates
the proceedings.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
HELD : 1. Section 197 Cr.  P.C. falls in the Chapter dealing
with conditions requisite for initiating of proceedings.  If
the conditions mentioned are not made out or are absent then
no prosecution can be set in motion. [321C]
2. So far as public servants are concerned cognizance of any
offence,  by  any  Court, is barred by	Section	 197  unless
sanction  is  obtained from appropriate	 authority,  if	 the
offence, alleged to have been committed,
314
was in discharge of the official duty.	The Section not only
specified the persons to whom the protection is afforded but
it also specifies the conditions and circumstances in  which
it  shall  be  available  and  the  effect  in	law  if	 the
conditions are satisfied. [321E]
3.  The mandatory character of the protection afforded to  a
public	servant is brought out by the expression, 'no  court
shall  take  cognizance	 of such  offence  except  with	 the
previous sanction'.  Use of the words, 'no' and 'shall	make
it abundantly clear that the bar on the exercise of power of
the Court to take cognizance of any offence is absolute	 and
complete.  Very cognizance is barred.  That is the complaint
cannot be taken notice of. [321F-G]
3(i).	In common parlance 'cognizance' means taking  notice
of.   A Court, therefore, is precluded from  entertaining  a
complaint or taking notice of it or exercising	jurisdiction
if it is in respect of a public servant who is accused of an
offence	 alleged to have been committed during discharge  of
his official duty. [321H]
(ii)'Official'	means pertaining to an office.	An  official
act or official duty means an act or duty done by an officer
in  his official capacity.  'Official duty' implies that  an
act or omission must have been done by the public servant in
course	of  his	 service and that it  should  have  been  in
discharge  of  his duty.  The section does  not	 extend	 its
protective  cover to every act or omission done by a  public
servant	 in service but restricts its scope of operation  to
only  those  acts or omissions which are done  by  a  public
servant in discharge of official duty'. [322G]
S.B. Saha v. M.S. Kochar, AIR 1979 SC 1841 and P.  Arulswami
v.  State  of  Madras, [1967] 1 SCR 201 =AIR  1967  SC	776,
referred to. [322B-G]
4.   Section  197  has	to  be	construed,  strictly   while
determining  its  applicability to any act  or	omission  in
course of service.  Its operation has to be limited to those
duties which are discharged in course of duty.	But once any
act  or omission has been found to have been committed by  a
public	servant	 in discharge of his duty then	it  must  be
given  liberal	and wide construction so  far  its  official
nature	is concerned.  For instance a public servant is	 not
entitled to indulge in criminal activities.  To that  extent
the  section has to be construed narrowly and in  restricted
manner.	 But once it is established that an act or  omission
was done by the public
315
servant	 while	discharging his duty then the scope  of	 its
being  official	 should be construed so as  to	advance	 the
objective  of the section in favour of the  public  servant.
Otherwise  the entire purpose of affording protection  to  a
public	servant	 without sanction  shall  stand	 frustrated.
[323F-G]
5.  A  police officer in discharge of duty may have  to	 use
force  which may be an offence for the prosecution of  which
the  sanction  may be necessary.  But if  the  same  officer
commits an act in course of service but not in discharge  of
his  duty then the bar under Section 197 of the Code is	 not
attracted. [323H]
Baijnath  v.  State  of Madhya Pradesh,	 AIR  1966  SC	220,
referred to.
[324A]
6.  If	on facts, it is prima facie found that	the  act  or
omission  for which the accused was charged  had  reasonable
connection  with discharge of his duty then it must be	held
to be official to which applicability of Section 197 of	 the
Code cannot be disputed. [324D]
In  the instant case, five charges were framed	against	 the
respondent  accused.  First two related to Section 3(1)	 and
3(1)(c)	 of  the  O.S.	Act.  Third  and  fifth	 related  to
Sections 6 (2) (a) and 5 of the O.S. Act and fourth  related
to  violation of Section 18(2) and 19 of A.E. Act.   In	 the
very  first  charge  after narrating  the  period  when	 the
accused	 was  employed	and  when  he  opted  for  voluntary
retirement  it	is stated that it was during the  course  of
this  period  that  he was  in	communication  with  foreign
agents, within or without India and for purpose	 prejudicial
to  the	 safety	 or interest of the State  he  obtained	 and
collected  top	secret and secret official  documents.	 The
High  Court  and the Trial Judge, both, found  that  it	 was
clear  that the documents which were seized from  possession
of  the accused and were subject matters of indictment	were
obtained  by  him  when	 he was	 in  service  prior  to	 his
retirement in 1987. [324F-G]
7. In respect of charge 2, the High Court rightly found that
the  use of words, 'during the said time and place'  related
back  to  what was stated in charge no. 1,  namely,  to	 the
period	when  the accused was in service.   It	was  rightly
found  that  ambiguity.	  If any, in charges I	to  4  stood
completely removed by charge no. 5 which left no doubt	that
the intention and purpose of framing the charge against	 the
accused	 was to indict him for whatever he had	done  during
the period when he was employed in the Navy
316
as  the	 alternative charge clearly stated that	 during	 his
deputation between 1976 and 1987 with BA.R.C. he had  access
to  secret  documents which he communicated to	the  persons
other  than  those  who	 were  authorised  to  receive	such
information, Charge no. 3 related, to retention of  Identity
Card  during  service  and charge no. 4 was  in	 respect  of
taking out information in form of books pertaining to atomic
energy the information of which had been obtained illegally,
obviously  when the accused was in service.  Therefore,	 the
act  or omission which furnished foundation  for  indicating
the  accused either under O.S. Act or A.E. Act were  related
to  the	 period when he Was in service.	 The narrow  or	 the
stricter  test to determine if the sanction for	 prosecuting
the accused was necessary was thus satisfied. [325B-E]
8.  As	is  clear from the charge itself  the  accused	was,
selected  in course of his employment in the Navy  to  study
the feasibility of nuclear power, propelled submarine vessel
along with a team of officers and was attached with B.A.R.C.
as second officer in command.  He joined the project in 1976
and was associated with the Centre for nearly 10 years.	 The
accused	 while working with B.A.R.C. not only  obtained	 Ph.
D.  but was even awarded gold medal for his achievements  in
computer  technology and control engineering and  a  special
Herbert Lott Memorial Award for his inventions in  improving
the  existing,	fighting devices of the	 Navy.	 The  thesis
written by the accused on which he was awarded Ph.  D.	were
seized by the prosecution.  The papers were written and	 the
books published when the accused was attached with  B.A.R.C.
as a Second Officer-in-Command and, therefore, the  material
or documents which were found by him cannot be said to	have
been  collected or procured by him by going out of  way	 and
beyond	the  discharge of his duties as an  officer  in	 the
Naval  Department.   May  be  some  of	them  were   secret,
confidential  or unclassified items.  But the  accused	came
across them and obtained their copies in course of his	duty
as  an	officer	 attached to B.A.R.C. Charge  No.  2  is  in
respect	 of classified information obtained by him  when  he
was in Naval Service.  Taking out of information obtained in
course	of employment was thus squarely covered	 by  Section
197.   Whether	it  was	 for communication  or	not  is	 not
material.  Retention of Identity Card issued during  service
may  be	 dereliction of duty but it was committed  when	 the
accused	 was  in  service and it was  issued  to  him  while
discharging his duties as a Naval Officer.
[326F-H, 327A-F]
317
9.  The	 High  Court and the Trial  Court  appear  to  have,
rightly, inferred that whatever material came in  possession
of the accused was as a result of discharge of his duty as a
Naval  Officer.	 If this be so then even the second and	 the
most  important	 requirement  of  acting  in  discharge	  of
official duty was satisfied.  Therefore, without  expressing
any  opinion  on merits we are of the opinion  that  it	 was
necessary for the prosecution to have obtained sanction	 for
prosecuting the accused. [327H, 328A]
10.  The  courts below did not commit any error	 of  law  in
coming	to  conclusion	that  the  entire  proceedings	were
vitiated  as no cognizance of the offences could  have	been
taken against the accused without complying with  provisions
of Section 197 of the Code. [328D]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 276  of
1993.
From  the Judgment and Order dated 12.10.1991 of the  Bombay
High Court in Crl.  Revision Application No. 123 of 1991.
Altaf  Ahmed,  Addl.  Solicitor General,  B.R.	Handa,	Mrs.
Manjula	 Rao, S.M. Jadhav, A.S. Bhasme and  A.M.  Khanwilkar
for the Appellant.
Dr. B. Subba Rao Respondent-in-person.
V.M. Tarkunde, A.M. Khanwilkar and A.K. Panka for the Inter-
venor.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
R.M.  SAHAI,  J.  The principal question  of  law,  and,  an
important  one, that arises for consideration in Appeal	 No.
276  of 1993 [arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No. 986  of  1992]
which  shall reflect on Appeal No. 277 of 1993 [arising	 out
of  S.L.P.  (Crl.) No. 987 of 1992], as well, filed  by	 the
State  of Maharashtra against the judgment and order of	 the
Bombay	High Court, affirming the order of the	Trial  Judge
discharging  the accused, is if the absence of sanction,  by
the  appropriate  authority,  under  Section  197   Criminal
Procedure  Code	 (in  short 'the Code')	 for  prosecuting  a
retired public servant, vitiates the proceedings.
Although facts are brief and simple too, but the High Court,
unfortunately,	instead of confining itself to the  legality
of discharge, either for
318
lack  of the sanction under Section 197 of the Code  or	 for
the  improper authorisation under the Official	Secrets	 Act
1923  (in brief 'the O.S. Act') and Atomic Energy  Act	1962
(referred to as 'A.E.Act') the two statutes for violation of
which  the  accused  was charged, was  led  away  to  record
findings  as  if the accused was deliberately  subjected  to
undue	harassment  by	the  State  aided  by  the   alleged
unreasonable attitude of the Public Prosecutor.	 So much  so
that  the  learned  Judge  allowed  an	application  of	 the
accused,  in  the revision filed by the	 State	against	 his
discharge,  and set aside the order of	Additional  Sessions
Judge (in brief 'ASJ') framing charges against him as it was
vitiated by fraud, merely because the State did not file any
counter-affidavit and insisted that the argument being	same
as  were  advanced in the revision it was not  necessary  to
file any reply, even though the learned Judge was aware that
the  accused had earlier approached the High  Court  against
the  order  rejecting  his application that  no	 charge	 was
liable	to be framed against him without any  success.	 Not
only  that the learned Judge did not spare, even,  this	 Co-
art,  for cancelling bail of the accused at  earlier  stage.
Needless  to say that the first was unnecessary' the  second
illegal	 and  is subject matter of appeal No.  277  of	1993
[arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 987 of 1992] and the third
improper.
Since the accused was discharged by the Trial Judge, mainly,
due to technical defects and the decision was rendered as  a
preliminary issue on direction of the High Court, suffice it
to  say that the accused, an ex-Naval Captain  who  achieved
not  able  success  in the field  of  computer	science	 and
software  during  the  period he was  attached	with  Bhabha
Atomic Research Centre, (in short B.A.R.C.) had	 voluntarily
opted  out  of service in 1987, was arrested  on  30th	May,
1988, just, when he was about to board a plane for New York.
His  residence	was  searched on the  next  day.   From	 the
documents recovered, from search of the hand bag on 30th and
residence on 31st and his interrogation, it appeared that he
was guilty of violating provisions of O.S. Act and A.E. Act,
therefore, a complaint was filed, against him after  obtain-
ing  permission,  under Section 3(i)(c), 3(1)(c)  read	with
Sections  9,  6(2)(a)  and  6(2)(b) of the  O.	S.  Act	 and
24(1)(d)  read	with Sections 18(2) and 24(2)(d)  read	with
Section	 19(b)	of  the A.E.  Act  before  the	Metropolitan
Magistrate  who being prima facie satisfied of the  offences
and  their  gravity  committed the accused  to	stand  trial
before	the  Court  of Sessions.  Effort  was  made  by	 the
accused	 to  assail the framing of charge, as  according  to
him,  on facts, no offence under either of the Statutes	 was
made out.  And offence if any for which he could be  charge-
sheeted could be under Section 5 only.	The
319
Trial  Judge  turned down the plea by  order  dated  24/27th
February,  1989	 and fixed date for framing the	 charge.   A
revision,  against  this order, was dismissed  by  the	High
Court,	on  6th	 June, 1989.  It was challenged	 by  way  of
Special Leave Petition in this Court.  But it was  permitted
to  be	withdrawn.   The accused  however  invoked  inherent
jurisdiction  of the High Court seeking review of the  order
dated	6th  June,  1989.   Although  the  application	 was
rejected, on 18th September 1989 but an observation was made
that  there was no impediment in way of the Trial  Judge  in
altering  or  modifying or reviewing any of the	 charges  or
even  framing  new or additional charge.  This	provided  an
occasion  to the accused for starting  proceedings,  afresh,
for  his  discharge and claim in the  alternative  to  frame
charge under Section 5 of O.S. Act instead of under  Section
3.  The application was allowed by the Trial Judge  on	15th
January	 1990, and the charges under A.E. Act were  dropped.
The  charge  under  the O.S. Act was altered  to  one  under
Section	 5 of the Act.	The order was set aside	 on  3rd/4th
April,	1990 by a learned Single Judge and the	Trial  Judge
was directed to frame charges both under Sections 3 and 5 of
the O.S. Act.  Against this order the accused approached the
Division  Bench,  by what is described as, speaking  to	 the
Minutes	 for clarification of the order passed by  the	High
Court on 3rd/4th April, 1990 as the learned Single Judge who
passed	the order on 3rd/4th April, 1990 did not  appreciate
the  observations  made by the Division Bench,	but  it	 was
rejected  on  24th  July  1990 as there	 was  no  system  of
speaking  to the Minutes by doing which the order  could  be
reviewed   in  criminal	 proceedings.	The  Bench   however
observed  that	remedy of the accused was  to  approach	 the
court in proper forum.	Therefore when the matter was  taken
up  for framing the charge the accused, once again,  claimed
that he was entitled to be heard at stage of Section 227  of
the  Code and he was entitled to be discharged.	  The  Trial
Judge  by  order  dated	 6th.	August	1990  rejected	 the
application,  restored	the  earlier charges  and  framed  a
charge	under Section 5 as well.  Validity of  the  charges,
thus,  framed  was  challenged	by  way	 of  Writ   Petition
(Criminal)  under Articles 226 and 227 of  the	Constitution
and  it was claimed that entire proceedings being  violative
of Article 21 of the Constitution were liable to be quashed.
The  High  Court  did not find any substance in	 it  but  it
directed the ASJ by its order 24th March, 1991 to decide  if
sanction under Section 197 of the Code was required and also
to determine if authorisation under Section of O.S. Act	 and
A.E. Act was in accordance with law.
In pursuance of this direction the ASJ examined the material
on  record and observed that authorisation, was	 not  proper
but refrained from
320
expressing any opinion in view of the direction of the	High
Court  to decide the requirement of sanction  under  Section
197  of	 the  Code, first, and the effect, in  law,  of	 its
absence.   The	ASJ  held that	the  documents	seized	from
possession   of	 the  accused  indicated  that	 they	were
inseparably  interwined	 with performance  of  his  official
duties whilst in Navy, therefore, the prosecution could	 not
have been initiated without sanction.  In revision filed  by
the  State  the High Court, decided both  the  questions  in
favour	of the accused.	 It was held that the  authorisation
for  institution  of  prosecution,  for	 offences  allegedly
committed  under either Statute, was invalid as even  though
authorisation  was  issued,  in favour	of  the	 Prosecuting
Inspector who was the Investigating Officer, but. it  having
been   issued  by  an  authority  other	 than  the   Central
Government  it	was  not in accordance	with  law.   On	 the
question of sanction under Section 197 of the Code the	High
Court agreed with the ASJ that the charges itself  indicated
that  the  offences  were committed during  the	 period	 the
accused was a serving officer, therefore, in absence of	 the
sanction  no  cognizance of any of the offences	 could	have
been taken.
discharging  the  accused  it may not be  out  of  place  to
examine	 the  nature of power exercised by the	Court  under
Section	 197  of the Code and the extent  of  protection  it
affords	 to public servant, who apart, from various  hazards
in discharge of their duties, in absence of a provision like
the  one may be exposed to vexatious prosecutions.   Section
197(1) and (2) of the Code reads as under :
	      "197 (1) When any person who is or was a Judge
	      or   Magistrate  or  a  public   servant	 not
	      removable from his office save by or with	 the
	      sanction	of the Government is accused of	 any
	      offence alleged to have been committed by	 him
	      while  acting  or	 purporting to	act  in	 the
	      discharge of his official duty, no Court shall
	      take  cognizance of such offence	except	with
	      the previous sanction-
	      (a)  in the case of a person who	is  employed
	      or,  as  the case may be, was at the  time  of
	      commission of the alleged offence employed, in
	      connection  with the affairs of the Union,  of
	      the Central Government;
	      (b)  in the case of a person who	is  employed
	      or, as the
321
	      case may be, was at the time of commission  of
	      the  alleged offence employed,  in  connection
	      with  the	 affairs of a State,  of  the  State
	      Government.
	      (2)  No  Court shall take	 cognizance  of	 any
	      offence alleged to have been committed by	 any
	      member of the Armed Forces of the Union  while
	      acting  or purporting to act in the  discharge
	      of his official duty, except with the previous
	      sanction of the Central Government."
The  section  falls in the Chapter dealing  with  conditions
requisite  for	initiation of proceedings.  That is  if	 the
conditions mentioned are not made out or are absent then  no
prosecution   can  be  set  in	motion.	  For  instance	  no
prosecution  can be initiated in a court of  Sessions  under
Section	 193,  as it cannot take cognizance, as a  court  of
original  jurisdiction, of any offence unless the  case	 has
been  committed to it by a Magistrate or the code  expressly
provides  for it.  And the jurisdiction of a  Magistrate  to
take cognizance of any offence is provided by Section 190 of
the Code, either on receipt of a complaint, or upon a police
report	or upon information received from any  person  other
than police officer, or upon his knowledge that such offence
has  been committed.  So far public servants  are  concerned
the  cognizance of any offence, by any court, is  barred  by
Section 197 of the Code unless sanction is obtained from the
appropriate authority, if the offence, alleged to have	been
committed,  was	 in  discharge of the  official	 duty.	 The
Section	  not  only  specifies	the  persons  to  whom	 the
protection is afforded but it also specifies the  conditions
and  circumstances  in which it shall be available  and	 the
effect	in  law	 if  the  conditions  are  satisfied.	 The
mandatory  character of the protection afforded to a  public
servant	 is brought out by the expression, 'no	court  shall
take  cognizance  of such offence except with  the  previous
sanction'.   Use  of  the words, 'no' and  'shall'  make  it
abundantly  clear that the bar on the exercise of  power  of
the Court to take cognizance of any offence is absolute	 and
complete.  Very cognizance is barred.  That is the complaint
cannot	be  taken  notice  of.	 According  to	Black's	 Law
Dictionary  the	 word 'cognizance' means  'jurisdiction'  or
'the  exercise	of  jurisdiction'  or  'power  to  try	 and
determine  causes'.   In  common parlance  it  means  taking
notice	 of.	A  court,  therefore,  is   precluded	from
entertaining   a  complaint  or	 taking	 notice	 of  it	  or
exercising  jurisdiction  if it is in respect  of  a  public
servant	 who  is  accused  of an  offence  alleged  to	have
committed during discharge of his official duty.
322
the expression, 'any offence alleged to have been  committed
by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of
his  official  duty,  be understood?   What  does  it  mean?
'Official'  according to dictionary means pertaining  to  an
office.	  And official act or official duty means an act  or
duty  done by an officer in his official capacity.  In	S.B.
Salta v. M.S. Kochar, AIR 1979 SC 1841, it was held.
	      "The  words 'any offence alleged to have	been
	      committed by him while acting or purporting to
	      act  in  the discharge of his  official  duty'
	      employed	in Section 197 (1) of the Code,	 are
	      capable  of a narrow as well as a wide  inter-
	      pretation.   If these words are construed	 too
	      narrowly,	  the  Section	will   be   rendered
	      altogether sterile, for, 'it is no part of  an
	      official duty to commit an offence, and  never
	      can be'.	In the wider sense, these words will
	      take   under   their   umbrella	every	 act
	      constituting  an	offence,  committed  in	 the
	      course  of the same transaction in  which	 the
	      official	duty is performed or purports to  be
	      performed.
	      The  right  approach to the  import  of  these
	      words lies between these two extremes.   While
	      on  the  one  hand, it is	 not  every  offence
	      committed by a public servant while engaged in
	      the performance of his official duty, which is
	      entitled to the protection of Section  197(1),
	      an  act constituting an offence, directly	 and
	      reasonably  connected with his  official	duty
	      will  require sanction for  prosecution  under
	      the said provision."
Use  of the expression, 'official duty' implies that act  or
omission must have been done by the public servant in course
of his service and that it should have been in discharge  of
his duty.  The section does not extend its protective  cover
to every act or omission done by a public servant in service
but  restricts its scope of operation to only those acts  or
omissions which are done by a public servant in discharge of
official duty.	In P. Arulswami v. State of Madras, [1967] 1
SCR  201  = AIR 1967 SC 776 this Court after  reviewing	 the
authorities  right from the days of Federal Court and  Privy
Council held,
"It is not therefore every offence committed by a public
323
servant that requires sanction for prosecution under Section
197(1)	of the Criminal Procedure Code; nor even  every	 act
done by him while he is actually engaged in the	 performance
of  his	 official duties; but if the act  complained  of  is
directly  concerned  with his official duties  so  that,  if
questioned, it could be claimed to have been done by  virtue
of the office, then sanction would be necessary.  It is	 the
quality of the act that is important and if it falls  within
the  scope and range of his official duties  the  protection
contemplated by s.197 of the Criminal Procedure Code will be
attracted.  An offence may be entirelY unconnected with	 the
official  duty	as such or it may be  committed	 within	 the
scope  of the official duty.  Where it is  unconnected	with
the  official duty there can be no protection.	It  is	only
when  it is either within the scope of the official duty  or
in excess of it that the protection is claimable."
It has been widened further by extending protection to	even
those acts or omissions which are done in purported exercise
of  official  duty.   That is under the	 colour	 of  office.
Official  duty	therefore implies that the act	or  omission
must  have been done by the public servant in course of	 his
service and such act or omission must have been performed as
part  of  duty	which further must  have  been	official  in
nature.	  The section has, thus, to be	construed,  strictly
while determining, its applicability to any act or  omission
in  course of service.	Its operation has to he	 limited  to
those  duties which are discharged in course of	 duty.	 But
once  any  act	or  omission has been  found  to  have	been
committed by a public servant in discharge of his duty	then
it  must be given liberal and wide construction so  far	 its
official nature is concerned.  For instance a public servant
is not entitled to indulge in criminal activities.  To	that
extent	the  section  has to be construed  narrowly  and  in
restricted  manner.  But once it is established that act  or
omission  was done by the public servant  while	 discharging
his  duty  then the scope of its being	official  should  be
construed  so as to advance the objective of the section  in
favour of the public servant.  Otherwise the entire  purpose
of affording protection to a public servant without sanction
shall  stand frustrated.  For instance a police	 officer  in
discharge  of  duty may have to use force which	 may  be  an
offence	 for  the prosecution of which the sanction  may  be
necessary.  But if the same officer commits an act in course
324
of  service  but not in discharge of his duty then  the	 bar
under  section	197 of the Code is not attracted.   To	what
extent	an act or omission performed by a public servant  in
discharge  of  his  duty can be deemed to  be  official	 was
explained  by  this  court in Baijnath v.  State  of  Madhya
Pradesh, AIR 1966 SC 220 thus,
	      "the offence alleged to have been committed by
	      the accused must have something to do, or must
	      be  related in some manner with the  discharge
	      of  official  duty.......	 there	must  be   a
	      reasonable connection between the act and	 the
	      discharge	 of official duty the act must	bear
	      such  relation  to the duty that	the  accused
	      could  lay  a  reasonable	 claim,	 but  not  a
			    pretended or fanciful claim, that he did it	 i
n
	      the course of the performance of his duty."
If on facts, therefore, it is prima facie found that the act
or omission for which the accused was charged had reasonable
connection  with discharge of his duty then it must be	held
to be official to which applicability of Section 197 of	 the
Code cannot be disputed.
On   the  law,	thus,  settled	two  questions	 arise	 for
consideration  one if the offence for which the accused	 was
charged	 and of which cognizance was taken was committed  by
him  during the period he was in Naval service and if it  be
so then whether the violations were in discharge of official
duty  or  they were beyond it.	For this purpose it  may  be
mentioned that five charges were framed against the accused.
First  two related to Section 3(i) and 3(1)(c) of  the	O.S.
Act.   Third and fifth related to Sections 6(2)(a) and 5  of
the  O.S.  Act and fourth related to violation	of  Sections
18(2)  and 19 of A.E. Act.  In the very first  charge  after
narrating the period when the accused was employed and	when
he  opted for voluntary retirement it is stated that it	 was
during	the  course  of	 this period that  he  was  in	com-
munication with foreign agents, within or without India	 and
for  purpose  prejudicial to the safety or interest  of	 the
State  he  obtained  and collected  top	 secret	 and  secret
official  documents.   The High Court and the  Trial  Judge,
both, found that it was clear that the documents which	were
seized	from  possession  of the accused  and  were  subject
matters	 of indictment were obtained by him when he  was  in
service prior to-his retirement in 1987.  Even the reference
to  the	 documents  in	the  charge  because  of  which	 the
Government  was	 of opinion that the  accused  had  violated
provisions
325
of  O.S.  Act  are mentioned to have been  procured  by	 the
accused	 during course of his employment.  In view of  these
averments, in the charge itself, it is very difficult to say
that  the  offence for which the accused  had  been  charge-
sheeted	 were  not  committed when he was  in  service.	  In
respect of charge 2, the High Court found and in our opinion
rightly	 that  the use of words, 'during the said  time	 and
place'	related	 back to what was stated in  charge  no.  1,
namely, to the period when the accused was in service.	 The
High  Court further found and again in our opinion  rightly,
that  ambiguity, if any, in charges 1 to 4 stood  completely
removed	 by  charge  no.  5 which left	no  doubt  that	 the
intention  and	purpose of framing the	charge	against	 the
accused	 was to indict him for whatever he had	done  during
the  period  when  he  was  employed  in  the  Navy  as	 the
alternative charge clearly states that during his deputation
between 1976 and 1987 with B.A.R.C. he had access to  secret
documents  which he communicated to the persons	 other	than
those  who  were  authorised to	 receive  such	information.
Charge	no. 3 related to retention of Identity	Card  during
service	 and  charge  no.  4 is in  respect  of	 taking	 out
information in form of books pertaining to atomic energy the
information of which had been obtained illegally, obviously,
when  the  accused was in service.  Therefore,	the  act  or
omission  which	 furnished  foundation	for  indicting	 the
accused	 either under O.S. Act or A.E. Act were	 related  to
the  period  when  he was in service.	The  narrow  or	 the
stricter  test to determine if the sanction for	 prosecuting
the accused was necessary was thus satisfied.
What  remains to be examined is if the documents which	were
found  in  possession of the accused and were  collected  or
obtained by him when he was in service were procured by	 him
in discharge of duty.  But before undertaking this  exercise
it  may be stated that Section 197 of the Code as it  stands
after 1973, extends the protection even to a retired  public
servant	 as  is	 clear from use of the words,  'is  or	was'
provided the accusation is in respect of an act or  omission
done or purported to have been done when such public servant
was in office.	By legislative fiction the officer is deemed
to  be	a  public  servant under Section  197  of  the	Code
irrespective  of his retirement if the	accusations  against
him  are  for  act or omission done by him when	 he  was  in
service.  The purpose is to avoid exposing a public  servant
to vexatious or frivolous prosecutions merely because he has
demited	  his  office.	 The  submission  of   the   learned
Additional Solicitor General that if a public servant ceases
to  hold the office by the time the Court is called upon  to
take cognizance cannot claim any protection, being
326
in  teeth  of  the  section,  does  not	 need  any   further
elucidation.
Reverting to the main issue the two courts below have  found
it  as	a  fact that the acts or  omissions  for  which	 the
accused has been charged were committed by him in  discharge
of his official duty.  To steer clear of the effect of	such
finding the learned Additional Solicitor General urged	that
in  view  of the charges framed under O.S. Act	the  accused
could not claim any protection under Section 197 of the Code
as espionage can by no stretch be taken to be official duty.
The learned counsel submitted that the documents which	were
recovered from possession of the accused were such as  could
not have been in his possession when he had already  retired
and  the  proper  custodian of	those  documents  being	 the
Central Government, no sanction was required for prosecuting
the  accused for possessing such documents.  As a matter  of
law  no	 exception can be taken to the	submission  that  no
public	 servant  can  indulge	in  espionage.	  But	mere
allegation of spying cannot deprive a public servant of	 the
legal  protection provided for in Section 197 of  the  Code.
Section 3 of the O.S. Act, no doubt, provides penalty if any
person	acts  in  any manner prejudicial to  the  safety  or
interest of the State.	This appeal is not concerned if	 the
accused	 acted	in  such manner which can give	rise  to  an
inference  in law that he was guilty of spying or  acted  in
any  manner  to	 affect sovereignty  and  integrity  of	 the
country.   The	limited question is if the  documents  which
were  seized from the accused either at the airport or	from
his residence are such that they could have been obtained or
procured  by him while acting as Naval Officer in  discharge
of his duty.  As is clear from the charge itself the accused
was,  selected	in course of his employment in the  Navy  to
study the feasibility of nuclear power, propelled  submarine
vessel	along with a team of officers and was attached	with
B.A.R.C.  as  second  officer in  command.   He	 joined	 the
project	 in  1976  and was associated with  the	 Centre	 for
nearly	10 years.  The accused while working  with  B.A.R.C.
not  only obtained Ph.	D. but was even awarded	 gold  medal
for  his  achievements in computer  technology	and  control
engineering  and a special Herbert Lott Memorial  Award	 for
his  inventions in improving the existing, fighting  devices
of  the	 Navy.	It is not the case of prosecution  that	 the
documents  which were seized either from the airport or	 the
residence  of the accused could not have been dealt  by	 him
when  he  was in service.  Amongst various  documents  which
were  seized  were  the Identity Card of  the  Indian  Armed
Forces	bearing	 his photograph and name,  the	eight  files
containing  different types of maps of India,  diagrams	 and
computer information, a book by name 'Nuclear Power Plan'
327
Modelling   and	 Design,  one  brown  envelope	 containing.
lamination  papers  with  diagrams,  one  book	MWT  Nuclear
Submarine  Propulsion Plant Design and one book Multi  Point
Satellite  Links in Navnet System were also  recovered	from
him.   The documents which were found at his  residence	 on.
31st  May were computer communication on HF Links in  Navnet
and  Advanced  Technology Adaptation Centre,  C-3  I  System
Development for Armed Forces Advanced Technology  Adaptation
for  Defence, Multi Point Satellite Links in Navnet  System,
Government  of India publications project report of  Nuclear
propulsion  for	 Marine Application, one book about  Sea  on
Control	 Radar and Display System for Land Design.   Certain
plan  design  of  B.A.R.C.  were  also	recovered  from	 his
possession.   Most of the documents which can be said to  be
sensitive  which  were	recovered  from	 the  accused	were
admittedly either the book written by him or the paper	read
by him as is clear from the Punchanama and the Statement  of
Witnesses who were produced on behalf of the prosecution  to
prove  the same.  Even the thesis written by the accused  on
which  he  was awarded Ph.  D. by the  Bhabha  Institute  of
Technology  was seized by the prosecution.  The	 purpose  of
stating	 all this is to demonstrate that these	papers	were
written	 and  the  books  published  when  the	accused	 was
attached  with B.A.R.C. as a Second Officer-in-Command	and,
therefore, the material or documents which were found by him
cannot be said to have been collected or procured by him  by
going  out of way and beyond the discharge of his duties  as
an  officer  in the Naval Department.  May be some  of	them
were  secret, confidential or unclassified items.   But	 the
accused came across them and obtained their copies in course
of his duty as an officer attached to B.A.R.C. Charge No.  2
is in respect of classified information obtained by him when
he was in Naval service.  Taking out of information obtained
in course of employment was thus squarely covered by Section
197.   Whether	it  was	 for communication  or	not  is	 not
material.  Retention of Identity Card issued during  service
may  be dereliction, of duty but it was committed  when	 the
accused	 was  in  service and it was  issued  to  him  while
discharging his duties as a Naval officer.  The Trial  Court
found that even though the Punchnama shows that two Identity
Cards were recovered from the possession of the accused, but
from  their perusal it appeared that the Identity  Card	 was
issued to the accused as a retired officer and	consequently
the  claim  of	the prosecution that the  accused  acted  in
violation  of the provisions of the Act was  not  justified.
But assuming there was violation since it was done when	 the
accused	 was in service he was entitled to protection  under
Section 197 of the Code.  The High Court and the Trial
328
Court  appear  to  have,  rightly,  inferred  that  whatever
material  came in possession of the accused was as a  result
of discharge of his duty as a Naval Officer.  If this be  so
then  even the second and the most important requirement  of
acting	 in  discharge	of  official  duty  was	  satisfied.
Therefore,  without expressing any opinion on merits we	 are
of the opinion that it was necessary for the prosecution  to
have   obtained	 sanction  for	prosecuting   the   accused.
Similarly so far charge no. 4 is concerned we do not propose
to examine if it was properly framed against the accused and
if there was any material in support of it.  But the alleged
information which the accused was taking with him to  United
States	having been obtained by him in course of  employment
and  in discharge of his duty the High Court did not  commit
any   error  of	 law  in  recording  the  finding  that	  no
prosecution could be initiated unless sanction under Section
197 was obtained.  Same applies to charge no. 5.  Therefore,
we  are of opinion that the courts below did not commit	 any
error  of  law	in  coming to  conclusion  that	 the  entire
proceedings  were vitiated as no cognizance of the  offences
could have been taken against the accused without  complying
with provisions of Section 197 of the Code.
Since the appeal fails for non-compliance of Section 197 and
the order discharging the accused has to be upheld we do not
propose	 to examine the finding if authorisation under	O.S.
Act and A.E. Act to prosecute the accused was valid or not.
In the result this appeal fails and is dismissed.  Since the
respondent   was   discharged  for  failure   of   mandatory
requirement yet the State went on filing revision before the
High Court and appeal before this Court and keeping in	mind
the  mental  sufferings	 and financial loss  caused  to	 the
respondent we are of opinion that the respondent is entitled
to costs which we assess in peculiar facts and circumstances
of this case at Rs. 25,000.
N.V.K.
			 Appeal dismissed.
329
