
Supreme Court of India
Ranjit Singh vs State Of Punjab on 29 March, 2011Author: .................J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                                      REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF  INDIA
                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION                  

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 389    OF 2004




       RANJIT SINGH                       ..  APPELLANT(S)

                         vs.

       STATE OF PUNJAB                    ..  RESPONDENT(S)
                                                                                 O 
                                                                       R D E R





              This   appeal   has   been   filed   by   Ranjit   Singh 

     challenging   his   conviction   and   sentence   under   Section   302 

     of the IPC for having committed the murder of his wife on 

     Ist   September   1990   in   the   area   of   village   Sandhwan, 

     District Faridkot.  

              As   per  the   prosecution  story   Gurtej  Singh-PW.10   of 

     village Sandhwan found the dead body of Gurmail Kaur lying 


in the house of the appellant on the Ist   September 1990. 

None of the family members of the appellant were present in 

the house at that time but an electric wire was lying near 

the dead body.   Gurtej Singh-PW. thereafter informed PW.3-

Harjinder Singh-the brother of the deceased, who rushed to 

village   Sandhwan   accompanied   by   his   son   Mohan   Singh     and 

Sarpanch Harbhajan Singh.   They found the dead body   lying 

in the house. The matter was reported by Harjinder Singh to 





the Police Station at 5.30 a.m. on the 2nd September, 1990. 

ASI-Sant Parkash (PW.14) thereafter reached the house of 





                                  -2-

the appellant in village Sandhwan. He recorded the inquest 


proceedings   and   sent   the   dead   body   for   its   post-mortem 

examination.  He also picked up an electric wire 15 feet in 

length   from   the   spot.     The   post-mortem   examination 

conducted   on   the   2nd  September   at   1.45   by   Dr.   K.K.Agarwal 

revealed ten injuries on the dead body. The Doctor opined 

that   the   death   had   been   caused   by   asphyxia   due   to 

strangulation.  It was also opined  that after the deceased 

had been done to death efforts had been made to electrocute 





her    as  well.     During   the  course   of  the   investigation  it 

was   found   that   Ranjit   Singh   -   appellant   and   his   sisters 

Manjit Kaur and Baljit Kaur and grandmother-Gurcharan Kaur 

were also involved in the murder.   Baljit Kaur and Manjit 

Kaur   were   accordingly   arrested   on   the   September   12,   1990 

whereas,   as   per   the   prosecution   story,   the   appellant   was 

produced  before   the  Investigating   officer  on   the  same   day 

by   PW.8   Geja   Singh   before   whom   he   had   made   an   extra 


judicial confession.  A charge-sheet was also filed against 

Ranjit Singh, Baljit Kaur and Manjit Kaur whereas Gurcharan 

Kaur was shown in Column No.2 but was subsequently summoned 

and sent up for trial on the basis of an application made 

under   Section   319   of   the   Cr.P.C.     On   appearance   of 

Gurcharan Kaur charges under Section 302/34 of the IPC were 

framed against all the accused.


                                   -3- 
         The prosecution in support of its case relied inter 

alia   on   the   evidence   of   Dr.   K.K.   Aggarwal   (PW.1)   who   had 


conducted the   post-mortem, PW.3-Harjinder Singh-the first 

informant, PW.4-Mohan Singh, and PW.8-Geja Singh and PW.9-

Arjan   Singh   to   whom   Ranjit   Singh   had   made   extra   judicial 

confessions and PW.13-Tejvir Singh to whom Baljit Kaur and 

Manjit Kaur had made extra-judicial confessions.  After the 

close of the prosecution case the statements of the accused 

were recorded under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. They denied 

all the allegations against them and stated that they had 





never sought any money from Gurnail Kaur's father for the 

purpose of sending Baljit Kaur and Manjit Kaur   Canada to 

join their mother who was living there.   They also pleaded 

alibis   in   defence     and   also   produced   evidence   to   that 

effect.  

         The   Trial  Court   recorded  some   positive  findings   in 

favour   of   the   accused   on   a   perusal   of   the   evidence.     It 

observed that there appeared to be no motive for the murder 


and   none   had   been   suggested   by   the   prosecution   and   the 

story   that   the   accused   were   attempting     to   extort   money 

from   the   deceased   and   her   father   so   that   they   could   buy 

tickets for going abroad was not based on any evidence. The 

court   also   observed   that   but   for   the   extra-judicial 

confession allegedly made by the accused to PW's. 8,9 and 

13, there was no other evidence against the accused.   The 





                                   -4-

Court then examined this evidence and held that as per the 

statement of PW.8 Geja Singh the accused had been arrested 

on   the   2nd  September,   1990   whereas   the   I.O.   PW.14   had 


categorically stated that they had been arrested on the 10th 

September, 1990 and in this view of the matter the sanctity 

of the extra judicial confession was suspect. It has also 

observed that PW.9 was closely related to the family of the 

deceased   and   was   therefore   improbable   that   the     accused 

would   make an extra judicial confession to him. The Trial 

Court   accordingly   acquitted   the   accused.   The   matter   was 

thereafter taken in appeal to the High Court by the State 





of Punjab. The High Court, has on a reconsideration of the 

evidence,   allowed   the   State   appeal   qua   Ranjit   Singh-the 

appellant and dismissed the appeal qua the other two i.e. 

Baljit   Kaur   and   Manjit   Kaur.     The   High   Court   has   opined 

that the appellant was the husband of the deceased and  as 

the   death   of   Gurmail   Kaur     was   homicidal   and   as   the 

appellant had made absolutely no effort to raise a hue and 

cry   despite   the   fact   that   his   wife   had   been   murdered, 


clearly spelt out that he was guilty of the crime.  It was 

also observed that the extra judicial confession though of 

little significance but an   inference could be drawn that 

the   appellant   wanted   his   wife   out   of   the   way   so   that   he 

could move to Canada to be with his mother who was settled 

there. The Court however observed that this was not a case 





                                    -5-

of   a   murder   for   dowry     but   was   nevertheless   a   diabolical 

crime.     The   State   appeal   was   accordingly   allowed   and   the 

appellant sentenced to life imprisonment under Section 302 

of the IPC. This statutory appeal has been filed by Ranjit 


Singh. 

           We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the   parties 

very carefully and had gone through the record. The Trial 

Court   had   gone   into   the   evidence   and   observed   that   there 

was   no   evidence   to   connect   the   appellant   with   the   crime. 

It   is   true   that   the   incident   happened   in   the   matrimonial 

home   and   some   presumption   regarding   the   special   knowledge 

etc.  could   be  raised   in  such   a  situation.     But   the  basic 





onus on the prosecution is to prove its case and the onus 

does not change merely  because  the victim is the wife and 

the   accused   the   husband   and   the   incident   happened   in   the 

matrimonial home. In this case it has been found that the 

extra-judicial confession has been made by the appellant to 

two    persons  i.e.   Geja  Singh     and   Arjun  Singh.   The  Trial 

Court     had   given   very   good   reasons   for   discarding   this 

evidence   by   observing   that   the   appellant   along   with   his 


sisters were in custody from the 2nd September, 1990 onwards 

and as such the prosecution story that he had been arrested 

on   the   10th  September,   1990   after   he   had   made   the   extra 

judicial confession was unbelievable. The High Court has 





                                   -6-

observed   however   that   the   extra   judicial   confession   was 

really   irrelevant   in   the   circumstances,     but   at   the   same 

time, curiously, relied on those very confessions. We also 

find that some of the conclusions drawn by the High Court 

are merely conjectural and are not borne out by evidence. 


An extra judicial confession  is an extremely weak kind of 

evidence   and   conviction   on   its   basis   alone     is   rarely 

recorded,   there   is   absolutely   no   other   evidence   in   the 

case.  We are of the opinion that the judgment of the High 

Court   was   a   little   stretched   out   and   not   possible   on   the 

facts  of   the  case.   The  view   taken  by   the  Trial   Court  was 

clearly  possible   and  should   not  have   been  interfered   with 

by the High Court.  


         We   accordingly   allow   the   appeal,   set   aside   the 

judgment   of   the   High   Court   and   direct   the   appellant's 

acquittal.  His bail bonds are discharged.




                                      .................J.
                                           (HARJIT SINGH BEDI) 
                                                         
                                                                   
                                          ....................J.
                                  (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)


New Delhi,
March 29, 2011.



