
Supreme Court of India
Santosh @ Santhosh Kumar vs State Of Kerala on 16 November, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                                       REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1409 OF 2018
                          (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No. 6224 of 2017)




                         Santosh @ Santosh Kumar                        ….Appellant(s)



                                                    VERSUS



                         State of Kerala                              ….Respondent(s)   
                                            J U D G M E N T




                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.

                         1.    Leave granted.

                         2.    This appeal is filed against the final judgment

Signature Not Verified   and   order   dated   13.06.2016   passed   by   the   High
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.11.16

                         Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in Crl. A. No.1837 of
16:12:56 IST
Reason:


                                                                                         1
2010 whereby the High Court allowed the appeal in

part by maintaining the conviction but reducing the

sentence imposed on the appellant herein by order

dated 13.09.2010 passed by the Additional Sessions

Court(Adhoc­1), Palakkad in Sessions Case No.221

of 2009.  

3.    Few facts need to be mentioned for disposal of

this appeal, which involves a short question.

4.    The   appellant   along   with   two   others   were

prosecuted for commission of an offence punishable

under Section 55 (a) of the Abkari Act enacted by

the State of Kerala in Sessions Case No.221/2009

in   the   Court   of   Additional   Sessions   Judge,

Palakkad. 

5.    By   order   dated   13.09.2010,     the   Sessions

Judge   acquitted   Accused   No.   3   but   convicted   the

appellant herein (Accused No. 2) and Accused No.1

and   sentenced   them   to   undergo   rigorous



                                                                2
imprisonment for five years and a fine of Rs.1 lakh

and in default of payment of fine, to further undergo

rigorous imprisonment for one year. 

6.    The appellant felt aggrieved and filed appeal in

the  High Court  of Kerala. By impugned order, the

High Court upheld the conviction but interfered in

the quantum of sentence awarded to the appellant

by the Sessions Judge. The High Court reduced the

jail sentence from 5 years to 3 years and maintained

the   imposition   of   fine   amount   of   Rs.1   lakh   being

mandatory for imposition along with jail sentence.

7.    The   appellant   (Accused   No.2)   felt   aggrieved

and filed the present appeal by way of special leave

against the order of the High Court in this Court. 

8.    This Court by order dated 07.09.2018 issued

notice of SLP to the respondent (State) confining to

examine   only   the   question   relating   to   quantum   of

sentence awarded to the appellant.



                                                                   3
9.    Therefore, the short question, which arises for

consideration in this appeal, is whether any case is

made out on facts and in law for interfering in the

quantum   of   sentence   awarded   to   the   appellant

(Accused No. 2) by the High Court.  

10.   Heard   Mr.   Shinoj   K.   Narayanan,   learned

counsel   for   the   appellant­accused   and   Mr.   Vipin

Nair, learned counsel for the respondent­State.

11.   Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

are inclined to allow the appeal as indicated below.
      

12.     The  incident in question, which gave rise to

the   appellant's   prosecution,   occurred   in   2007.     It

was in relation to seizure of spirit stored in 58 cans

in one residential house and in one car parked in

the porch of the house. 


                                                                  4
13.   Three   persons   were   arrested   in   connection

with this  incident. The appellant was one of them

who,   according   to   the   prosecution,   had   taken   the

said   house  on  rent. The seizure of the spirit from

the   house   in   question   was   held   illegal   and   was,

therefore,   held   to   be   an   offence   punishable   under

Section 55(a) of the Abkari Act. 

14.   Section   55(1)   of  the   Abkari   Act  provides   that

for any offence other than an offence falling under

clause   (d)   or   clause   (e),   shall   be   punishable   with

imprisonment for a term, which may extend to ten

years   and   with   fine,   which   shall   not   be   less   than

Rs.One Lakh.

15.   So far as the appellant’s case is concerned, it

falls   under   clause   (a),   therefore,   it   is   governed   by

Section 55 (1) of the Abkari Act.  

16.     From  a mere reading  of Section 55 (1), it is

clear that insofar as the jail sentence is concerned,



                                                                       5
it may vary and  extend up to 10 years depending

upon the facts of each case, but insofar as the fine

amount is concerned, the Court has to impose the

minimum amount of Rs. one lakh. 

17.   It   is,   therefore,   mandatory   for   the   Court   to

impose   a   fine   while   awarding   jail   sentence   and

secondly,   it   cannot   be   less   than   Rs.   one   lakh.

However,   the   Court   has   discretion   to   impose   fine

more than Rs. one lakh depending upon the facts of

each case.

18.   It   is   not   in   dispute   that   the   appellant   has

already   undergone   jail   sentence   of   around   1   year

and   3   months   till   date   and   he   still   continues   to

remain in jail. In other words, the appellant out of

total jail sentence of 3 years awarded to him by the

High Court has so far undergone for a period of one

year approximately. It is also not in dispute that the




                                                                     6
appellant   was   not   involved   in   any   other   criminal

case except the one in question.

19.   Keeping in view the facts that  the incident in

question is of the year 2007; Second, the appellant

has undergone jail sentence of 1 year 3 months out

of three years total period of jail sentence awarded

by the High Court; Third, the appellant was never

involved in any criminal activity except the case at

hand; and the last, out of three accused, one was

given the benefit of doubt, we are of the considered

opinion that the appellant has made out a case for

interference in the quantum of sentence awarded to

him by the High Court.

20.   In view of the foregoing discussion, the appeal

succeeds and is accordingly allowed. The impugned

order is modified to the extent that the appellant is

now  awarded  jail sentence of "already undergone".

However, so far as the fine amount of Rs. one lakh



                                                                 7
imposed by the Courts is concerned, it is modified

and accordingly enhanced from Rs. one Lakh to Rs.

one Lakh Fifty Thousand (Rs.1,50,000/­). In other

words, the appellant is now awarded jail sentence of

"already   undergone"   and   a   fine   of   Rs.1,50,000/­.

Failure   to   deposit   the   enhanced   fine   amount,   the

appellant will have to undergo one more year of jail

sentence. 

                               ………...................................J.
                                 [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                                   …...……..................................J.
                                               [INDU MALHOTRA]
New Delhi;
November 16, 2018 




                                                                                8

