
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra & Anr vs Salem Hasan Khan on 9 March, 1989Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 1304, 1989 SCR  (1) 970
Author: L Sharma
Bench: Sharma, L.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SALEM HASAN KHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT09/03/1989

BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
PANDIAN, S.R. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 1304		  1989 SCR  (1) 970
 1989 SCC  (2) 316	  JT 1989 (2)	 96
 1989 SCALE  (1)700


ACT:
    Bombay  Police Act: Sections 56 and 60--Externment	pro-
ceedings-Not necessary for State Government to give  reasons
while  making externment order or disposing of an appeal  in
respect of such order-Reasoned order would cause  harassment
and frustrate purpose of externment proceedings.



HEADNOTE:
    An	externment order was passed against  the  respondent
under section 56 of the Bombay Police Act on the ground that
he was found to be frequently engaged in illegal business of
narcotics and was also involved in several cases of riot and
criminal intimidation. The respondent filed an appeal  under
section 60 of the Act and while the appeal was pending moved
the High Court with a writ application. The State Government
dismissed the appeal by a short order.
    Before the High Court it was urged that since the  State
Government  omitted to give reasons in support of the  order
of  dismissal of the appeal, the same was-vitiated  in	Law.
The  High Court agreed with the petitioner and	allowed	 the
writ  application  quasing the appellate order as  well	 the
initial externment order.
    Allowing  the appeal by the State to the extent of	cor-
recting the error of law only, it was,
    HELD:  (1) The High Court was in error in  quashing	 the
order of externment as confirmed by the State Government  in
appeal,	 on the ground that the State Government omitted  to
give reasons.
    (2) A full and complete disclosure of particulars, as is
requisite  in an open prosecution, will frustrate  the	very
purpose	 of  an externment proceeding. There is a  brand  of
lawless elements in society which it is impossible to  bring
to book by established methods of judicial trial because  in
such  trials there can be no conviction without	 legal	evi-
dence.	And legal evidence is impossible to obtain,  because
out of fear of reprisal witnesses are unwilling to depose in
public. [972C-E, G]
971
    (3)	 If the authorities were to discuss the evidence  in
the  case, it would be easy to fix the identity of the	wit-
nesses	who were unwilling to depose in public	against	 the
proposed externee. A reasoned order containing a  discussion
would probably spark off another round of harassment. [972G]
    Pandarinath Sridhar Rangnekar v. Deputy Commissioner  of
Police, [1973] 3 SCR 63, followed.



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 205
of 1989.
    From  the  judgment	 and Order dated  24.2.1987  of	 the
Bombay High Court in Crl. W.P.No. 67 of 1986.
A.M. Khanwilkar for the Appellant.
    Syed  Ali Ahmad, Tanweer Ahmad, Mohan Pandey and Ms.  J.
Ahmed for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
SHARMA, J. 1. Special leave granted.
    2.	The respondent was served with an  externment  order
passed under Section 56 of the Bombay Police Act  (hereinaf-
ter  referred  to  as the Act) directing him  to  leave	 the
districts of Aurangabad and Jalna for a period of two years.
The  order  stated that from 11.5.1980	the  respondent	 was
found  to be frequently engaged in illegal business of	nar-
cotics	and since he was involved in several cases  of	riot
and  criminal  intimidation causing physical  hurts  to	 the
residents  of the locality on account of his suspicion	that
they  were  supplying information to the  police  about	 his
illegal	 activities,  witnesses	 were not  willing  to	come
forward	 and  depose against him. He filed an  appeal  under
Section	 60 of the Act and while the appeal was	 pending  he
moved  the Bombay High Court with a writ  application  under
Article 226 of the Constitution. During the pendency of	 the
writ  application  the State Government dismissed,  the	 re-
spondent's  appeal  by a short order.. The  writ  petitioner
thereafter challenged the appellate order also in the  pend-
ing writ case.
    3.	At  the time of the final hearing of the  writ	case
before the High Court, four points were raised on behalf  of
the petitioner. As the
972
first  point, it was urged that since the  State  Government
omitted to give reasons in support of the order of dismissal
of the appeal, the same was vitiated in law. The High  Court
agreed with the petitioner and allowed the writ	 application
quashing the appellate order as well as the initial  extern-
ment  order on this ground alone without going to the  other
questions.  The	 State Government has  challenged  the	High
Court judgment in the present appeal.
    4.	On behalf of the appellant reliance has been  placed
on the decision of this Court in Pandarinath Sridhar Rangne-
kar v. Deputy Commissioner of Police, [1973] 3 SCR 63 where-
in  a  similar plea was taken by the appellant	before	this
Court. It was contended that the failure on the part of	 the
State  Government  indicated non-application  of  mind.	 The
appellant  had also urged that the allegations contained  in
the  show cause notice were too vague in absence of  details
to  afford  him reasonable opportunity	to  defend  himself.
Rejecting  the	argument, this Court held that	a  full	 and
complete  disclosure of particulars, as is requisite  in  an
open  prosecution,  will frustrate the very  purpose  of  an
externment proceeding. There is a brand of lawless  elements
in society which it is impossible to bring to book by estab-
lished	methods	 of judicial trial because  in	such  trials
there can be no conviction without legal evidence. And legal
evidence  is  impossible to obtain, because out of  fear  of
reprisal witnesses are unwilling to depose in public.  While
dealing	 with the contention that the State  Government	 was
under  a duty to give reasons in support of its	 order	dis-
missing the appeal, the point was rejected in the  following
terms:--
	      "Precisely  for the reason for which the	pro-
	      posed externee is only entitled to be informed
	      of the general nature of the material  allega-
	      tions, neither the externing authority nor the
	      State  Government	 in appeal can be  asked  to
	      write  a	reasoned order in the  nature  of  a
	      judgment."
As observed, if the authorities were to discuss the evidence
in  the	 case, it would be easy to fix the identity  of	 the
witnesses who were unwilling to depose in public against the
proposed externee. A reasoned order containing a  discussion
would  probably	 spark off another round of  harassment.  We
are, therefore, of the view that the High Court was in error
in  quashing the order as confirmed by the state  Government
in appeal.
    5. The externment order was made several years back	 and
the  learned counsel for the appellant rightly	stated	that
although the
973
impugned order need not be revived now, it was necessary  to
correct	 the  error in the High Court's judgment  as  it  is
likely to prejudice' other similar cases. Accordingly in the
circumstances we set aside the impugned judgment but make it
clear  that  the  externment order  shall  not	be  enforced
against the respondent any further, the appeal is according-
ly allowed to this extent.
R.S.S.						Appeal	 al-
lowed.
974




