
Supreme Court of India
Abdul Kuddus vs Union Of India on 17 May, 2019Author: S Khanna
Bench: S Khanna, D Gupta, R Gogoi
                                                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5012 OF 2019
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 23127 OF 2018)


                         ABDUL KUDDUS                                                   …..      APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                                  …..       RESPONDENT(S)

                                                                   WITH

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5025 OF 2019
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. _13011 OF 2019
                                        ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 25095 OF 2017)

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5026 OF 2019
                           (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. __13012 OF 2019
                                        ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 25101 OF 2017)

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5013 OF 2019
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 25052 OF 2017)

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5014 OF 2019
                             (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 2512 OF 2018)

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5015 OF 2019
                             (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 5342 OF 2018)

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.                          5024         OF 2019
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. _13010 OF 2019
                                        ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 26459 OF 2018)

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5016 OF 2019
                            (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 26935 OF 2018)

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.                          5017         OF 2019
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
Date: 2019.05.20
13:17:53 IST
                             (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 3774 OF 2019)
Reason:




                         Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                          Page 1 of 27
                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.               5021           OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 13007 OF 2019
                 ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 1191 OF 2019)

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5023 OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. _13009 OF 2019
                  ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 4112 OF 2019)

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5018 OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4704 OF 2019)

                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.               5022           OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. _13008 OF 2019
                  ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 5071 OF 2019)

                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                     910   OF 2019
 (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 2058 OF 2019)

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  5019 OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 5367 OF 2019)

                                          WITH

                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5020                  OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6570 OF 2019)




                                     ORDER
SANJIV KHANNA, J.

               Delay condoned. Leave granted.


2.      This order decides perceived conflict between sub-paragraph (2)

        to paragraph 3 and paragraph 8 of the Schedule to the Citizenship

        (Registration of Citizens and Issue of National Identity Cards)

        Rules, 2003 (“the 2003 Rules” for short). We shall also examine

        the alternative argument and suggestion of the appellants that this

        court should by way of a judicial pronouncement and in exercise of
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                     Page 2 of 27
       power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India provide and

       create an appellate forum for deciding disputes regarding the

       citizenship status of persons residing in the State of Assam.


3.     Articles 5 to 9 of the Constitution delineate and determine persons

       who are citizens of India on commencement of the Constitution.

       Article 10 provides for their continuance as citizens subject to the

       provisions of any law that may be made by the Parliament. Article

       11 of the Constitution, expressly confers power on the Parliament

       to make laws with respect to acquisition and termination of

       citizenship and all matters relating to citizenship. To achieve and

       with this objective, the Parliament has enacted the Citizenship Act,

       1955 (“the Citizenship Act” for short) which provides for acquisition

       of citizenship after the commencement of the Constitution by birth,

       registration, naturalisation and incorporation of territory.


4.     Section 14A of the Citizenship Act states that the Central

       Government may compulsorily register every citizen of India and

       issue national identity card to him/her. The Central Government

       may maintain a National Register of Indian Citizens and can

       establish a National Registration Authority for this purpose.

       Procedure to be followed for compulsory registration of citizens

       shall be such as may be prescribed.

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                 Page 3 of 27
5.     Section 6A of the Citizenship Act incorporates special provisions

       as to the citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord.

       For the purpose of the present order, we would like to reproduce

       sub-section (3) to Section 6A of the Citizenship Act which reads as

       under:

                  “6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons
                  covered by the Assam Accord. ―

                  (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and
                  (7), every person of Indian origin who―

                  (a) came to Assam on or after the 1st day of January,
                  1966 but before the 25th day of March, 1971 from the
                  specified territory; and

                  (b) has, since the date of his entry into Assam, been
                  ordinarily resident in Assam; and

                  (c) has been detected to be a foreigner,

                  shall register himself in accordance with the rules
                  made by the Central Government in this behalf under
                  section 18 with such authority (hereafter in this sub-
                  section referred to as the registering authority) as may
                  be specified in such rules and if his name is included in
                  any electoral roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary
                  constituency in force on the date of such detection, his
                  name shall be deleted therefrom.

                  Explanation.―In the case of every person seeking
                  registration under this sub-section, the opinion of the
                  Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals)
                  Order, 1964 holding such person to be a foreigner,
                  shall be deemed to be sufficient proof of the
                  requirement under clause (c) of this subsection and if
                  any question arises as to whether such person
                  complies with any other requirement under this sub-
                  section, the registering authority shall,―



Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                   Page 4 of 27
                  (i) if such opinion contains a finding with respect to
                  such other       requirement, decide the question in
                  conformity with such finding;

                  (ii) if such opinion does not contain a finding with
                  respect to such other requirement, refer the question to
                  a Tribunal constituted under the said Order having
                  jurisdiction in accordance with such rules as the
                  Central Government may make in this behalf under
                  section 18 and decide the question in conformity with
                  the opinion received on such reference.”


               Sub-Section (3) to Section 6A states that subject to the

       provisions of sub-section (6) and (7), all persons who have come

       to Assam on or after the 1st day of January, 1966 but before 25th

       March, 1971 from specified territory and from the date of entry

       have been ordinary resident of Assam and have been detected to

       be foreigners shall register themselves with the Registering

       Authority in accordance with Rules made by the Central

       Government. If name of any such person has been included in the

       electoral rolls of any Assembly or Parliamentary constituency, the

       same shall be deleted therefrom. Explanation to Section 6A (3)

       states that the opinion of the Tribunal under the Foreigners

       (Tribunal) Order, 1964 (“the 1964 Order” for short) that the person

       was a foreigner shall be deemed sufficient for the requirement of

       sub-section (3). The opinion of the Tribunal is also binding with

       respect to any other requirement of sub-Section (3) to Section 6A

       of the Citizenship Act. The Registering Authority is required to refer

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                  Page 5 of 27
       the matter to the Tribunal constituted under the said Order if the

       earlier opinion of the Tribunal on other requirements is silent.

       Thereupon, the question is decided by the Registering Authority in

       conformity with the opinion received from the Tribunal.


6.     Before we advert to the 1964 Order, we would like to refer to Rule

       4A and the Schedule to the 2003 Rules which was inserted by

       G.S.R 803 (E) dated 9th November, 2009, as a special provision

       relating to National Register of Indian Citizens in the State of

       Assam. Rule 4A of the 2003 Rules reads as under:

                  “4A. Special provisions as to National Register of
                  Indian Citizens in the State of Assam— (1) Nothing
                  in rule 4 shall, on and after the commencement of the
                  Citizenship (Registration of Citizenship and Issue of
                  National Identity Cards) Amendment Rules, 2009,
                  apply to the State of Assam.

                  (2) The Central Government shall, for the purpose, of
                  the National Register of Indian Citizens in the State. of
                  Assam, cause to carry out throughout the State of
                  Assam for preparation of the National Register of
                  Indian Citizens in the State of Assam by inviting
                  applications from all the residents, for collection of
                  specified particulars relating to each family and
                  individual, residing in a local area in the State including
                  the citizenship status based on the National Register of
                  Citizens 1951, and the electoral rolls upto the midnight
                  of the 24th day of March, 1971.

                  (3) The Registrar General of Citizens Registration shall
                  notify the period and duration of the enumeration in the
                  Official Gazette.
                  (4) The manner of preparation of the National Register
                  of Indian Citizens in the State of Assam shall be such
                  as specified in the Schedule appended to these rules.”

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                     Page 6 of 27
               Sub-rule (2) of Rule 4A states that the Central Government

       for the purpose of preparation of the National Register of Indian

       Citizens in the State of Assam shall invite applications from all

       residents for collection of specified particulars relating to each

       family and individual residing in the local area in the State

       including the citizens’ status based upon the National Register of

       Citizens, 1951 and the electoral rolls upto the midnight of 24 th

       March, 1971. The manner of preparation of the National Register

       of Indian Citizens in the State of Assam shall be such as specified

       in the Schedule to the 2003 Rules.


7.     We are not reproducing the entire Schedule but would like to

       refer to paragraph 2 of the Schedule which prescribes the

       mandate to prepare and specifies the manner of preparation of

       the draft National Register of Indian Citizens in the State of

       Assam on the basis of the National Register of Citizens, 1951

       and electoral rolls upto the midnight of 24 th March, 1971. The list

       so prepared has to be published and made available to the Local

       Registrar of Indian Citizens for wide circulation and public

       inspection in every village and ward.            The Local Registrar of

       Indian Citizens are mandated to receive application forms and

       issue receipt to the applicants.

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                Page 7 of 27
8.     Sub-para (3) to paragraph 2 of the Schedule to the 2003 Rules

       reads as under:

                  “The Local Registrar of Citizen Registration, after the
                  receipt of the application under sub-paragraph (2) shall
                  scrutinize the applications and after its verification,
                  prepare a consolidated list thereof which shall contain
                  the names of the following persons, namely:

                  persons whose names appear in any of the electoral
                  rolls upto the midnight of the 24th day of March, 1971 or
                  in the National Register of Citizens, 1951;
                  descendants of the persons mentioned in clause (a)
                  above.”


               This sub-para states that the Local Registrar, after receipt of

       the application from citizens in terms of sub-para (2), has to

       scrutinize them and after verification prepare a consolidated list

       including the names of the persons whose names had appeared in

       any of the electoral rolls upto the midnight of 24 th March,1971 or in

       the National Register of Citizens, 1951 and the descendants of

       such persons.


9.     Paragraph 3 of the Schedule to the 2003 Rules reads as under:

                  “3. Scrutiny of applications— (1) The scrutiny of
                  applications received under sub-paragraph (3) of
                  paragraph 2 shall be made by comparing the
                  information stated in the application form with the
                  official records and the persons, of whom the
                  information is found in order, shall be eligible for
                  inclusion of their names in the consolidated list.

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                   Page 8 of 27
                  (2) the names of persons who have been declared as
                  illegal migrants or foreigners by the competent
                  authority shall not be included in the consolidated list:

                  Provided that the names of persons who came in the
                  State of Assam after 1966 and before the 25th March,
                  1971 and registered themselves with the Foreigner
                  Registration Regional Officer and who have not been
                  declared as illegal migrants or foreigners by the
                  competent authority shall be eligible to be included in
                  the consolidated list;

                  (3) the names of persons who are originally inhabitants
                  of the State of Assam and their children and
                  descendants, who are Citizens of India, shall be
                  included in the consolidated list if the citizenship of
                  such persons is ascertained beyond reasonable doubt
                  and to the satisfaction of the registering authority;

                  (4) the Local Registrar of Citizens Registration may, in
                  case of any doubt in respect of parental linkage or any
                  particular mentioned in the application received under
                  sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2, refer the matter to
                  the District Magistrate for investigation and his decision
                  and Local Registrar of Citizens Registration shall also
                  inform the same to the individual or the family;

                  (5) the Local Registrar of Citizens Registration may, in
                  respect of a person who—

                  (a) was residing in a place other than the State of
                  Assam upto the midnight of the 24th day of March,
                  1971; or

                  (b) has shifted from one district to another within the
                  State of Assam upto the midnight of the 24th day of
                  March, 1971.

                  verify information relating to such person through inter-
                  State correspondence, or, as the case may be, through
                  inter-district correspondence.”


               Paragraph 3 deals with the preparation of consolidated list of

       original inhabitants of Assam, their children and descendants if

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                    Page 9 of 27
       their citizenship is ascertained beyond reasonable doubt and to

       the satisfaction of the Registering Authority. As per Sub-para (4) in

       case of any doubt during scrutiny in respect of parental linkage or

       any particular mentioned in the application received under sub-

       para (2) of paragraph 2, the Local Registrar of citizens is required

       to refer the matter to the District Magistrate for investigation and

       decision by him. The Local Registrar is required to inform about

       any such directions to the individual or his family. Sub-para (5) to

       paragraph 3 deals with investigation to be made by the Local

       Registrar in respect of persons who are residing in a place other

       than the State of Assam upto the midnight of the 24 th day of March,

       1971 or has shifted from one district to another within the State of

       Assam upto the midnight of the 24 th day of March, 1971. Sub-para

       (2) to paragraph 3 of the Schedule deals with a separate class or

       cases of persons who have been declared as illegal migrants or

       foreigners by the Competent Authority. Sub-para (2) mandates that

       the illegal migrants or foreigners so declared by the Competent

       Authority shall not be included in the consolidated list. Proviso

       applies to persons who had come to the State of Assam after 1966

       but before 25th March, 1971 and had registered themselves with

       the Foreigner Registration Regional Office and had not been




Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018           Page 10 of 27
       declared as illegal migrants or foreigners by the Competent

       Authority. They are eligible to be included in the consolidated list.


10.    It is obvious to us that the persons covered by sub-para (2) to

       paragraph 3 of the Schedule i.e. persons who have been declared

       to be illegal migrants or foreigners by the Competent Authority fall

       in a separate and distinct class and in such cases, no enquiry or

       investigation is required to be conducted in terms of sub-paragraph

       4. Such persons cannot, in terms of the specific language used in

       sub-para (2) to paragraph 3 of the Schedule, be included in the

       National Register of Citizens. The reason as is evident is that their

       citizenship status has already been determined by the Competent

       Authority. A person once declared an illegal migrant or a foreigner

       cannot claim or put forth a claim to the citizenship of India on the

       basis that he/she has been residing in the State of Assam.


11.    We are not referring to paragraphs 4 to 7 of the Schedule which

       deal with the publication of the consolidated list, additional list,

       claims and objections by a person whose name does not appear in

       the draft list published under paragraph 2 or additional list or

       objections by a third person for inclusion of a name in the draft list

       or the additional list. We would, however, reiterate that the said

       list(s) would not include name of the persons who have been

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018             Page 11 of 27
       declared illegal migrants or foreigners by the Competent Authority

       in terms of sub-para (2) to paragraph 3 of the Schedule. In other

       cases, i.e. cases not covered by sub-para (2) to paragraph 3, the

       Local Registrar after considering the objections and claims has to

       prepare a supplementary list to be published under paragraph 7 of

       the Schedule for inclusion and deletion of names, as the case may

       be, and thereafter, a final list of National Citizens in the State of

       Assam.


12.    This brings us to paragraph 8 of the Schedule to the 2003 Rules

       which reads as under:

                  “8. Appeal- Any person, not satisfied with the outcome
                  of the decisions of the claims and objections under
                  paragraph 7, may prefer appeal, before the designated
                  Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals)
                  Order, 1964 within a period of sixty days from the date
                  of such order; and on the disposal of appeal by the
                  Tribunals the names shall be included or deleted, as
                  the case may be, in the National Register of Indian
                  Citizens in the State of Assam.”


               Paragraph 8 provides for a right of appeal to the person who

       had filed objections and is not satisfied with the outcome of the

       decision under the final list published under paragraph 7. Such

       persons may prefer an appeal before the designated Tribunal

       constituted under the 1964 Order within a period of sixty days and

       on disposal of appeal by the Tribunal, such persons can

       accordingly be included or deleted from the National Register of
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                Page 12 of 27
       Indian Citizens in the State of Assam. Paragraph 8, therefore,

       makes the Foreigners Tribunal under the 1964 Order as the

       appellate forum to decide claims and objections under paragraph 7

       of the Schedule.

13.    The 1964 Order has been issued in exercise of power under

       Section 3 of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (“the Foreigners Act” for

       short). The Tribunals under the 1964 Order have the power to

       decide whether the person is a foreigner or not within the meaning

       of the Foreigners Act. The 1964 Order before its amendment in

       2012 was examined by this Court in Sarbananda Sonowal vs.

       Union of India & Anr.1 (“Sarbananda Sonowal (I)” for short),

       wherein it was held that the procedure prescribed for the Tribunals

       constituted under the 1964 Order was just, fair and reasonable.

       This reasoning formed the basis to strike down provisions of the

       Illegal Migrants (Determination of Tribunals Act, 1983) (“the IMDT

       Act” for short) as ultra vires the Constitution of India, primarily on

       the ground that the offending Act did not contain any provision

       similar to Section 9 of the Foreigners Act which stipulates that the

       burden of proof as to whether any person is or is not a foreigner

       lies upon the said person notwithstanding anything contained in

       the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.                   Referring to the factual data

1
 (2005) 5 SCC 665
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                     Page 13 of 27
       reflecting discernible illegal migration threatening the demographic

       structure of the area, resultant outbreak of insurgency in Assam

       and other concomitant dimensions that had greatly undermined

       the national security, duty of the Union Government under Article

       355 of the Constitution to protect the State against external

       aggression and internal disturbance, it was held that the word

       “aggression” is a word of very wide import and would include influx

       of foreigners who had illegally migrated. Reference was also made

       to the Memorandum of Settlement between the Government of

       India and All India Students Union and the State of Assam. In

       paragraph 33 in Sarbananda Sonowal (I) acknowledging the role

       of the Tribunals constituted under the 1964 Order, it was observed:

                  “33. Clause (b) of sub-Section 6-A(1) of the Citizenship
                  Act, 1955 defines "detected to be a foreigner" and it
                  means detected to be a foreigner in accordance with
                  the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 and the
                  Foreigners (Tribunals) Order 1964 by a Tribunal
                  constituted under the said Order. Similarly, the
                  explanation appended to Section 6-A (2) also refers to
                  the "opinion of the Tribunal constituted under the
                  Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 holding such
                  person to be a foreigner". These provisions mandate
                  the establishment and functioning of a Tribunal
                  constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order,
                  1964 in the State of Assam. The learned Additional
                  Solicitor General and Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned
                  senior counsel for the State of Assam have made a
                  statement that such Tribunals are actually functioning
                  in the State of Assam.”




Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                Page 14 of 27
               Thus, the IMDT Act was struck down as it did not have a

       provision similar to Section 9 of the Foreigners Act regarding the

       burden of proof observing that it would be difficult for the State to

       give an exact date of entry of                   a foreign national who had

       surreptitiously crossed the Indian national border and that the

       court cannot be remain a quiet spectator to the continuing influx of

       illegal migrants. A Bench of 3 Judges did not hesitate to observe

       that the IMDT Act which had been constituted for the detection and

       deportation of illegal migrants having entered into India on or after

       25th March, 1971 had designedly failed in its purpose.

14.    Subsequently, this Court in Sarbananda Sonowal (II) vs. Union

       of India2 (“Sarbananda Sonowal (II)” for short) had struck down

       the Foreigners (Tribunals) Amendment Order 2006 inter alia for

       several reasons including those mentioned and which had found

       favour in Sarbananda Sonowal (I).                  The amendment Order in

       distinction to the 1964 Order had required the Tribunal to first

       consider whether there were sufficient grounds for proceeding and

       only on the Tribunal being satisfied that the basic facts are prima

       facie established that the notice could be issued to a person

       suspected of being an illegal migrant. The Division Bench in




2
 (2007) 1 SCC 174
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                   Page 15 of 27
       Sarbananda Sonowal (II) was pleased to observe in paragraphs

       64 and 65 as under:

                  “64. In the face of the clear directions issued in
                  Sonowal I, it was for the authority concerned to
                  strengthen the Tribunals under the 1964 Order and to
                  make them work. Instead of doing so, the 2006 Order
                  has been promulgated. It is not as if the respondents
                  have found the 1964 Order unworkable in the State of
                  Assam; they have simply refused to enforce that Order
                  in spite of directions in that behalf by this Court. It is not
                  for us to speculate on the reasons for this attitude. The
                  earlier decision in Sonowal, has referred to the relevant
                  materials showing that such uncontrolled immigration
                  into the North- Eastern States posed a threat to the
                  integrity of the nation. What was therefore called for
                  was a strict implementation of the directions of this
                  Court earlier issued in Sonowal I, so as to ensure that
                  illegal immigrants are sent out of the country, while in
                  spite of lapse of time, the Tribunals under the 1964
                  Order had not been strengthened as directed in
                  Sonowal I. Why it was not so done, has not been made
                  clear by the Central Government. We have to once
                  again lament with Sonowal I that there is a lack of will
                  in the matter of ensuring that illegal immigrants are
                  sent out of the country.

                  65. It appears that the 2006 Order has been issued
                  just as a cover up for non-implementation of the
                  directions of this Court issued in Sonowal I. The Order
                  of 2006, in our view, is clearly unnecessary in the light
                  of the 1946 Act and the Orders made thereunder and
                  the directions issued in Sonowal I. It does not serve the
                  purpose sought to be achieved by the 1946 Act or
                  the Citizenship Act and the obligations cast on the
                  Central Government to protect the nation in terms
                  of Article 355 of the Constitution of India highlighted in
                  Sonowal. We have also earlier struck down the repeal
                  of the 1964 Order as regards Assam. The 2006 Order
                  is therefore found to be unreasonable and issued in an
                  arbitrary exercise of power. It requires to be quashed or
                  declared invalid.”




Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                      Page 16 of 27
15.    We have referred to the two decisions in Sarbananda Sonowal (I)

       and (II) to indicate and show that the issues and arguments raised

       before us and noticed below have already been substantially

       examined and dealt with and rejected earlier.


16.    The aforesaid judgments had referred to the 1964 Order prior to its

       amendment vide Foreigners (Tribunal) Amendment Order, 2012.

       In order to appreciate the contentions raised by the appellants, we

       would like to first reproduce Paragraph 3 of the amended 1964

       Order, which reads as under:

                  “3. Procedure for disposal of question:

                  (1) The Tribunal shall serve on the person to whom the
                  question relates a show cause notice with a copy of the
                  main grounds on which he or she is alleged to be a
                  foreigner.     This notice should be served as
                  expeditiously as possible and in any case, not later
                  than ten days of the receipt of the reference of such
                  question by the Central Government of any competent
                  authority.

                  (2) The Tribunal shall give him or her a reasonable
                  opportunity to show cause by filing a representation.
                  Ordinarily, not more than ten days’ time from the date
                  of service of the notice as aforesaid should be given to
                  file such a representation.

                  (3) The Tribunal shall give him or her a reasonable
                  opportunity to produce evidence in support of his or her
                  case. Ordinarily, not more than ten days’ time should
                  be given to produce such evidence.

                  (4) A prayer for examination of witnesses in Court or a
                  Commission for production of documents shall be
                  refused if, in the opinion of the Tribunal, such prayer is
                  made for the purpose of vexation or delay or similar
                  purpose.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                  Page 17 of 27
                  (5) The Tribunal shall take such evidence as may be
                  produced by the Superintendent of Police concerned.

                  (6) The Tribunal shall hear such persons as, in its
                  opinion, are required to be heard.

                  (7) A party to the proceeding may be allowed to
                  appear before the Tribunal either in person or through
                  a legal practitioner or such person or relation
                  authorized by him in writing as the Tribunal may admit
                  as a fit person to represent the party.

                  (8) The power of granting adjournment or any plea
                  should be very sparingly exercised.

                  (9) After the case has been heard, the Tribunal shall
                  submit its opinion as soon thereafter as may be
                  practicable, to the officer or the authority specified in
                  this behalf in the order of reference. Every case should
                  be disposed of within a period of 60 days after the
                  receipt of the reference from the competent authority.

                  (10) The Tribunal’s final order containing its opinion on
                  the question referred to need not be a detailed order as
                  it is not a judgment; a concise statement of facts and
                  the conclusion will suffice.

                  (11) Subject to the provisions of this order, the Tribunal
                  shall have the power to regulate its own procedure for
                  disposal of the cases expeditiously in a time bound
                  manner.”


17.    Referring to the above amended provisions, it is urged on behalf of

       the appellants that an order of the Foreigners Tribunal is an

       executive order which renders an opinion and therefore, it cannot

       be equated with a judgment. Summary opinion of the Foreigners

       Tribunal, it is submitted, is not a detailed order and hence, is not a

       decision or judgment. Based on the said submission, it is argued

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                  Page 18 of 27
       that the opinion formed by the Foreigners Tribunal is not an order

       of the Competent Authority for the purposes of sub-para (2) to

       paragraph 3 of the Schedule to the 2003 Rules.           Further, the

       opinion formed by the Foreigners Tribunal being an executive

       order would not operate as res judicata. It is highlighted that in

       some cases, persons who have been declared to be a foreigner

       under the Foreigners Act have been included in the draft National

       Register of Citizens for the State of Assam, while in others siblings

       and close blood relations of such persons have been named in the

       draft National Register of Citizens. It is averred that in these cases

       of contradictions, an aggrieved person should be entitled to take

       recourse to paragraph 8 of the Schedule to the 2003 Rules.


18.    We have examined the contentions and have no hesitation in

       holding that they have no force. The Foreigners Act and the

       Citizenship Act including the Rules framed under the two Acts

       have to be read harmoniously as both the Acts are inter-related

       and sister enactments. Pertinently, the Rules framed under the

       Citizenship Act are subordinate legislation.        The expression

       Competent Authority used in sub-para (2) to paragraph 3 of the

       Schedule to the 2003 Rules would obviously and without a doubt

       has reference to the duly constituted authority under the

       Foreigners Act. Indeed, the learned counsel for the appellants did
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018            Page 19 of 27
       not make any attempt to point out and highlight that there could be

       any other authority covered by the expression ‘Competent

       Authority’ or which would qualify and can be treated as a

       Competent Authority referred to in sub-para (2) to Paragraph 3 of

       the Schedule to the 2003 Rules. Paragraph 3 of the amended

       1964 Order uses the expression ‘Competent Authority’ as is also

       used in sub-para (2) to paragraph 3 of the Schedule, albeit in a

       different context as a competent authority that makes reference to

       the Tribunal in terms of Paragraph 3.            On receipt of such

       reference, the Tribunal has to submit its opinion/decision, which

       opinion/decision in terms of Explanation to Section 6A of the

       Citizenship Act is final and binding. Decisions of the Tribunal have

       been given primacy. Thus, the Competent Authority referred to in

       sub-para (2) to paragraph 3 of the Schedule would be, without a

       doubt, the Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners Act i.e. the

       1964 Order.


19.    The procedure prescribed by the post 2012 amendment under the

       1964 Order mandates compliance with the principles of natural

       justice. All the allegations and grounds are required to be served

       by the Tribunal in the form of a show cause notice to the person

       who is alleged to be a foreigner [see paragraph 60 in Sarbananda

       Sonowal (II) (supra)]. Thereupon, the person has to be given a
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018           Page 20 of 27
       reasonable opportunity to file representation and also produce

       evidence. The Tribunal has been authorised to consider and allow

       prayer for production and examination of the witnesses which can

       be refused if found to be vexatious, or made with the intent to

       cause delay, etc. The evidence produced by the Superintendent of

       Police can also be recorded. The person concerned has to be

       heard before the Tribunal gives its opinion. The person concerned

       may appear in person or can be represented by a legal practitioner

       or an authorised representative. Opinion is to be given within a

       period of sixty days after the reference from the competent

       authority. No doubt, the Rules do not prescribe and require an

       opinion of the Tribunal to be a detailed judgment, nevertheless, it

       is obvious that the opinion rendered must state the facts and

       reasons for drawing the conclusions. It is a decision and an order.

       Fixing time limits and recording of an order rather than detailed

       judgment is to ensure that these cases are disposed of

       expeditiously and in a time bound manner. The opinion by the

       Foreigners Tribunal is a quasi-judicial order and not an

       administrative order. The expression ‘quasi-judicial order’ means a

       verdict in writing which determines and decides contesting issues

       and question by a forum other than a court. The determination has

       civil consequences. Explaining the meaning of quasi-judicial body

Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018         Page 21 of 27
       in Indian National Congress (I) vs. Institute of Social Welfare &

       Ors.3, it was held that when any body of persons has a legal

       authority to determine questions affecting the rights of subjects

       and a duty to act judicially, such body of persons constitute a

       quasi-judicial body and decision given by them is a quasi-judicial

       decision. It would also be a quasi-judicial order if the statute

       empowers an authority to decide the lis not between the two

       contesting parties but also when the decision prejudicially affects

       the subject as against the authority, provided that the authority is

       required by the statute to act judicially. Further, what differentiates

       an administrative act from the quasi-judicial act is that a quasi-

       judicial body is required to make an enquiry before arriving at a

       conclusion. In addition, an administrative authority is the one which

       is dictated by policy and expediency whereas a quasi-judicial

       authority is required to act according to the rules.


20.    The opinion/order of the Tribunal, or the order passed by the

       Registering Authority based upon the opinion of the Foreigners

       Tribunal, as the case may be, can be challenged by way of writ

       proceedings. Thus, it would be incorrect to hold that the opinion of

       the Foreigners Tribunal and/or the consequential order passed by

       the Registering Authority would not operate as res judicata. Both

3
 (2002) 5 SCC 685
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018             Page 22 of 27
         the opinion of the Tribunal and the Order of the Registering

         Authority result in determination of rights/status under the statute

         and by an authority after a contest on the merits which would

         necessarily operate as a bar to subsequent proceedings before

         the    same      authority      for     re-determination   of   the   same

         issue/question.      This court in Shrimati Ujjambai vs. State of

         Uttar Pradesh & Anr.4 has held that the principles of res judicata

         equally apply to quasi-judicial bodies. Whenever a judicial or

         quasi-judicial Tribunal gives a finding on law or fact, its findings

         cannot be impeached collaterally or in a second round and are

         binding until reversed in appeal or by way of writ proceedings. The

         characteristic attribute of a judicial act or decision is that it binds,

         whether right or wrong. Thus, any error, either of fact or law,

         committed by such bodies cannot be controverted otherwise by

         way of an appeal or a writ unless the erroneous determination

         relates to the jurisdictional matter of that body. In Dr. J.J.

         Merchant & Ors. vs. Shrinath Chaturvedi 5, when the learned

         counsel had pleaded that the National Consumer Disputes

         Redressal Commission cannot examine complicated questions of

         facts which require examination and cross-examination of experts

         including doctors and that the procedure followed for determination

4
    AIR 1962 SC 1621
5
 (2002) 6 SCC 635
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                    Page 23 of 27
       of consumer disputes being summary in nature is not suitable for

       determination of complicated questions, this court rejected these

       contentions and held that under the Consumer Protection Act,

       1986, for a summary trial, an exhaustive procedure conforming to

       the principles of natural justice is provided. Merely because the

       trial is summary in nature cannot be a ground to reject it as unjust

       or unfair. Further, it was held in Rajesh Kumar & Ors. vs. DY. CIT

       & Ors.6 that when civil or evil consequences ensue by reason of

       an act done by the statutory authority, principles of natural justice

       must be followed. The Act and power of judicial review vested with

       the constitutional courts provide sufficient safeguards, in the

       present context.


21.    When we apply general principles of res-judicata, the contention of

       the appellants that the person concerned should be permitted to

       double-dip and be entitled to a second round of litigation before

       the Foreigners Tribunal notwithstanding the earlier opinion

       expressed by the Foreigners Tribunal is far-fetched, and

       completely unacceptable. The plea is fallacious and has no merit.

       This contention therefore must be rejected and fails.


22.    As stated above, a person aggrieved by the opinion/order of the

       Tribunal can challenge the findings/opinion expressed by way of a
6
 (2007) 2 SCC 181
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018           Page 24 of 27
       writ petition wherein the High Court would be entitled to examine

       the issue with reference to the evidence and material in the

       exercise of its power of judicial review premised on the principle of

       “error in the decision-making process”, etc. This serves as a

       necessary check to correct and rectify an ‘error’ in the orders

       passed by the Tribunal.


23.    It was highlighted that there could be contradicting decisions/

       opinions of Foreigners Tribunal even in cases of near family

       members, albeit contradictions can be avoided when ‘family tree

       hearing’ are held as is now being undertaken. In the absence of

       joint decisions, conflict is possible as the principle of res judicata

       would not apply to separate proceedings even if against two

       closely related but different persons, as each case has to be

       strictly decided on the facts and evidence on record. Secondly,

       there is a possibility that some/one of the near family members

       may have migrated to India prior to midnight of March 24, 1977

       and, therefore, fall in a different category.              Any such conflict,

       however, would not compel us to take a different view, in terms of

       the clear statutory provisions.                  In a given case, the person

       aggrieved would have liberty to invoke writ jurisdiction, or if

       necessary, review jurisdiction before the High Court or this Court to

       ensure that no injustice is done. Any order passed in case of close
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                    Page 25 of 27
       family members, subsequent to adjudication order determining the

       citizenship status of a person, would necessarily be a material

       evidence which can be duly taken note of and considered while

       deciding a writ petition or a review application.


24.    In view of the aforesaid findings, it has to be held that paragraph 8

       of the Schedule to the 2003 Rules which gives a right to appeal

       before the Tribunal under the 1964 Order would apply only if and,

       in those cases, where the Tribunal constituted under the 1964

       Order has not already adjudicated upon and decided the issue as

       to whether the person is an Indian National or a foreigner. In other

       words, where the issue and question of nationality has already

       been determined under the 1964 Order, an appeal would not be

       maintainable under paragraph 8 of the Schedule to the 2003

       Rules. The determination would be final and binding on the

       Registering Authority under the Schedule and the Local Registrar.

       Paragraph 8 does not envisage and provide for a second round of

       litigation before the same authority i.e. the Foreigners Tribunal

       constituted under the 1964 Order on and after preparation of the

       final list. Provisions of paragraph 8 of the Schedule to the 2003

       Rules will apply when there has not been an earlier adjudication

       and decision by the Foreigners Tribunal.


Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018           Page 26 of 27
25.    Alternative submission that this court should create an appellate

       forum has not been pressed in the written submissions and

       arguments. We would not give any such direction and entrench

       upon the field of legislation reserved for legislature. This is not a

       case of an unoccupied legislation nor would facts justify the Court

       to exercise powers as in the cases of vacuum and when there is a

       complete absence of active law to provide for effective

       enforcement of basic human rights [See P. Ramachandra Rao vs.

       State of Karnataka7 and Pravasi Bhalai Sangathan vs. Union

       of India8].


26.    With the aforesaid observations, we dispose of the appeals and

       reject the contention of the appellants on the perceived conflict

       pertaining to the adjudication on the citizenship status of persons.

       We also reject the contention that this Court should direct the

       creation of an appellate forum.

                                                        ......................................CJI
                                                                     (RANJAN GOGOI)

                                                          ......................................J.
                                                                     (DEEPAK GUPTA)


                                                          ......................................J.
                                                                   (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 17, 2019.
7
 (2002) 4 SCC 578
8
 (2014) 11 SCC 477
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23127 of 2018                            Page 27 of 27

