
Supreme Court of India
Rajendra Singh vs State Of U.P. & Anr on 6 August, 2007Author: P Balasubramanyan
Bench: G.P. Mathur, P.K. Balasubramanyan
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1019 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Rajendra Singh

RESPONDENT:
State of U.P. & Anr

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 06/08/2007

BENCH:
G.P. Mathur & P.K. Balasubramanyan

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T 

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1019 OF 2007
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.3182 of 2006)

P.K. BALASUBRAMANYAN, J.

1.		I very respectfully agree with the reasoning and 
conclusion of my learned Brother.  But, I would like to add a 
few words on Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
with a view at least to kindle a thought.

2.		Section 319 (1), which is relevant for our purpose 
reads:
"319. Power to proceed against other 
persons appearing to be guilty of offence- 
(1)  Where, in the course of any inquiry into, or 
trial of, an offence, it appears from the 
evidence that any person not being the 
accused has committed any offence for which 
such person could be tried together with the 
accused, the Court may proceed against such 
person for the offence which he appears to 
have committed."

As I see it, the words are plain and the meaning clear.  When 
in the course of the enquiry or trial, it appears to the court 
from the evidence that a person, not arrayed as an accused, 
appears to have committed any offence for which that person 
could be tried together with the accused, the court may 
proceed against that person.  Surely, it must appear to the 
Court from the evidence that someone not arrayed as an 
accused, appears to have committed an offence.  Be it noted, 
the Court need not be satisfied that he has committed an 
offence.  It need only appear to it that he has committed an 
offence.  In other words, from the evidence it need only appear 
to it that someone else has committed an offence, to exercise 
jurisdiction under Section 319 of the Code. Even then, it has a 
discretion not to proceed, since the expression used is 'may' 
and not 'shall'.  The legislature apparently wanted to leave that 
discretion to the trial court so as to enable it to exercise its 
jurisdiction under this section.  The expression 'appears' 
indicates an application of mind by the court to the evidence 
that has come before it and then taking a decision to proceed 
under Section 319 of the Code or not.  With great respect, I see 
no reason to describe the power as an extraordinary power or 
to confine the exercise of it only if compelling reasons exist for 
taking cognizance against any other person against whom 
action has not been taken. After all, the section only gives 
power to the court to ensure that all those apparently involved 
in the commission of an offence are tried together and none 
left out.  I see no reason to curtail this power of the court to do 
justice to the victim and to the society.   It appears to me that 
it is left to the judicial discretion of the court, judicially 
trained, to decide to proceed or not to proceed against a 
person in terms of Section 319 of the Code. 

3.		The decision in Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
Vs. Ram Kishan Rohtagi & ors. [(1983) 1 S.C.C. 1] which 
described the power as an extraordinary power to be exercised 
very sparingly and only if compelling reasons exist proceeded 
on its own peculiar facts.  The broad statement contained in 
that decision cannot be understood out of context.  That was a 
case where the very same proceeding against certain persons 
initially arrayed as accused, had been quashed.  But, 
thereafter from the evidence, it appeared to the court that 
some of them have to be tried as accused in exercise of power 
under Section 319 of the Code.  This Court in that context 
after referring to Joginder Singh Vs. State of Punjab [(1979) 
2 S.C.R. 306] held that if the prosecution can at any stage 
produce evidence which satisfies the court that the other 
accused or those who have not been arrayed as accused 
against whom proceedings have been quashed, have also 
committed the offence, the Court can take cognizance against 
them and try them along with the other accused.  This Court 
thus upheld the power of the court to invoke Section 319 of 
the Code even in such a case. Their Lordships then added:
"But, we would hasten to add that this is really 
an extraordinary power which is conferred on 
the court and should be used very sparingly 
and only if compelling reasons exist for taking 
cognizance against the other person against 
whom action has not been taken."

With respect, I understand this sentence as relating to 
exercise of the power under Section 319 of the Code in a case 
where the prosecution against the person sought to be 
arraigned, had earlier been quashed by the court, but still he 
is to be roped in, in exercise of power under Section 319 of the 
Code.

4.		These observations have unfortunately led to some 
decisions using these expressions, even in cases where there 
has not been a prior quashing of the charge and a proceeding 
is taken in terms of Section 319 of the Code.  With respect, it 
appears to me that there is no warrant for such narrowing 
down of the power of the court.  After all, an authority has to 
be understood in the context of the facts based on which the 
observations therein are made.  The ratio of a decision is 
generally secundum subjectam materiam.  

5.		In Quinn Vs. Leathem (1901) A.C. 495, Earl of 
Halsbury L.C. stated:
".., that 
every judgment must be read as applicable to 
the particular facts proved, or assumed to be 
proved, since the generality of the expressions 
which may be found there are not intended to 
be expositions of the whole law, but governed 
and qualified by the particular facts of the case 
in which such expressions are to be found.  
The other is that a case is only an authority for 
what it actually decides."

The above dictum, as regards the first proposition, was quoted 
and adopted by the Privy Council in Punjab Cooperative 
Bank Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, Lahore [A.I.R. 
1940 P.C. 230]

6.		The power under Section 319 of the Code is 
conferred on the court to ensure that justice is done to the 
society by bringing to book all those guilty of an offence.  One 
of the aims and purposes of the Criminal Justice System is to 
maintain social order.  It is necessary in that context to ensure 
that no one who appears to be guilty escapes a proper trial in 
relation to that guilt.  There is also a duty to render justice to 
the victim of the offence.  It is in recognition of this that the 
Code has specifically conferred a power in the court to proceed 
against others not arrayed as accused in the circumstances 
set out by this Section.  It is a salutary power enabling the 
discharge of a court's obligation to the society to bring to book 
all those guilty of a crime.

7.		Exercise of power under Section 319 of the Code, in 
my view, is left to the court trying the offence based on the 
evidence that comes before it.  The court must be satisfied of 
the condition precedent for the exercise of power under 
Section 319 of the Code.  There is no reason to assume that a 
court trained in law would not exercise the power within the 
confines of the provision and decide whether it may proceed 
against such person or not.  There is no rationale in fettering 
that power and the discretion, either by calling it extraordinary 
or by stating that it will be exercised only in exceptional 
circumstances.  It is intended to be used when the occasion 
envisaged by the section arises.

