
Supreme Court of India
Vinubhai Ranchhodbhai Patel vs Rajivbhai Dudabhai Patel . on 16 May, 2018Author: ........................J.
Bench: [ K Kaul], [J.Chelameswar]
                                                                                           Reportable

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1525 OF 2009

            Vinubhai Ranchhodbhai Patel                                           …      Appellant

                               Versus

            Rajivbhai Dudabhai Patel & Others                                     …     Respondents
                                                          WITH
                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1526­1527 OF 2009 



                                                J U D G M E N T 


            Chelameswar, J.

            1.           On 11.07.1992, at about 10.10 pm, an incident occurred in

            the village of Nana Ankadia leaving 3 persons dead and 5 persons

            injured. It appears from the judgment of the High Court:

                         “…information   about   the   incident   was   conveyed   by   wireless
                         message by PSO of Amreli (Rural) Police Station to PSI, Mr. NG
                         Rajput. On the basis of the said information, PSI, Rajput had
                         gone to village Nana Ankadia and found three dead bodies lying
                         near   the   shop   of   Bhikabhai   and   after   getting   some   further
                         information,   he   had   gone   to   Amreli   Hospital   and   recorded
Signature Not Verified   complaint from Vinu Ranchhod, which was registered at about
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
                         1.30 a.m. on 12.07.1992. On the basis of the said complaint,
Date: 2018.05.16
14:24:02 IST
Reason:
                         PSI,   Rajput   started   investigation   by   recording   statements,
                         drawing   panchnamas   and   sending   the   dead   bodies   for   post
                         mortem etc.”

                                                                                                       1
2.    On completion of investigation, a charge­sheet came to be

filed against 15 accused because the remaining two accused A­16

and   A­17   were   absconding   for   some   time.   The   matter   was

committed   to   the   Sessions   Court   of   Amreli   as   offences   were

exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions. In Sessions Case No.

118/1992,   trial   was   conducted   against   15   accused.   The   trial

insofar as the two absconding accused was segregated from the

trial of the remaining even after they were apprehended and they

were put to trial separately in Sessions Case No. 58/98 before the

Special Judge of the Fast Track Court, Amreli. 


3.    In  Sessions   Case   No.118/1992, the  Sessions Court by  its

judgment dated 17.01.1996 recorded the conviction of A­1, A­5,

A­10 and A­12 as follows:

      “Prosecution  has  proved  the  criminal  offence  punishable  under
      section 302 and 148 of the Indian Penal Code and under section
      135(1)   of   the   B.P.   Act,   against   the   accused   No.   10   and   [12]
      respectively Nanjibhai Khodabhai and Ratilal Nagji, and therefore
      the accused No. 10 and 12 are convicted under sections 302, 148
      IPC and section 135(1) of the B.P. Act. The accused No. 1 Ravji
      Duda   is   convicted   for   the   criminal   offence   punishable   under
      section   326   and   148   of   IPC   and   section   135(1)   of   B.P.   Act.
      Whereas the accused No. 5 Manubhai Makanbhia is convicted for
      the criminal offence punishable under section 326, 323 and 148
      of   the   IPC   and   section   135(1)   of   the   B.P.   Act.   Whereas   the
      accused other than these accused, the prosecution has not been
      able to prove their case beyond doubt therefore the accused No.
      2,3,4,6,7,8,9,11,13,14 and 15 are given the benefit of doubt and
      are acquitted, and if they are not required in any other matter,
      then   the   accused   Nos.   2,3,4,6,7,8,11,13,14   be   released   from


                                                                                          2
      judicial custody. The accused No. 2,4,9 and 15 are enlarged on
      bail, their bail bonds are ordered to be cancelled.”


And   by   separate   order   dated   17.01.1996,   A­10   and   A­12   were

sentenced   to   imprisonment   for   life   for   an   offence   punishable

under Section 302 Indian Penal Code [hereinafter referred to as

“IPC”]; one year rigorous imprisonment for an offence punishable

under Section 148 IPC; and six months rigorous imprisonment

for   an   offence   punishable   under  Section  135(1)  of  the   Bombay

Police Act [hereinafter referred to as “BP Act”].


4.    A­1 was sentenced to suffer six years rigorous imprisonment

and a fine of Rs.1000/­ for an offence under Section 326 IPC and

one year rigorous imprisonment for an offence punishable under

Section  148   IPC  and   six  months rigorous imprisonment for  an

offence under Section 135(1) of the BP Act.


5.    A­5 was sentenced to six years rigorous imprisonment and

fine   for   an   offence   punishable   under   Section   326  IPC   and  one

year   rigorous   imprisonment   for   an   offence   punishable   under

Section   148   IPC,   six   months   rigorous   imprisonment   for   an

offence   under   Section   323   IPC   and   six   months   rigorous

imprisonment for an offence under Section 135(1) of the BP Act.


                                                                             3
6.      All   the   convicted   accused   preferred   appeal   No.   166/1996

before   the   High   Court   of   Gujarat   challenging   conviction   and

sentence.   The   State   of   Gujarat   filed   Criminal   Appeal

No.167/1996 challenging the acquittal of the remaining thirteen

accused. It must be mentioned here that the original complainant

also filed a Criminal Revision Petition No.138/1996 challenging

the   decision   of   the   Sessions   Court   acquitting   eleven   of   the

accused. 


7.      The   two   absconding   accused   nos.16   and   17   “ were   tried

separately for the offences punishable under sections 147, 148, 120B, 302

and 307 read with section 149 of IPC and under Section 25(1)(A) of the Arms

Act   and   under   Section   135   of   Bombay   Police   Act   in   Sessions   Case

No.58/98.”1  They were found not guilty by the Fast Track Court,

Amreli by judgment dated 19.07.2003. The State of Gujarat filed

Criminal Appeal No.1226/2003 against the acquittal of accused

nos.16 and 17.


8.      All the appeals and the revision were clubbed together and

disposed   of   by   the   High   Court   by   a   common   judgment   dated




1 2.2, Judgment of the High Court.

                                                                                   4
5.10.2004,   which   is   the   subject   matter   of   the   various   appeals

before us.


9.    The   appeal   of   A­10   and   A­12   was   dismissed   by   the   High

Court. The appeal of accused nos.1 and 5 was partly allowed. The

State   appeals   challenging   acquittals   of   various   accused   were

dismissed   along   with   the   revision   filed   by   the  de   facto

complainant. Hence, these appeals, by the State and the de facto

complainant.


10.   Admittedly   all   the   convicts   have   by   now   served   out   their

sentences. Some of the accused have even died.


11.   An   examination   of   the   record   in   these   appeals   left   us   in

distress.   The   judgments   of   the   Sessions   Courts   as   well   as   the

High Court leave too much to be desired. 


12.   We notice the following striking features from the judgment

of the Sessions Court that: 

      (i)    Charges   have   not   been   framed   in   accordance
             with the requirements of the CrPC;
      (ii)   There appears to be a charge (however defectively
             framed), conviction and sentencing of 4 accused
             for an offence under Section 148 IPC;
      (iii)  There is an omnibus accusation that the accused
             committed   offences   falling   under   Sections   143,

                                                                                 5
       147,   148   and   vicariously   liable   by   virtue   of
       Section   149   IPC   for   the   offence   of   Section   302
       IPC; 


(iv)   The judgment does not contain any clear finding:
       (a)    regarding   the   existence   of   an   ‘unlawful
              assembly’ i.e. regarding the accusation of an
              offence punishable under Section 143 IPC;
       (b)    number   of   persons   (identified   or   not)   who
              participated   in   the   attack   on   the   deceased
              and the injured; or 
       (c)    the identity of such participants. 
(v)    The   judgment   is   singularly   silent   regarding   the
       post mortem examination report of one of the 3
       deceased   and   the   evidence   of   the   doctor   who
       conducted the post mortem examination. It only
       discusses   the   evidence   of   the   doctor   who
       conducted the post mortem on the dead bodies of
       two of the deceased;
(vi)   The   judgment   does   not   specify   whether   the
       accused   10   and   12   are   guilty   of   causing   the
       death of all the 3 deceased or one of them; 
(vii) The legal analysis and appreciation of evidence in
      the context of the question of vicarious liability is
      wholly unsubstantial and not in accordance with
      the settled principles of law; and

(viii) There is material on record to indicate that even
       some   of   the   accused   received   injuries   in   the
       transaction   but   no   material   is   on   record
       indicating   whether   any   crime   is   registered   and
       investigated   or   anybody   is   prosecuted   in   that
       regard.
        

                                                                        6
13.   The   judgment   in   Sessions   Case   No.118/1992   commences

with an omnibus statement:

      “In this case against the present accused, there are charges of
      offences under sections 302, 307, 324, 147, 148, 149, 120B of
      IPC and section 25(1)(aa) of the Arms Act and section 135 of the
      Bombay Police Act, for these offences the charge sheet is filed.”

      Later in the same paragraph it is stated:
      “Fifteen accused in the case have remained present before the
      court, my learned predecessor has on 21/3/1994 below Exh. 1
      on   charges   of   offences   punishable   under   sections   143,   147,
      148, 302 read with 149, 120­b, 307 read with 147, 114, 120­b
      of the Indian Penal Code and against the accused Nos. 7, 8 and
      11 charges under section 27 of the Arms Act, and against all
      the   accused   the   offence   punishable   under   section   25   of   the
      Indian Telegraphs Act, and for carrying weapons the charges of
      violation of the Notification by the District Magistrate Amreli,
      for which against the accused Nos. 2,4,9,15,10,12,13, 1, 3, 6,
      7 and 8 the charges of offence punishable under section 135 of
      the Bombay Police Act, charges were pronounced against the
      accused.”

It appears from the above that no clear charges appear to have

been framed.  At any rate, no document is brought to our notice

showing   the   charges   framed   by   the   Court   in   spite   of   repeated

enquiry.   It must be remembered that it is a case where three

persons died and five persons were injured allegedly in an attack

by   all   the   accused.     Causing   death   to   each   one   of   the   three

persons   or   causing   injury   to   each   one   of  the   five   persons   is  a

distinct   offence.   Similarly,   an   offence   under   Section   307   is   a

distinct offence specific to a particular victim. The offences under



                                                                                     7
Sections 147 and 148 are distinct offences.  Section 149 IPC does

not   create   a   separate   offence   but   only   declares   the   vicarious

liability  of   all the  members of an unlawful assembly  in certain

circumstances. 

14.     It   was   held   by   a   three­judge   bench   of   this   Court   in

Shambhu Nath Singh & Others v. State of Bihar2: 

          “Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code is declaratory of the
          vicarious liability of the members of an unlawful assembly
          for   acts   done   in   prosecution   of   the   common   object   of   that
          assembly or for such offences as the members of the unlawful
          assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of
          that object”
                                                                  [emphasis supplied]

However, there are benches of a lesser smaller strength 3  which

have   observed   that   Section   149   creates   a   specific   and   distinct

offence. In view of the fact that decision in  Shambu Nath Singh

was decided by a larger bench, the law declared therein must be

taken   to   be   declaring   the   correct   legal   position.     With   utmost

respect,   we   may   also   add   that   the   same   is   in   accord  with   the

settled   principles   of   the   interpretation   of   the   statutes   having

regard to the language of Section 149 and its context. 

2 AIR 1960 SC 725
3 Sheo Mahadeo Singh v. State of Bihar, (1970) 3 SCC 46 paragraph 9; Lalji v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1989 (1)
SCC 437 paragraph 9

                                                                                                            8
15.     Chapter XVII of the Code of Criminal Procedure [hereinafter

referred   to   as   “CrPC”]   deals   with   “charges”   in   a   criminal   case.

Sections 211 to 213 deal with the particulars which are required

to be contained in a charge in a criminal trial.  These provisions

are made to ensure a fair procedure by which a person accused

of an offence should be tried – a procedure in compliance with

the requirement of the mandate of Article 21 of the Constitution

of India.   The accused are entitled in law to know with precision

what is the charge on which they are put to trial. It was held by

this Court in Esher Singh v. State of Andhra Pradesh4:

        “It   is   the   precise   formulation   of   the   specific   accusation   made
        against   a   person   who   is   entitled   to   know   its   nature   at   the
        earliest   stage.  A   charge   is   not   an   accusation   made   or
        information   given   in   the   abstract,  but   an   accusation   made
        against a person in respect of an act committed or omitted in
        violation   of   penal   law   forbidding   or   commanding   it.   In   other
        words, it is an accusation made against a person in respect of
        an offence alleged to have been committed by him. A charge is
        formulated   after   inquiry   as   distinguished   from   the   popular
        meaning of the word as implying inculpation of a person for an
        alleged offence as used in Section 224 of the IPC.”
                                                                          [emphasis supplied]

16.     In the case on hand where three persons died, the charge

under   Section   302   must   have   been   framed   on   three   counts

against  specifically   named  accused  with   respect  to   each  of  the

deceased.   Assuming   for   the   sake   of   argument,   that   all   the   17


4 (2004) 11 SCC 585, para 20

                                                                                            9
persons are accused of causing the death of each one of the three

deceased, distinct charges should have been framed with respect

to each of the deceased. It is also necessary that the court should

record   a   specific   finding   as   to   the   guilt   of   the   accused   under

Section 302 IPC  qua  the death of a named deceased. If different

accused   are   prosecuted   for   causing   the   death   of   the   three

different   deceased,   then   distinct   charges   should   have   been

framed   specifying   which   of   the   accused   are   charged   for   the

offence of causing the death of which one of the three different

deceased.   Charges   should   also   have   been   proved   clearly

indicating which of the accused is charged for the offence under

Section 302 simpliciter or which of the accused are vicariously

liable under Section 149 IPC for causing the death of one or more

of   the   three   deceased.   Of   course,   none   of   the   accused   is

eventually found vicariously guilty of the offence under Section

302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC.


17.     By definition of the offences covered under Sections 147 and

1485, a person cannot be charged simultaneously with both the

offences by the very nature of theses offences.  A person can only


5 Section 146 IPC defines the offence of rioting. Section 147, IPC prescribes punishment for offence of rioting.
Section 148, IPC prescribes punishment for offence of rioting armed with deadly weapons.

                                                                                                             10
be held guilty of an offence punishable either under Section 147

or Section 148.

18.     The   legal   consequences   of   framing   defective   charges   or

omission in charges was considered by this Court in Dalbir Singh

v. State of U.P.6  and this Court held as follows: 

        “Section  464  of   the  Code   deals  with  the   effect   of   omission   to
        frame, or absence of, or error in, charge. Sub­section (1) of this
        section provides that no finding, sentence or order by a court of
        competent   jurisdiction   shall  be   deemed   invalid   merely   on   the
        ground   that   no   charge   was   framed   or   on   the   ground   of   any
        error,   omission   or   irregularity   in   the   charge   including   any
        misjoinder   of   charges,   unless,   in   the   opinion   of   the   court   of
        appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact
        been occasioned thereby.”

It   is   obvious   from   the   above   that   an   erroneous   or   irregular   or

even absence of a specific charge shall not render the conviction

recorded by a court invalid unless the appellate court comes to a

conclusion   that   failure   of   justice   has   in   fact   been   occasioned

thereby.  

19.     In cases where a large number of accused constituting an

‘unlawful assembly’ are alleged to have attacked and killed one or

more persons, it is not necessary that each of the accused should

inflict fatal injuries or any injury at all.  Invocation of Section 149

is   essential   in   such   cases   for   punishing   the   members   of   such


6 (2004) 5 SCC 334

                                                                                            11
unlawful   assemblies   on   the   ground   of   vicarious   liability   even

though they are not accused of having inflicted fatal injuries in

appropriate cases if the evidence on record justifies.   The mere

presence   of   an   accused   in   such   an   ‘unlawful   assembly’   is

sufficient to render him vicariously liable under Section 149 IPC

for causing the death of the victim of the attack provided that the

accused are told that they have to face a charge rendering them

vicariously   liable   under   Section   149   IPC   for   the   offence

punishable   under   Section   302   IPC.     Failure   to   appropriately

invoke and apply Section 149 enables large number of offenders

to get away with the crime. 


20.     This Court in Bala Seetharamaiah v. Perike S. Rao7 held:

        “8.   Unfortunately,   the   Sessions   Judge   did   not   frame   charge
        against   the   accused   persons   for   offence   punishable   under
        Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC. It is also important
        to note that the relevant prosecution allegations so as to bring
        in the ingredients of the offence punishable under Section 302
        IPC read with Section 149 IPC also were not incorporated in the
        charge   framed   by   the   Sessions   Judge.   The   accused   were   not
        told   that   they   had   to   face   charges   of   being   members   of   an
        unlawful   assembly   and   the   common   object   of   such   assembly
        was to commit  murder  of the deceased and in furtherance of
        that  common  object  murder  was  committed and thereby   they
        had a constructive liability and thus they committed the offence
        punishable under Section 302 IPC read with Section 149 IPC.
        Of  course  the  mere  omission to  mention Section  149  may  be
        considered as an irregularity, but failure to mention the nature
        of the offence committed by them cannot be said to be a mere
7 (2004) 4 SCC 557, para 8.

                                                                                          12
         irregularity. Had this mistake been noticed at the trial stage, the
         Sessions   Judge   could   have   corrected   the   charge   at   any   time
         before   the   delivery   of   the   judgment.   In   the   instant   case,   the
         accused  were   told   to  face  a   charge   punishable   under   Section
         302 simpliciter and there was no charge under Section 302 IPC
         read   with   Section   149   IPC.   Therefore,   it   is   not   possible   to
         reverse   the   conviction   of   the   accused   under   Section   326   IPC
         and substitute the conviction for the offence punishable under
         Sections 302/149 IPC as there was no charge framed against
         them for such offence.”


21.      When a large number of people gather together (assemble)

and   commit   an   offence,   it   is   possible   that   only   some   of   the

members of the assembly commit the crucial act which renders

the   transaction   an   offence   and   the  remaining   members   do  not

take part in that ‘crucial act’ ­ for example in a case of murder,

the   infliction   of   the   fatal   injury.   It   is   in   those   situations,   the

legislature thought it fit as a matter of legislative policy to press

into   service   the   concept   of   vicarious   liability   for   the   crime. 8

Section 149 IPC is one such provision.  It is a provision conceived

in   the   larger   public   interest   to   maintain   the   tranquility   of   the

society   and   prevent   wrong   doers   (who   actively   collaborate   or

assist   the   commission   of   offences)   claiming   impunity   on   the



8 Ram Gope v. State of Bihar, AIR 1969 SC 689 paragraph 5: “… When a concerted attack is made on the
victim by a large number of persons it is often difficult to determine the actual part played by each offender. But
on that account for an offence committed by a member of the unlawful assembly in the prosecution of the
common object or for an offence which was known to be likely to be committed in prosecution of the common
object, persons proved to be members cannot escape the consequences arising from the doing of that act which
amounts to an offence.”

                                                                                                                13
ground that their activity as members of the unlawful assembly is

limited.   


      The responsibility of the prosecution and/or of the Court (in

a case like the one at hand where large numbers of people (5 or

more) are collectively accused to have committed various offences

and   subjected   to   trial)   ­   in   examining   whether   some   of   the

members   of   such   group   are   vicariously   liable   for   some   offence

committed   by   some   of   the   other   members   of   such   group   ­

requires an analysis.  Such analysis has two components – (i) the

amplitude and the vicarious liability created under Section 149;

and   (ii)   the   facts   which   are   required   to   be   proved   to   hold   an

accused vicariously liable for an offence. 


22.   To understand the true scope and amplitude of Section 149

IPC   it   is   necessary   to   examine   the   scheme   of   Chapter   VIII

(Sections 141 to 160) of the IPC which is titled “Of the offences

against   the   public   tranquility”.   Sections   141   to   158   deal   with

offences   committed   collectively   by   a   group   of   5   or   more

individuals. 


23.   Section   141   IPC   declares   an   assembly   of   five   or   more

persons   to   be   an   ‘unlawful   assembly’   if   the   common   object   of
                                                                                  14
such   assembly   is   to   achieve   any   one   of   the   five   objects

enumerated in the said section.9   One of the enumerated objects

is to commit any offence.10  “The words falling under section 141, clause

third “or other offence” cannot be restricted to mean only minor offences of

trespass or mischief. These words cover all offences falling under any of the

provisions   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   or   any   other   law.”11  The   mere

assembly of 5 or more persons with such legally impermissible

object   itself   constitutes   the   offence   of   unlawful   assembly

punishable under Section 143 of the IPC. It is not necessary that

any overt act is required to be committed by such an assembly to

be punished under Section 143.12


24.      If force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly or any

member thereof in prosecution of the common objective of such

assembly,   every   member   of   such   assembly   is   declared   under

Section 146 to be guilty of the offence of rioting punishable with

two  years   imprisonment  under  Section  147.   To  constitute the

offence of rioting under Section 146, the use of force or violence

need   not   necessarily   result   in   the   achievement   of  the   common



9 See Yeshwant & Others v. State of Maharashtra, (1972) 3 SCC 639
10 Section 40 “offence”.- Except in the Chapters and sections mentioned in clauses 2 and 3 of this section, the
word “offence” denotes a thing made punishable by this Code.
11Manga alias Man Singh Vs. State of Uttarakhand (2013) 7 SCC 629
12 See Dalip Singh and Ors. Vs. State of Punjab , AIR 1953 SC 364.

                                                                                                              15
object.13 In other words, the employment of force or violence need

not result in the commission of a crime or the achievement of any

one of the five enumerated common objects under Section 141.


25.     Section   148   declares   that   rioting   armed   with   deadly

weapons is a distinct offence punishable with the longer period of

imprisonment (three years).   There is a distinction between the

offences   under   146   and   148.     To   constitute   an   offence   under

Section   146,   the   members  of  the  ‘unlawful  assembly’  need  not

carry weapons.   But to constitute an offence under Section 148,

a   person   must   be   a   member   of   an   unlawful   assembly,   such

assembly is also guilty of the offence of rioting under Section 146

and the person charged with an offence under Section 148 must

also be armed with a deadly weapon.14



26.     Section   149   propounds   a   vicarious   liability 15  in   two

contingencies   by   declaring   that  (i)  if  a   member   of  an   unlawful

assembly  commits an offence in prosecution of the common

object of that assembly,  then every member of such unlawful

assembly is guilty of the offence committed by the other members

13 See Sundar Singh Vs. State, AIR 1955 All 232 (FB)
14See Sabir v. Queen Empress, (1894) ILR 22 Cal 276; In re Choitano Ranto and Others, AIR 1916 Mad 788
15 See Shambu Nath Singh Vs. State of Bihar, AIR 1960 SC 725.

                                                                                                         16
of   the   unlawful   assembly   and   (ii)   even   in   cases   where   all   the

members   of   the   unlawful   assembly   do   not   share   the   same

common object to commit a particular offence,  if they had the

knowledge of  the  fact that some of the other  members of the

assembly   are   likely   to   commit   that   particular   offence   in

prosecution of the common object. The scope of Section 149 IPC

was enunciated by this Court in Masalti16:

        “The crucial question to determine in such a case is whether
        the assembly consisted of five or more persons and whether the
        said persons entertained one or more of the common objects as
        specified   by   section   141.   While   determining   this   question,   it
        becomes relevant to consider whether the assembly consisted of
        some   persons   who   were   merely   passive   witnesses   and   had
        joined   the   assembly   as   a   matter   of   idle   curiosity   without
        intending to entertain the common object of the assembly. It is
        in that context that the observations made by this court in the
        case of Baladin  assume significance; otherwise, in law, it would
        not   be   correct   to   say   that   before   a   person   is   held   to   be   a
        member of an unlawful assembly, it must be shown that he had
        committed   some   illegal   overt   act   or   had   been   guilty   of   some
        illegal   omission   in   pursuance   of   the   common   object   of   the
        assembly. In fact, section 149 makes it clear that if an offence is
        committed   by   any   member   of   an   unlawful   assembly   in
        prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or such as
        the   members   of   that   assembly     knew   to   be   likely   to   be
        committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at
        the time of the committing of that offence, is a member of the
        same assembly, is guilty of that offence, and that emphatically
        brings   out   the   principle   that   the   punishment   prescribed   by
        section 149 is in a sense vicarious and does not always proceed
        on the basis that the offence has been actually committed by
        every member of the unlawful assembly.”

27.     It can be seen from the above, Sections 141, 146 and 148

create   distinct   offences.     Section   149   only   creates   a   vicarious
16Masalti v. State of U.P., AIR 1965 SC 202.

                                                                                               17
liability.     However, Sections 146, 148 and 149 contain certain

legislative declarations based on the doctrine of vicarious liability.

The doctrine is well known in civil law especially in the branch of

torts,   but   is   applied   very   sparingly   in   criminal   law   only   when

there   is   a   clear   legislative   command.    To   be   liable   for

punishment   under   any   one   of   the   provisions,   the

fundamental   requirement   is   the   existence   of   an   unlawful

assembly   as   defined   under   Section   141   made   punishable

under Section 143 IPC. 

 
28.   The concept of an unlawful assembly as can be seen from

Section 141 has two elements;

      (i)    The   assembly   should   consist   of   at   least   five
             persons; and

      (ii)   They should have a common object to commit an
             offence   or   achieve   any   one   of   the   objects
             enumerated therein.

29.   For recording a conclusion, that a person is (i) guilty of any

one   of   the   offences   under   Sections   143,   146   or   148   or  (ii)

vicariously   liable   under   Section   149   for   some   other   offence,   it

must   first   be   proved   that   such   person   is   a   member   of   an

‘unlawful   assembly’   consisting   of   not   less   than   five   persons

                                                                               18
irrespective of the fact whether the identity of each one of the 5

persons is proved or not. If that fact is proved, the next step of

inquiry is whether the common object of the unlawful assembly is

one of the 5 enumerated objects specified under Section 141 IPC.


30.   The common object of assembly is normally to be gathered

from the circumstances of each case such as the time and place

of the gathering of the assembly, the conduct of the gathering as

distinguished   from   the   conduct   of   the   individual   members   are

indicative of the common object of the gathering. Assessing the

common object of an assembly only on the basis of the overt acts

committed by such individual members of the assembly, in our

opinion is impermissible. For example, if more than five people

gather together and attack another person with deadly weapons

eventually   resulting   in   the   death   of   the   victim,   it   is   wrong   to

conclude that one or some of the members of such assembly did

not  share   the   common  object with those who had inflicted the

fatal   injuries   (as   proved   by   medical   evidence);  merely  on   the

ground that the injuries inflicted by such members are relatively

less serious and non fatal.


                                                                                  19
31.   For   mulcting   liability   on   the   members   of   an   unlawful

assembly   under   Section   149,   it   is   not   necessary   that   every

member of the unlawful assembly should commit the offence in

prosecution   of   the   common   object   of   the   assembly.   Mere

knowledge of the likelihood of commission of such an offence by

the members of the assembly  is sufficient. For example, if five

or more members carrying AK 47 rifles collectively attack a victim

and cause his death by gunshot injuries, the fact that one or two

of the members of the assembly did not in fact fire their weapons

does not mean that they did not have the knowledge of the fact

that the offence of murder is likely to be committed. 


32.   The identification of the common object essentially requires

an   assessment   of   the   state   of   mind   of   the   members   of   the

unlawful   assembly.   Proof   of  such  mental  condition   is normally

established   by   inferential   logic.     If   a   large   number   of   people

gather at a public place at the dead of night armed with deadly

weapons like axes  and  fire arms and attack another person or

group of persons, any member of the attacking group would have

to be a moron in intelligence if he did not know murder would be

a likely consequence.


                                                                               20
33.   The Sessions Court purported to frame ‘issues’ – a practice

statutorily mandated under the Code of Civil Procedure as one of

the   ingredients   of   the   adjudication   of   a   suit.     But,   we   are

informed   that   in   the   State   of   Gujarat   the   practice   of   framing

“issues” is prevalent even in the trial of a criminal case.  Be that

as it may, obviously ‘issues’ are not the same as “charges”.  They

are not framed prior to the commencement of trial.  They are only

‘identified’ at the time of writing the judgment. 


34.   Issue Nos.2 and 4 framed by the Sessions Judge are with

respect to offence of unlawful assembly, rioting and the vicarious

liability under the IPC.  Issue Nos. 2 and 4 read as follows:­

      “(2)   Whether the prosecution has proved that, the accused and
      the persons of the complainant party are the Kadva and Leuva
      Patels   of   teh   Nana   Ankadiya,   Taluka   Amreli,   and   due   to   the
      enemity between them on 11/7/92 at about 22­15 at night near
      the   Nana   Ankadiya   village   Bus   stand,   near   the   shop   of
      Bhikhabhai in the public place all the accused in this matter
      and   the   absconding   accused  Chandubhai   Vallabhbhai   and
      Vallabhbhai Khodabhai, thus all of these had constituted an
      illegal assembly  and with the common intention of killing the
      Leuva Patels of the Nana Ankadiya village, attempted to murder,
      and   at   that   above   time   and   place,   all  these   accused   and  the
      absconding   accused   with   the   intentions   of   achieving   their
      common object, caused rioted and committed criminal offence
      punishable under section 143, 147?

      (4)  Whether the prosecution is able to prove that, the accused
      had for achieving the common object of their illegal assembly,
      made use of the weapons carried by them and had assaulted
      Chhaganbhai   Premjibhai   Patel,   Madhubhai   Mohanbhai   Patel
      and Pragjihai Parbatbhai Patel and fired at them and by such
      act they were well aware that they would certainly be killed and

                                                                                        21
      inspite of  this  intentionally  and with  the  intentions of  killing,
      caused   grievous   injuries,   and   all   the   three   persons   were
      assaulted   and   murdered,   the   said   act   was   committed   by   the
      accused No. 2,4,5 and 9 using stick, and accused No. 10, 12
      using sword, and accused No. 1, 3 and 6 using their dhariya, all
      three deceased were caused injuries and murdered, and thus
      the accused have committed criminal offence punishable under
      section 302, 149 and 114 of the IPC”
                                                          [emphasis supplied]


35.   Issue  No.   2   makes   a reference  to  all   the  accused  put to

trial along with absconding accused (put to trial subsequently in

Sessions   Case   No.   58)   in   the   context   of   the   offences   of   the

unlawful   assembly   and   rioting.   Issue   No.   4   does   not   make   a

reference to  “all the accused”, in the context of the offences under

Sections   302   read   with   Section   149   IPC.     But   in   view   of   the

reference   to   the   illegal   (obviously   the   learned   Judge   meant

unlawful) assembly we assume that the Sessions Court intended

to   examine   the   vicarious   liability   under   Section   149   of   all   the

accused in the context of the death of the three victims.   Since

the prosecution invoked Section 149, charges should have been

framed   specifying   which   of   the   accused   are   sought   to   be

punished for which offence with the aid of Section 149.


36.   From the judgment of the Sessions Court, we do not see any

clear   findings   recorded   (i)   as   to   the   existence   of   an   unlawful

assembly, (ii) if it existed, how many (number of the members)

                                                                                    22
were present in the unlawful assembly.  It must be remembered

that the accusation is that all the 17 accused were members of

the unlawful assembly.  There appears to be an accusation of the

commission of the offence under Section 143 IPC.   There is no

finding   whether  the   assembly  consisted of 17 members or  less

(number) and which of the 17 accused were present (the identity)

in   the   assembly.   Nor   is   there   any   clear   finding   regarding   the

common   object   of   the   assembly.     Consequentially,   there   is   no

finding   recorded   by   the   Sessions   Court   whether   an   offence   of

unlawful assembly punishable under Section 143 was committed

by   all   or   some   of   the   accused.   The   Trial   Court   recorded   the

conviction under Section 148 IPC against 4 accused.  Logically it

should follow that the trial court was of the opinion that there

was   an   unlawful   assembly.   That   means   more   than   5   people

participated in the attack. In such a case even assuming for the

sake of argument the identity of the accused (other than the 4

convicts)   is   not   proved   beyond   reasonable   doubt,   A­1   and   A­5

who were found to have been guilty of the offence under Section

148   should   normally   have   been   found   vicariously   guilty   of   the

offence of murder along with A­10 and A­12 (provided of course

that they are not prejudiced by the improper framing of charges).

                                                                              23
The record is not very clear whether the accused were told they

were to face a charge of being members of the unlawful assembly,

whose   common   object   was   to   commit   murder   of   the   three

deceased.


37.      Coming   to   the   conviction   of   A­10   and   A­12,   the   mere

statement   in   the   Sessions   Court’s   judgment   that   two   of   the

accused  were  found   guilty  of offence punishable under  Section

302   of   the   IPC   falls   short   of   the   requirement   of   law   in   a   case

where more than one person died in the transaction. Equally the

other two accused who are convicted of other offences mentioned

earlier are entitled to know the details of the offence for which

they are convicted. 


38.      We shall now examine the judgment of the High Court. The

High Court completely failed to take note of the defects in framing

of the charges. 


         The High Court recorded a finding at paragraph 19, that the

prosecution   witnesses   are   trustworthy   and   they   had   witnessed

the incident. However, in paragraph 20 17, the High Court records
17 “20.… However, all the PWs have not specifically involve all the accused. Likewise, there are certain
discrepancies in their evidence regarding the part played by them, the weapons carried by them etc., that in our
opinion is natural as all the accused, 17 in number came all of a sudden and started assaulting and that too
during night hours when visibility was also low. Because of the same, the learned trial judge acquitted A-2, A-3,
A-4, A-6, A-7, A-8, A-9, A-11, A-13, A-14 and A-15 by giving benefit of doubt. In other words, the learned

                                                                                                              24
that  there   are   discrepancies in the evidences of  PWs  regarding

the part played by each of the accused, the weapons carried by

them,   etc..   The   High   Court   takes   note   of   the   fact   that   the

Sessions   Court   acquitted   11   accused   by   giving   the   benefit   of

doubt.   To   us,   it   is   not   very   clear   whether   the   Sessions   Court

doubted   the   very   presence   of   the   11   accused   in   the   unlawful

assembly or the Sessions Court doubted the very existence of an

‘unlawful assembly’  for  the lack of proof of either the requisite

number of the accused to constitute the unlawful assembly or for

the   lack   of   proof   of   the   common   object   which   renders   the

assembly to be an unlawful assembly (even if the court concluded

that   more   than   5   people   participated   in   the   transaction).   The

High   Court   readily   drew   an   inference   that   the   Sessions   Court

disbelieved the case of the prosecution regarding the existence of

an unlawful assembly, in our opinion, a very unsatisfactory way

of   analyzing   the   case   of   the  prosecution  vis­à­vis the  vicarious

liability of the accused under Section 149. 




trial judge disbelieved the case of the prosecution of unlawful assembly and convicted the accused of their
individual act. After carefully examining the evidence on record, we are of the view that the presence of A-2,
A-4, A-9 and A-15 who were alleged to have carried sticks, is not established. The complainant involved them
in his further statement. Likewise other PWs are also contradicted about the presence of these accused with
their previous statement. Apart from that in the post mortem reports of the deceased as well as in the injury
certificates of the injured, the injuries do not reveal any injury possible with sticks.”

                                                                                                           25
      The   High   Court   recorded   a   finding   with   reference   to   4

accused   (A­2,   A­4,   A­9   and   A­15)   who   according   to   the

prosecution were alleged to have carried sticks, that there is no

evidence on record to prove the same on three grounds: (i) that

their names were not to be found in the FIR (ii) that there were

improvements   in   the   evidence   of   the   PWs   at   various   stages

regarding   the   presence   of   the   four   accused   and   (iii)   that   the

medical evidence does not disclose any injury which could have

been attributed to the beatings by sticks. In our opinion, the first

two reasons given by the High Court are legally tenable, however,

the   third   reason,   i.e.   the   absence   of   injuries   attributable   to   a

stick,  need   not   necessarily   result  in   a   conclusion   that   the

accused   were   not   present   in   the   unlawful   assembly.   But   the

absence   of   such   injuries   cannot   said   to   be   an   irrelevant

consideration   in   arriving   at   a   conclusion   whether   the   four

accused participated in the unlawful assembly in the background

of the other two factors mentioned above. But a similar analysis

with respect to the seven of the other accused who were given the

benefit of doubt by the Sessions Court is lacking in the judgment

of the High Court.


                                                                                 26
        Another important aspect of the matter is that at least one

of   the   accused   (A­7)   appears   to   have   been   injured   in   the

transaction and it appears from the judgment of the High Court

that an FIR in that regard was lodged.  A submission was made

that there was tampering with the record to screen the offence. 18

This aspect of the matter has not been considered either by the

trial Court or by the High Court.  In fact, the judgment of the trial

Court contains further details regarding this aspect of the matter

but without recording any conclusive finding.

 
39.     The   question   is   whether   this   court   would   be   justified   in

reversing   the   finding   of   acquittal   in   the   case   on   hand   on   the

grounds that (i) the framing of charges is egregiously erroneous

and not in accordance with the provisions of the CrPC; or (ii) the

courts below failed to record appropriate findings with respect to

the   various   offences   which   the   accused   are   said   to   have

committed; or (iii) the 1st appellate court’s reasoning in declining

to   reverse   a   finding   of   acquittal   recorded   by   the   trial   court   is




18 Impugned Judgment Para 6.
        “ … Finally, Mr. Shethna submitted that investigation in the instant case is also not free from doubt.
    According to him, the manner in which the FIR given by A-7, being the first in point of time, was treated
    and the manner in which the investigating officer expresses his ignorance in the hospital of the erasure
    made in the station diary etc. would go to show that a deliberate attempt is made to falsely involve the
    accused.”

                                                                                                           27
defective?  The answer to the question, in our opinion, should be

in the negative.


40.         In   Sessions   Case   No.58/98   against   A­16   and   A­17,   no

evidence   was   recorded   independently.   On   the   other   hand,   the

evidence recorded in Sessions Case No.118/1992 was marked as

evidence in Sessions Case No.58/1998. The Indian Evidence Act,

1872 does not permit such a mode of proof of any fact barring in

exceptional situations contemplated in Section 33 19 of the Indian

Evidence Act.


41.  There   is   no   material   on   record   to   warrant   the   procedure

adopted by the Sessions Court. On that single ground, the entire

trial   of   Sessions   Case   No.58/98   is   vitiated   and   is   not   in

accordance with procedures established by law. It is a different

matter   that   both   the   accused   put   to   trial   in   Sessions   Case

No.58/98 were acquitted by the Fast Track Court and the High



19   “33. Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceeding, the truth of facts therein stated. ––
Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person authorized by law to take it, is relevant for the
purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of
the facts which it states, when the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence, or is kept out of the
way by the adverse party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense which, under the
circumstances of the case, the Court considers unreasonable:
           Provided ––
           that the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives in interest; that the adverse party in
the first proceeding had the right and opportunity to cross-examine;
          that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the second proceeding.
         Explanation.–– A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between the prosecutor and the
accused within the meaning of this section.”


                                                                                                                             28
Court did not interfere with the conclusions recorded by the Fast

Track Court.


42.     It is the grievance of the appellant that in spite of the gravity

of the offence and the evidence of the 5 injured witnesses, most of

the accused went scot free without any punishment and, hence,

this appeal.


        We   do   understand   the   grievance   of   the   appellant.   The

following prophetic words of Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer 20  deserve

to be etched on the walls of every criminal court in this country:

        “6.   …   The   cherished   principles   or   golden   thread   of   proof
        beyond reasonable doubt which runs through the web of our
        law   should   not   be   stretched   morbidly   to   embrace   every
        hunch,   hesitancy   and   degree   of   doubt.   The   excessive
        solicitude   reflected   in   the   attitude   that   a   thousand   guilty
        men   may   go   but   one   innocent   martyr   shall   not   suffer   is   a
        false dilemma. Only reasonable doubts belong to the accused.
        Otherwise   any   practical   system   of   justice   will   then   break
        down   and   lose   credibility   with   the   community.   The   evil   of
        acquitting a guilty person light heartedly as a learned Author
        [   Glanville   Williams   in   ‘Proof   of   Guilt’.]   has   sapiently
        observed,   goes   much   beyond   the   simple   fact   that   just   one
        guilty person  has  gone  unpunished.  If  unmerited  acquittals
        become general, they tend to lead to a cynical disregard of
        the law, and this in turn leads to a public demand for harsher
        legal   presumptions   against   indicted   “persons”   and   more
        severe punishment of those who are found guilty. Thus, too
        frequent   acquittals   of   the   guilty   may   lead   to   a   ferocious
        penal  law,   eventually  eroding  the  judicial   protection  of  the
        guiltless. …”
                                                 [emphasis supplied]


20 In Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade & Anr. v. State of Maharashtra, (1973) 2 SCC 793, para 6

                                                                                         29
The   prophecy   came   true   when   Section   21   of   TADA   Act,   1987

burdened   the   accused   to   prove   his   innocence,   and   when   the

Parliament responded to the public outcry to impose more and

more harsher punishments to persons found guilty of the offence

of rape under Section 376 IPC etc.


43.  For   all   the   abovementioned   reasons,   we   should   have

recorded a conclusion that there is a failure of justice in the case

on hand looked at from the point of view of either the victims or

even from the point of view of the convicted accused.   The most

normal consequence thereafter should have been to order a fresh

trial, but such a course of action after a lapse of 26 years of the

occurrence   of   the   crime,   in   our   opinion,   would   not   serve   any

useful purpose because as already indicated some of the accused

have died in the interregnum. We are not sure of the availability

of the witnesses at this point of time. Even if all the witnesses are

available, how safe it would be to record their evidence after a

quarter century and place reliance on the same for coming to a

gist conclusion regarding the culpability of the accused?

 
44.   We   are   of   the   opinion   that   the   only   course   of   action

available to this court is that the victims of the crime in this case

                                                                             30
are   required   to   be   compensated   by   the   award   of   public   law

damages   in   light   of   the   principles   laid   down   by   this   Court   in

Nilabati Behera21.   In  the circumstances, we are of the opinion

that the families of each of the deceased should be paid by the

State  an  amount  of  Rs.  25,00,000/­ (Rupees Twenty  Five Lacs

Only) each and the injured witnesses, if still surviving, otherwise

their   families   are   required   to   be   paid   an   amount   of

Rs.10,00,000/­ (Rupees Ten Lacs Only) each. The said amount

shall be deposited within a period of eight weeks from today in

the Trial Court, and on such deposit the said amounts shall be

distributed   by   the   Sessions   Judge,   after   an   enquiry   and

satisfying himself regarding the genuineness of the entitlement of

the claimants. 

 
45.     This case, in our opinion, is a classic illustration of how the

State   failed   in   its   primary   constitutional   responsibility   of

maintaining   law   and   order   by   its   ineffectiveness   in   the

enforcement of criminal law.  In our opinion, the reasons for such

failure are many. Some of them are ­ (i) inefficiency arising out of

either incompetence or lack of proper training in the system of


21 Nilabati Behera (Smt) alias Lalita Behera (Through the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee) v. State of
Orissa & Others, (1993) 2 SCC 746.

                                                                                                     31
criminal investigation; (ii) corruption or political interference with

the   investigation   of   crime;   (iii)   less   than   the   desirable   levels   of

efficiency of the public prosecutors to correctly advise and guide

the investigating agencies contributing to the failure of the proper

enforcement of criminal law; and (iv) inadequate efficiency levels

of the bar and the members of the Judiciary (an offshoot of the

bar) which contributed to the overall decline in the efficiency in

the dispensation of criminal justice system.  


      Over   a   period   of   time   lot   of   irrelevant   and   unwarranted

considerations   have   crept   into   the   selection   and   appointment

process of Public Prosecutors all over the country.   If in a case

like the  one  on hand where three people were killed and more

than   five   people   were   injured,   if   charges   are   not   framed   in

accordance with the mandate of law, the blame must be squarely

taken by both the bar and the bench. Another distressing feature

of the record in this case is the humungous cross examination of

the witnesses by the defense which mostly is uncalled for.




                                                                                    32
46.   In view of the above, the appeals stand disposed of.




                                                    …..................................... J.
                                                    (J. CHELAMESWAR)




                                                   …..................................... J.
                                                    (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)

New Delhi
May 16, 2018.




                                                                                         33
                                                                REPORTABLE
               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1525 OF 2009

VINUBHAI RANCHHODBHAI PATEL                              APPELLANT(S)

                                  VERSUS


RAJIVBHAI DUDABHAI PATEL & ORS.                          RESPONDENT(S)

                               WITH

           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1526-1527 OF 2009

                             O R D E R

      In   view   of   the    situation    obtaining       on    the

record, we thought it fit to call for the assistance

of   Mr.S.Nagumuthu    and     Ms.Tarannum     Cheema,     learned

counsel to assist this Court.         We place on record the

invaluable   assistance       rendered    by   them   as   amicus

curiae.

      We also deem it appropriate to place on record

the appreciation for the effort put in by Mr.A.Selvin

Raja, learned counsel, a young member of the Bar,

appearing for the appellant.


                                  ........................J.
                                    [J.CHELAMESWAR]


                                  ........................J.
                                    [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]
NEW DELHI
MAY 16, 2018

