
Supreme Court of India
Uttam Chakraborty vs State Of Assam on 6 April, 2010Author: J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                                             [REPORTABLE]


                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 869 OF 2006


Uttam Chakraborty                                                        .....Appellant


                      Vs.


State of Assam                                                            ....Respondent 


                                   WITH


               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 871 OF 2006


                                O R D E R

1.       This judgment will dispose of Criminal Appeal Nos. 871 and 869 of 



2006.

2.       The facts are as under:

         The   appellants,   Mission   Suklabaidhya   and   Uttam   Chakraborty 



were friends.  Mission Suklabaidhya, who was a retired Army personnel, 



was married to Gita Das deceased.  The couple had a child Marjon PW-6 



who   was   about   4   or   5   years   old   when   the   incident   happened.     The 



deceased was also pregnant at that time and was carrying a foetus about 



8  months  old.     As  the  deceased  was  employed  as  a  school teacher,  the 



couple had engaged one Panchami Suklabaidya PW-1, aged 16 years, as 



a domestic help, and she resided in the house of the couple.  As per the 



prosecution   story,   Mission   Suklabaidhya   and   PW-1   developed   an   illicit 



relationship   and  when  this   was   discovered  by  the   deceased,   there   were 



frequent quarrels between the couple.   As per the prosecution story, on 


                             Crl. Appeal No.869 of 2006

                                              2


the   night   intervening   the   13th  and   14th  April   2004   at   about   2.00   a.m. 



Radhu   Paul   PW-4,   a   resident   of   Lala   Town,   accompanied   by   4   or   5 



persons   went   to   the   house   of   Nioti   Das   PW-1,   the   mother   of   the 



deceased,   situated   at   Abdullapur,   and   told   her   that   her   daughter   had 



fallen   ill   and   asked   her   to   accompany   them   to   the   Police   Station.     On 



reaching   the   Police   Station,   PW-1   found   Mission   Suklabaidhya   and 



Panchami   Suklabaidhya   present   there   and   learnt   from   them   that   her 



daughter had died of burn injuries.  She thereupon lodged a FIR at about 



2.30 a.m. to the effect that she had learnt from her son-in-law and PW-1 



that   her   daughter   had   died   in   a   fire   caused   by   kerosene   oil   but   she 



further went on to say that she had been killed by her husband.  During 



the   course   of   the   investigation,   it   transpired   that   accused   Uttam 



Chakraborty   had   also   present   when   the   deceased   had   been   done   to 



death.     The  statement  of  PW-1  was  also recorded  under  Section   164  of 



the   Cr.P.C.   in   which   she   stated   that   both   the   accused   had   been 



responsible   for   the   murder   as   the   deceased   was   objecting   to   her 



relationship with Mission Suklabaidhya accused.  

3.     On the completion of the investigation the appellants were brought 



to trial on a charge of murder.   The prosecution relied primarily  on the 



evidence   of   PW-6   Marjon   Suklabaidhya,   who   was   projected   as   an   eye 



witness   to   what   had   happened   on   the   fateful   day,   PW-1   Panchami 



Suklabaidya aforesaid, PW-2 the Executive Magistrate Manash Das, who 



held an inquest on the dead body and had noticed a huge cut injury on 


                              Crl. Appeal No.869 of 2006

                                              3


the person  of the  deceased,    Radhu Paul  PW-4  who  stated   that  he  had 



seen both the accused involved in an animated discussion in front of his 



shop  and   when   he   had   gone   close   to  them   they   had   changed   the   topic 



and had started discussing some business matter and that after a short 



while   a   girl   had   come   out   and   raised   a   hue   and   cry   and   told   Mission 



Suklabaidhya   that   his   wife   had   died   of   burn   injuries,   Nioti   Rani   PW-6, 



the mother of the deceased, who deposed to the illicit relationship of her 



son-in-law and PW-1, and PW-7 the doctor,  Khairuz Zaman Choudhary, 



who   had   carried   out   the   post-mortem   examination   and   had   found   very 



severe  cut  injuries  on the stomach  which indicated  that  the foetus  had 



been removed.  

4.     The trial court, on a consideration of the evidence, convicted both 



the accused for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC and 



while   Mission   Suklabaidhya   was   awarded   the   death   penalty,   Uttam 



Chakraborty was ordered to undergo imprisonment for life.   The matter 



was   thereafter   referred   to   the   High   Court   for   the   confirmation   of   the 



death   sentence   in   Criminal   Death   Reference   No.   4/2005   whereas 



Criminal Appeal No.212/2005 was filed by the accused.  The High Court, 



by the impugned judgment, confirmed the death reference and dismissed 



the   Criminal   Appeal.     While   confirming   reference,   the   Division   Bench 



considered  the  aggravating   and  mitigating  circumstances  and  held  that 



the aggravating circumstances far outweighed the mitigating ones.   Two 



appeals have been  filed in this Court, Criminal  Appeal No.871/2006 by 


                              Crl. Appeal No.869 of 2006

                                               4


Mission   Suklabaidhya   and   Criminal   Appeal   No.   869/2006   by   Uttam 



Chakraborty.

5.      We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the   parties   and   gone 



through   the   record   very   carefully.   It   is   true   that   the   primary   evidence 



would   have   been   that   of   PW-1   Panchami   Suklabaidya,   a   girl   15   or   16 



years   of   age,   and   admittedly   a   domestic   help   of   Mission   Suklabaidhya 



and the deceased.    In her statement recorded  under Section 164 of the 



Cr.P.C. she supported the prosecution story but while giving evidence as 



PW-1 she resiled therefrom and gave a complete go by to what she had 



said   earlier.     In   the   light   of   the   fact   that   a   statement   recorded   under 



Section 164 of the Cr.P.C. is not substantive evidence we have to go to 



the other evidence produced in Court by the prosecution.  Both the trial 



court   and   the   High   Court   have   noticed   that   the   only   other   evidence 



against the appellants was the statement of PW-6, a child 4 or 5 years of 



age.    PW-6 did support the prosecution  and it is primarily  his evidence 



that has led to the conviction of the appellants.   The courts below have 



also   found   corroboration   for   the   motive   in   the   statement   of   PW-5   Nioti 



Rani   Das,   the   mother   of   the   deceased,   and   the   very   material 



circumstance   that   the   murder   had   been   committed   in   the   matrimonial 



house   of   the   couple.           We   are,   however,   of   the   opinion   that 



notwithstanding the fact that PW-6 is a witness whose credibility has not 



been   doubted,   it   would   perhaps   be   imprudent   to   award   a   capital 



sentence on the statement of a child witness as observed in  Suresh vs. 


                              Crl. Appeal No.869 of 2006

                                               5


State  of  U.P.  (1981)  2  SCC  569.    While   rendering   its  decision,   this   is 


what the Court had to say: 

                      "Children,   in   the   first   place,   mix   up   what 

      they see with what they like to imagine to have seen and 

      besides,   a   little   tutoring   is   inevitable   in   their   case   in 

      order   to   lend   coherence   and   consistency   to   their 

      disjointed   thoughts   which   tend   to   stray.     The   extreme 

      sentence cannot seek its main support from evidence of 

      this  kind  which, even if true, is not safe enough to act 

      upon for putting out a life."


6.      This judgment was followed later in  Raja Ram Yadav & Ors.   vs. 


State   of   Bihar   (1996)   9   SCC   287    wherein   similar   observations   have 


been made.  We are, therefore, of the opinion that though the conviction 



of Mission Suklabaidhya needs to be maintained, and his crime was truly 



horrendous,   the   death   sentence   awarded   should   be   commuted   to   life 



imprisonment.   We make an order in the above terms.   Criminal Appeal 



No. 871 of 2006 is disposed of accordingly.  

7.      We now take up the case of the appellant Uttam Chakraborty.  We 



find   absolutely   no   evidence   to   connect   him   with   the   murder.     PW-4 



Radhu   Paul   did   state   that   at   about   10/10.30   p.m.   on   the   night   of   the 



occurrence,   he   had   seen   the   two   accused   discussing   something   with 



each other and while they were doing so, a girl ( that is PW-1) had come 



out shouting and had told Mission Suklabaidhya that his wife had died 



of burn injuries.  We are unable to see how this evidence can connect the 



appellant  with the murder.    PW-5, the mother of the deceased, has  not 



said a word about his involvement in the incident except that he was a 


                              Crl. Appeal No.869 of 2006

                                               6


neighbour   of   PW-1.     PW-6   did   identify   the   appellant   in   Court   but   he 



apparently   mistook   him   for   Radhu   Paul   PW-4,   as   is   clear   from   his 



statement.     In   this   view   of   the   matter,   we   find   that   the   conviction   of 



Uttam   Chakraborty,   appellant   cannot   be   sustained.     We   accordingly 



allow   Criminal   Appeal   No.   869   of   2006,   set   aside   his   conviction   and 



sentence   and   direct   that   he   be   set   free   forthwith,   if   not   wanted   in   any 



other case.

                                                                 ...............................J.

                                                                 (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)





                                                              .........................................

                                                         J.

                                                    (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)

                                                                                      




APRIL  6, 2010

NEW DELHI.

