
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Shriram . on 5 September, 2018              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1177/2012



STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                        …. Appellant(s)

                             VERSUS

SHRIRAM & ANR.                                 ….   Respondent(s)



                            ORDER

1.   This criminal appeal is preferred by the State against the

impugned order dated 05.11.2009 passed by the High Court of

Madhya Pradesh, Bench at Jabalpur in Criminal Appeal No. 3187 of

1999, wherein, the High Court set aside the order of conviction &

sentence passed by the Trial Court against the respondents herein.


2.   The factual matrix as advanced by the prosecution, necessary

for the disposal of this case is that, one Sarita Bai was married to

respondent no. 1 on 23.04.1998. Ever since her marriage, she was

alleged to have been tortured and ill treated by her in-laws,

including her husband i.e. respondent no. 1 and mother-in-law i.e.

respondent no. 3.

                                 1
3.   On   14.07.1998,   Sarita   Bai   (hereinafter   referred   to   as

‘deceased’) committed suicide at her in-laws’ (respondents) place by

consuming poison. Thereafter, investigation was conducted by the

police and respondents were charged under Sec. 498-A/34,

304-B/34 of IPC and alternatively under Sec. 306/34 of IPC. Trial

Court after examining the witnesses and evidence available on

record, found the respondents guilty for committing offence under

Sec. 498-A/34 and Sec. 306/34 of IPC. Therefore, vide order dated

22.11.1999, respondents were convicted and sentenced to undergo

rigorous imprisonment of 3 years for offence committed under Sec.

498-A/34 and rigorous imprisonment of 5 years for offence

committed under Sec. 306/34 of IPC. The sentences were ordered

to run concurrently.

4.   Thereafter, respondents filed a criminal appeal in the High

Court against the order passed by Trial Court. By the judgment

impugned herein, the High Court observed that the Trial Court

proceeded on assumptions against the respondents, without giving

them any opportunity under Sec. 313 of Cr.P.C to defend

themselves. High Court ruled that there was no cogent or positive

evidence on record to prove that the respondents subjected the

deceased to mental or physical cruelty or harassment, so as to force
                                 2
her to commit suicide. Thus, presumption under Sec. 113-A of

Indian Evidence Act could not be drawn against the respondents.

Therefore, High Court vide order dated 05.11.2009, acquitted the

respondents from all charges and set aside the order of conviction

and sentence passed by the Trial Court.

5.   Heard learned counsel for both the parties and perused the

evidence available on record.

6.   After examining the depositions of PW-2 & PW-3, it becomes

amply clear that they have tried to make improvements in their

evidence which suffer from several contradictions. PW-2 made

improvements regarding demand of five thousand rupees in lieu of

the vehicle and allegations pertaining to pressurizing the deceased

by respondents, to come at the matrimonial home along-with the

new & bigger vehicle like rajdoot and not otherwise. The evidence of

PW-2 is contrary to his own statement given to the police (Ex. D-1).

Further, PW-3 admitted in his cross examination at Para-7 of his

deposition that he disclosed it for the first time before the Court

that the Respondents used to ask for a bigger vehicle and addressed

the deceased as ‘kali kaluti’ etc. Therefore, allegations made by

PW-2 & PW-3 against the respondents regarding ill-treatment or

harassment of the deceased for vehicle and other things, cannot be
                                 3
accepted as correct and true, beyond any doubt. It is to be noted,

that these allegations were made for the first time by PW-2 & PW-3,

before the Court and not earlier to the police in the merg intimation

report (Ex. P-3) or in any other report.

7.   Further, It is to be noted that there is no evidence to prove

that the deceased was subjected to physical torture or beating by

the respondents. There is no evidence on record to show that the

deceased made any complaint to her parents (PW-2) or brother

(PW-3) about any physical assault or torture caused by the

Respondents. Further, no physical injury was found by PW-5 (Dr.

Azad Kumar Saravagi) in the postmortem examination of the

deceased.

8.   Lastly, it is to be observed that the deceased committed

suicide by consuming poison at her in-laws place/matrimonial

home, would not itself lead to the presumption that deceased was

subjected to physical-mental cruelty, so as to force her to commit

suicide. Herein, prima facie burden lies on the prosecution to prove

the guilt of the accused/respondents beyond all reasonable doubts.

However, there is no cogent or positive evidence on record to prove

that the respondents subjected the deceased to any such mental or

physical cruelty, so as to force her to commit suicide. Thus,
                                   4
presumption under Sec. 113-A of the Indian Evidence Act cannot be

drawn against the respondents in this case.

9.   In the light of above-stated findings and reasons, the case is

devoid of merits. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.




                                                ….……………………J
                                                   (N.V. RAMANA)



                                           ..….……………………J
                                 (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)


NEW DELHI,
5th SEPTEMBER, 2018.


                                  5

