
Supreme Court of India
Nupur Talwar vs Cbi & Anr on 7 June, 2012Author: …………………………….J.
Bench: A.K. Patnaik, Jagdish Singh Khehar
                                                                           “REPORTABLE”

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    REVIEW PETITION (CRL.) NO. 85 OF 2012

                                     IN

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 68 OF 2012


Nupur Talwar                                       …. Petitioner

                                   Versus

Central Bureau of Investigation & Anr.             …. Respondents


                                  O R D E R

1.    The instant controversy emerges out of a double murder,  committed  on
the night intervening 15-16.5.2008.  On having found  the  body  of  Aarushi
Talwar in her bedroom in house no. L-32, Jalvayu Vihar,  Sector  25,  Noida,
her father Dr. Rajesh Talwar got a first information  report  registered  at
Police Station Sector 20, Noida, on 16.5.2008.   In  the  first  information
report Dr. Rajesh Talwar pointed  the  needle  of  suspicion  at  Hemraj,  a
domestic help in the household of the Talwars.  On 17.5.2008 the  dead  body
of Hemraj was recovered from the terrace of the same house, i.e., house  no.
L-32, Jalvayu Vihar, Sector 25,  Noida,  where  Aarushi’s  murder  had  also
allegedly been committed.
2.    The initial investigation into the double murder was  carried  out  by
the U.P. Police.  On 29.5.2008 the State of Uttar Pradesh  handed  over  the
investigation to the Central Bureau of Investigation  (hereinafter  referred
to as, the CBI), thereupon investigation was conducted by the CBI.
3.    During the course of investigation, besides  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar,  the
needle of suspicion came to be pointed towards  Krishna  Thadarai,  Rajkumar
and Vijay Mandal.  Dr. Rajesh Talwar was arrested on 23.5.2008.   Originally
a three days’ remand was granted to interrogate  him  to  the  U.P.  Police.
Dr. Rajesh Talwar remained in police  and  judicial  custody  from  time  to
time, wherefrom, he was eventually  released  on  bail  on  11.7.2008.   The
other three  individuals,  namely,  Krishna  Thadarai,  Rajkumar  and  Vijay
Mandal were also arrested by the police.  Since  investigation  against  the
aforesaid three could not be completed within the period of  90  days,  they
were ordered to be released on bail.
4.    Having investigated into the  matter  for  a  considerable  length  of
time, the CBI  submitted  a  closure  report  on  29.12.2010.   The  reasons
depicted in the closure report indicated the absence of sufficient  evidence
to prove the alleged offences against the accused Dr. Rajesh Talwar,  beyond
reasonable doubt.  A summary of the reasons  recorded  in  the  said  report
itself, are being extracted hereunder:
      “Despite best  efforts  by  investigating  team,  some  of  the  major
      shortcomings in the evidence are :-

      i.    No blood of Hemraj was found on the  bed  sheet  and  pillow  of
           Aarushi.  There is no evidence to prove that Hemraj  was  killed
           in the room of Aarushi.

      ii.   Dragging mark on steps only indicate that murder has taken place
           somewhere other than the terrace.

      iii.  On the clothes of Dr. Rajesh Talwar, only the blood  of  Aarushi
           was found but there was no trace of blood of Hemraj.

      iv.   The clothes that Dr. Nupur Talwar was wearing in the  photograph
           taken by Aarushi in the night of the incident were seized by CBI
           but no blood was found during forensic examination.

      v.    Murder weapons were not recovered immediately after the offence.
            One of the murder weapon i.e. sharp edged instrument could  not
           be recovered till date and expert could not find any blood stain
           or DNA of victims from golf stick to directly  link  it  to  the
           crime.

      vi.   There is no evidence to explain the finger prints on the  scotch
           bottle (which were found along with blood  stains  of  both  the
           victims on the bottle).  As per police diary, it was taken  into
           possession on 16th morning itself.  In spite  of  best  efforts,
           the fingerprint(s) could not be identified.

      vii.  The guards of the colony are mobile  during  night  and  at  the
           entrance  they  do  not  make  any  entry.    Therefore,   their
           statements regarding movement of persons may not be foolproof.
      viii. Scientific tests on Dr. Rajesh Talwar and Dr. Nupur Talwar  have
           not conclusively indicated their involvement in the crime.

      ix.   The exact sequence of events between (in the  intervening  night
           of 15-16/05/2008) 00.08 mid night to 6:00 AM in the  morning  is
           not clear.  No evidence has emerged to show the  clear  role  of
           Dr. Rajesh Talwar and Dr. Nupur  Talwar,  individually,  in  the
           commission of crime.

      x.    A board of experts constituted during earlier investigation team
           has given an opinion that the possibility of the neck being  cut
           by khukri  cannot  be  ruled  out,  although  doctors  who  have
           conducted postmortem have said that cut was done  by  surgically
           trained person with a small surgical instrument.

      xi.   There is no evidence to explain the presence of Hemraj’s  mobile
           in Punjab after murder.

      xii.  The offence has occurred  in  an  enclosed  flat  hence  no  eye
           witness are available.

      xiii. The blood soaked clothes of the offenders, clothes used to clean
           the blood from the flat and stair case, the sheet on  which  the
           Hemraj was carried and dragged on the roof, the bed cover  which
           was used to cover the view from the steel iron grill on the roof
           are not available and hence could not be recovered.

      26.   The investigation revealed several  suspicious  actions  by  the
      parents post occurrence, but  the  circumstantial  evidence  collected
      during investigation has critical  and  substantial  gaps.   There  is
      absence of a clear cut motive  and  incomplete  understanding  of  the
      sequence of events and non-recovery of the weapon of offence and their
      link to either the servants or the parents.

           In view of the aforesaid shortcomings in  the  evidence,  it  is
      felt that sufficient evidence is not available to prove the offence(s)
      U/s 302/201 IPC against accused Dr. Rajesh  Talwar  beyond  reasonable
      doubt.  It is, therefore, prayed that the case may be  allowed  to  be
      closed due to insufficient evidence.”


5.    On the receipt of  the  closure  report  submitted  by  the  CBI,  the
Special Judicial Magistrate (CBI), Ghaziabad  (hereinafter  referred  to  as
“the Magistrate”) issued notice to the Dr. Rajesh Talwar in his capacity  as
the first informant.  In response to  the  notice  received  by  Dr.  Rajesh
Talwar, he submitted a detailed protest petition dated  25.1.2011,  wherein,
he objected to the closure report (submitted by the CBI).   In  the  protest
petition he prayed for further investigation, to  unravel  the  identity  of
those responsible for the twin murders of Aarushi Talwar and Hemraj.
6.    On 9.2.2011, the Magistrate rejected the closure report  submitted  by
the CBI.  The Magistrate also rejected,  the  prayer  made  in  the  protest
petition for further investigation (by Dr. Rajesh Talwar).  Instead,  having
taken cognizance, the Magistrate  summoned  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  (father  of
Aarushi Talwar) and his wife Dr. Nupur Talwar  (mother  of  Aarushi  Talwar)
for committing the murders of  Aarushi  Talwar  and  Hemraj,  as  also,  for
tampering with the evidence.
7.    The aforestated summoning order dated 9.2.2011, was  assailed  by  Dr.
Nupur Talwar by  filing  a  revision  petition  before  the  High  Court  of
judicature at Allahabad (Criminal Revision Petition no. 1127 of 2011).   The
aforesaid Criminal Revision Petition came to be dismissed by the High  Court
vide an order dated 18.3.2011.  Dissatisfied with the order  passed  by  the
High Court dated 18.3.2011,  Dr.  Nupur  Talwar  approached  this  Court  by
filing Special Leave Petition (Criminal) no. 2982  of  2011  (renumbered  as
Criminal Appeal  no.  16  of  2011).   The  aforesaid  Criminal  Appeal  was
dismissed by this Court by an order dated  6.1.2012.   Through  the  instant
review petition, the petitioner Dr. Nupur Talwar has expressed  the  desire,
that this Court  reviews  its  order  dated  6.1.2012  (dismissing  Criminal
Appeal no. 16 of 2011).  The instant Review Petition  was  entertained,  and
notice was issued to the respondents.  Lengthy arguments  were  advanced  at
the hands  of  the  learned  counsel  representing  the  review  petitioner.
Learned counsel  representing  the  CBI  also  went  to  great  lengths,  to
repudiate the same.  It emerged from the submissions advanced at  the  hands
of the rival parties, that the focus of attack was against the order  passed
by the Magistrate dated 9.2.2011.
8.    The order  passed  by  the  Magistrate  on  9.2.2011  was  startlingly
criticized for being unnecessarily exhaustive.  The Magistrate  was  accused
of discussing the  evidence  in  minute  detail,  and  thereby,  for  having
evaluated the merits of the controversy, well before the  beginning  of  the
trial.  It was sought to be canvassed, that even if  the  Magistrate  having
taken cognizance, was satisfied that  process  deserved  to  be  issued,  he
ought not have examined the factual intricacies  of  the  controversy.   The
Magistrate,  it  was  submitted,  has  the  authority  only  to  commit  the
controversy in hand,  to  a  Court  of  Session,  as  the  alleged  offences
emerging out of the  first  information  report  dated  16.5.2008,  and  the
discovery of the murder of Hemraj thereafter, are triable only  by  a  Court
of Session.  It was submitted, that the controversy  had  been  examined  as
if, the Magistrate was conducting  the  trial.   It  was  asserted,  that  a
perusal of the order passed by the  Magistrate  dated  9.2.2011,  gives  the
impression of the passing of a final order, on  the  culmination  of  trial.
It was, therefore, submitted, that the order dated 9.2.2011  be  set  aside,
as all the inferences, assumptions and conclusions  recorded  therein,  were
totally uncalled for.
9.    Undoubtedly, merely for taking cognizance and/or for issuing  process,
reasons may not be recorded.   In  Kanti  Bhadra  Shah  vs.  State  of  West
Bengal, (2000) 1 SCC 722, this Court having examined sections 227,  239  and
245 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, concluded,  that  the  provisions  of
the Code mandate, that at the time of  passing  an  order  of  discharge  in
favour of an accused, the provisions referred to above  necessitate  reasons
to  be  recorded.   It  was,  however,  noticed,  that  there  was  no  such
prescribed mandate to  record  reasons,  at  the  time  of  framing  charges
against an accused.  In U.P. Pollution Control Board vs. M/s. Mohan  Meakins
Ltd. and others, (2000) 3 SCC 745, the issue whether it  was  necessary  for
the trial court to record reasons while issuing process came to be  examined
again, and this Court held as under:-
      “2.   Though the trial court issued process against the accused at the
           first instance, they desired the trial court to  discharge  them
           without even making their first appearance in  the  court.  When
           the  attempt  made  for  that  purpose  failed  they  moved  for
           exemption from appearance in the court.  In  the  meanwhile  the
           Sessions Judge, Lucknow  (Shri  Prahlad  Narain)  entertained  a
           revision moved by the accused against the order issuing  process
           to them and,  quashed  it  on  the  erroneous  ground  that  the
           magistrate did not pass "a  speaking  order"  for  issuing  such
           summons.
      3.    The Chief Judicial Magistrate, (before whom  the  complaint  was
           filed) thereafter passed a detailed order on 25.4.1984 and again
           issued process to the accused. That order was  again  challenged
           by the accused in revision before the  Sessions  Court  and  the
           same Sessions Judge (Shri Prahlad Narain) again  quashed  it  by
           order dated 25.6.1984.
      5.    We may point out at the very outset that the Sessions Judge  was
           in error for quashing the process at the first round  merely  on
           the ground that the Chief Judicial Magistrate had not  passed  a
           speaking order. In fact it was  contended  before  the  Sessions
           judge,  on  behalf  of  the  Board,  that  there  is  no   legal
           requirement in Section 204 of the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure
           (For short the 'Code') to record reasons  for  issuing  process.
           But the said contention was spurned down in the following words:
                 My attention has been drawn to Section 204 of the  Code  of
                 Criminal Procedure and it has been argued that  no  reasons
                 for summoning an accused person need be given. I feel  that
                 under Section 204 aforesaid, a Magistrate has  to  form  an
                 opinion that there was  sufficient  ground  for  proceeding
                 and, if an opinion had to be formed  judicially,  the  only
                 mode of doing so is to find out express reasons for  coming
                 to the conclusions. In  the  impugned  order,  the  learned
                 Magistrate has neither specified any  reasons  nor  has  he
                 even  formed  an  opinion  much  less  about  there   being
                 sufficient ground for not proceeding with the case.
      6.    In a recent decision of the Supreme Court it  has  been  pointed
           out that the legislature has stressed the need to record reasons
           in certain situations such as dismissal of a  complaint  without
           issuing process. There is no such legal requirement imposed on a
           Magistrate for passing detailed order while issuing summons vide
           Kanti Bhadra Shah v. State  of  W.B.,  (2000)  1  SCC  722.  The
           following passage will be apposite in this context:
                 “12.  If there is no legal requirement that the trial court
                 should write an order showing the  reasons  for  framing  a
                 charge, why should the already  burdened  trial  courts  be
                 further burdened with such an  extra  work.  The  time  has
                 reached to adopt all  possible  measures  to  expedite  the
                 court procedures and to chalk out  measures  to  avert  all
                 roadblocks causing avoidable delays. If a Magistrate is  to
                 write detailed orders at different  stages  merely  because
                 the counsel would address  arguments  at  all  stages,  the
                 snail-paced progress of proceedings in trial  courts  would
                 further be slowed down. We are coming across  interlocutory
                 orders of Magistrates  and  Sessions  Judges  running  into
                 several pages. We can appreciate if such a  detailed  order
                 has been passed  for  culminating  the  proceedings  before
                 them. But it is quite unnecessary to write detailed  orders
                 at other stages, such as  issuing  process,  remanding  the
                 accused to custody, framing of  charges,  passing  over  to
                 next stages in the trial.”
      12.   In the above context what is to be looked at during the stage of
           issuing  process  is  whether  there  are  allegations  in   the
           complaint by which the Managers or Directors of the company  can
           also be proceeded against, when the company  is  alleged  to  be
           guilty of the offence. Paragraph 12 of the complaint read thus:
                 “That   the   accused   persons   from   2   to   11    are
                 Directors/Managers/Partners   of   M/s.    Mohan    Meakins
                 Distillery,  Daliganj,  Lucknow,  as  mentioned   in   this
                 complaint are responsible for constructing the proper works
                 and plant for the treatment of their highly polluting trade
                 effluent so as to conform the standard  laid  down  by  the
                 Board. Aforesaid accused persons are deliberately  avoiding
                 to abide by the provisions of Sections 24  and  26  of  the
                 aforesaid  Act  which  are  punishable  respectively  under
                 Sections 43 and 44 of the aforesaid Act, for which not only
                 the company but its Directors, Managers, Secretary and  all
                 other  responsible  officers  of   the   accused   company,
                 responsible for the conduct of its business are also liable
                 in accordance with the provision of the Section 47  of  the
                 Act.”

                 The appellant has further stated in  paragraph  23  of  the
           complaint that "the Chairman, Managing Directors  and  Directors
           of the company are the  persons  responsible  for  the  act  and
           therefore, they are liable to be proceeded against according  to
           the law."
                                                          (emphasis is mine)

Whether an order passed by a Magistrate issuing process required reasons  to
be recorded, came  to  be  examined  by  this  Court  again,  in  Dy.  Chief
Controller of Imports and Exports vs. Roshanlal Agarwal  &  Ors.,  (2003)  4
SCC 139, wherein this Court concluded as below:-
      “9.   In determining the question whether any process is to be  issued
           or not, what the Magistrate has to be satisfied is whether there
           is sufficient ground for proceeding and  not  whether  there  is
           sufficient  ground  for  conviction.  Whether  the  evidence  is
           adequate for supporting the conviction, can be  determined  only
           at the trial and not at the stage of inquiry. At  the  stage  of
           issuing the process  to  the  accused,  the  Magistrate  is  not
           required  to  record  reasons.  This  question  was   considered
           recently in U.P. Pollution Control Board v. M/s.  Mohan  Meakins
           Ltd. & Ors., (2000) 3 SCC 745, and after noticing the  law  laid
           down in Kanti Bhadra Shah v. State of West Bengal, (2000) 1  SCC
           722, it was held as follows:

                 "The legislature has stressed the need to record reasons in
                 certain situations such as dismissal of a complaint without
                 issuing process. There is no such legal requirement imposed
                 on a Magistrate for passing detailed  order  while  issuing
                 summons. The process issued to accused  cannot  be  quashed
                 merely on the ground that the Magistrate had not  passed  a
                 speaking order."
                                                          (emphasis is mine)

Recently, in Bhushan Kumar and another vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and  another
(Criminal Appeal no. 612 of 2012, decided on 4.4.2012)  the  issue  in  hand
was again considered.  The observations of this Court recorded therein,  are
being placed below:-
      “9.   A summon is a process issued by a Court calling upon a person to
           appear before a Magistrate.  It  is  used  for  the  purpose  of
           notifying an individual of his legal obligation to appear before
           the Magistrate as a response  to  violation  of  law.  In  other
           words, the summons will announce to the person  to  whom  it  is
           directed that a legal proceeding has been started  against  that
           person and the date and time on which the person must appear  in
           Court. A person who is  summoned  is  legally  bound  to  appear
           before  the  Court  on  the  given  date   and   time.   Willful
           disobedience is liable to be punished Under Section  174  Indian
           Penal Code. It is a ground for contempt of Court.
      10.   Section 204 of the Code  does  not  mandate  the  Magistrate  to
           explicitly state the reasons for issuance of summons. It clearly
           states that if in the opinion of a Magistrate taking  cognizance
           of an offence, there is sufficient ground for  proceeding,  then
           the summons may be issued. This section mandates the  Magistrate
           to form an opinion as  to  whether  there  exists  a  sufficient
           ground for summons to be issued but it is nowhere  mentioned  in
           the  section  that  the  explicit  narration  of  the  same   is
           mandatory, meaning thereby that it is not  a  pre-requisite  for
           deciding the validity of the summons issued.
      11.   Time and again it  has  been  stated  by  this  Court  that  the
           summoning order Under  Section  204  of  the  Code  requires  no
           explicit reasons to be stated because it is imperative that  the
           Magistrate must have taken notice of the accusations and applied
           his mind to the allegations made in the police  report  and  the
           materials filed therewith.”
                                                          (emphasis is mine)

It is therefore apparent, that an order issuing process, cannot be  vitiated
merely because of absence of reasons.
10.   The matter can be examined from  another  perspective.   The  Code  of
Criminal Procedure expressly delineates irregularities  in  procedure  which
would vitiate proceedings.  Section 461 thereof, lists irregularities  which
would lead to annulment of proceedings.   Section  461  aforesaid  is  being
extracted hereunder:-
            “461.      Irregularities which vitiate proceedings-

           If any Magistrate, not being empowered by law  in  this  behalf,
           does any of the following things, namely:-

            (a)  attaches and sells property under section 83;
           (b)   issues a search-warrant for a document,  parcel  or  other
                 thing in the custody of a postal or telegraph authority;
            (c)  demands security to keep the peace;
            (d)  demands security for good behaviour;
           (e)    discharges  a  person  lawfully  bound  to  be  of   good
                 behaviour;
           (f)   cancels a bond to keep the peace;
           (g)   makes an order for maintenance;
           (h)   makes an order under section 133 as to a local nuisance;
           (i)    prohibits,  under  section   143,   the   repetition   or
                 continuance of a public nuisance;
           (j)   makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter X;
           (k)   takes cognizance of an offence under clause  (c)  of  sub-
                 section (1) of section 190;
           (l)   tries an offender;
           (m)   tries an offender summarily;
           (n)   passes a  sentence,  under  section  325,  on  proceedings
                 recorded by another Magistrate;
           (o)   decides an appeal;
           (p)   calls, under section 397, for proceedings; or
           (q)   revises an order passed under section 446,

           his proceedings shall be void.”

In the list of irregularities indicated  in  Section  461  of  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, orders passed under Section 204 thereof, do not  find  a
mention.  In a situation, as the one in hand, Section 465(1) of the Code  of
Criminal   Procedure,   protects   orders   from   errors    omissions    or
irregularities, unless “a failure of justice” has been  occasioned  thereby.
Most certainly, an order  delineating  reasons  cannot  be  faulted  on  the
ground that it has occasioned failure of justice.  Therefore,  even  without
examining the matter any further, it would have been sufficient to  conclude
the issue.  The  present  situation,  however,  requires  a  little  further
elaboration.  Keeping in mind the peculiarity of the present matter and  the
special circumstances arising in this case, some  observations  need  to  be
recorded.  Accordingly, to determine whether  reasons  ought  to  have  been
recorded by the Magistrate, in  this  case,  is  being  dealt  with  in  the
succeeding paragraphs.
11.   On the basis of the  foundational  facts  already  recorded  above,  I
shall examine the merits of the first submission advanced before the  Court.
 First and foremost it needs to be remembered, that the CBI had submitted  a
closure report on  29.12.2010.   The  Magistrate  could  have  accepted  the
report and dropped proceedings.   The  Magistrate,  however,  chose  not  to
accept the CBI’s prayer for closure.  Alternatively,  the  Magistrate  could
have disagreed with the report, by taking a view (as she  has  done  in  the
present case) that there were sufficient  grounds  for  proceeding  further,
and thereby, having taken cognizance, could  have  issued  process  (as  has
been done  vide  order  dated  9.2.2011).   A  third  alternative  was  also
available to the Magistrate.  The Magistrate could have directed the  police
to carry out further investigation.  As noticed hereinabove, the  Magistrate
inspite of the submission of a closure report,  indicating  the  absence  of
sufficient evidence, having taken cognizance, chose to  issue  process,  and
thereby, declined the third alternative as well.  Since the CBI  wanted  the
matter to be closed, it  was  appropriate  though  not  imperative  for  the
Magistrate to record reasons, for differing with  the  prayer  made  in  the
closure report.  After all, the CBI would have surely wished  to  know,  how
it went wrong.  But then, there are two  other  important  factors  in  this
case, which further necessitated the recording  of  reasons.   Firstly,  the
complainant himself (Dr. Rajesh Talwar, who authored the  first  information
report dated 16.5.2008) was being summoned as an accused.   Such  an  action
suggests, that the complainant was really the accused.  The action taken  by
the Magistrate, actually reversed the  position  of  the  adversaries.   The
party which was originally pointing the finger, is now sought to be  pointed
at.  Certainly, the complainant would  want  to  know  why.   Secondly,  the
complainant  (Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar)  had  filed  a  protest  petition   dated
25.1.2011, praying for a direction  to  the  police  to  carry  out  further
investigation.  This implies that the CBI  had  not  been  able  to  procure
sufficient evidence on the basis whereof, guilt of the perpetrators  of  the
twin murders of Aarushi Talwar and Hemraj  could  be  established.   Whilst,
the rival parties were  pleading  insufficient  evidence,  the  Magistrate’s
order  dated  9.2.2011  issuing  process,  implies   the   availability   of
sufficient material to proceed against the accused.  This second  aspect  in
the present controversy, also needed to be explained,  lest  the  Magistrate
who had chosen to issue process against all odds, would have been blamed  of
having taken the decision whimsically and/or arbitrarily.  Before  rejecting
the prayer made in the closure report, as  also,  the  prayer  made  in  the
protest  petition,  it  was  appropriate  though  not  imperative  for   the
Magistrate to narrate, why she had taken a decision different from  the  one
sought.  Besides the aforesaid, there is yet another  far  more  significant
reason for recording reasons in the present matter.  The incident  involving
the twin murders of Aarushi Talwar and Hemraj are  triable  by  a  Court  of
Session.  The authority of the Magistrate was limited to  taking  cognizance
and issuing process.  A Magistrate in such a situation, on being  satisfied,
has the authority to merely  commit  the  case  for  trial  to  a  Court  of
Session, under Section 209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.   Section  209
is being extracted hereunder:
           “Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is  triable
           exclusively by it – When in a case instituted on a police report
           or otherwise, the accused  appears  or  is  brought  before  the
           Magistrate and it appears to the Magistrate that the offence  is
           triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall –
           (a)   commit, after complying with the provisions of section 207
                 or section 208, as the case may be, the case to  the  Court
                 of Session, and subject to  the  provisions  of  this  Code
                 relating to bail, remand the accused to custody until  such
                 commitment has been made;
           (b)   subject to the provisions of this Code relating  to  bail,
                 remand  the  accused  to  custody  during,  and  until  the
                 conclusion of, the trial;
           (c)   send to  that  Court  the  record  of  the  case  and  the
                 documents and articles, if any, which are to be produced in
                 evidence;
           (d)   notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the case
                 to the Court of Session.”


In this background, it was essential for the Magistrate  to  highlight,  for
the perusal of the Court of Session, reasons which had weighed with her,  in
not accepting the closure report submitted by the  CBI,  as  also,  for  not
acceding  to  the  prayer  made  in  the  protest  petition,   for   further
investigation.   It  was  also  necessary  to  narrate  what  prompted   the
Magistrate to summon  the  complainant  as  an  accused.   For,  it  is  not
necessary that the Court of Session would have viewed the  matter  from  the
same perspective as the Magistrate.  Obviously, the Court of  Session  would
in the first instance, discharge the responsibility of  determining  whether
charges have to  be  framed  or  not.   Merely  because  reasons  have  been
recorded, the Court of Session will have an opportunity to view the  matter,
in the manner of understanding of the Magistrate.  If reasons had  not  been
recorded,  the  Court  of  Session  may  have  overlooked,  what  had   been
evaluated, ascertained and comprehended by the  Magistrate.   Of  course,  a
Court of Session, on being seized of a matter  after  committal,  being  the
competent court, as also,  a  court  superior  to  the  Magistrate,  has  to
examine all issues independently, within the four corners  of  law,  without
being influenced by the reasons recorded in the order issuing  process.   In
the  circumstances  mentioned  hereinabove,  it  was   befitting   for   the
Magistrate to pass a well reasoned order, explaining why she  was  taking  a
view different from the one prayed for in the closure report.   It  is  also
expedient for the Magistrate to record reasons why the request made  by  the
complainant (Dr. Rajesh  Talwar)  praying  for  further  investigation,  was
being declined.  Even the fact, that the  complainant  (Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar)
was being summoned as an accused, necessitated  recording  of  reasons.   An
order passed in the circumstances noted hereinabove, without  outlining  the
basis therefor, would have been  injudicious.   Certainly  the  Magistrate’s
painstaking effort needs a  special  commendation.   At  this  juncture,  it
would be apposite to notice the  observations  recorded  by  this  Court  in
Rupan Deol Bajaj and another vs. KPS Gill and another,  (1995)  6  SCC  194,
wherein this Court remarked as under:-
      “28.  Since at the time of taking cognizance the Court has to exercise
           its judicial discretion it necessarily  follows  that  if  in  a
           given case - as the present one - the complainant, as the person
           aggrieved raises objections to the acceptance of a police report
           which recommends discharge of the accused and seeks  to  satisfy
           the Court that a case for taking cognizance was  made  out,  but
           the Court overrules such objections, it is  just  and  desirable
           that the  reasons  therefore  be  recorded.  Necessity  to  give
           reasons which disclose proper appreciation of the issues  before
           the Court needs  no  emphasis.  Reasons  introduce  clarity  and
           minimize chances of arbitrariness. That necessarily  means  that
           recording of reasons  will  not  be  necessary  when  the  Court
           accepts  such  police  report  without  any   demur   from   the
           complainant. As the order  of  the  learned  Magistrate  in  the
           instant case does not contain any reason whatsoever, even though
           it was passed after hearing the objections of  the  complainant,
           it has got to be set aside  and  we  do  hereby  set  it  aside.
           Consequent thereupon, two courses are left open to us; to direct
           the learned  Magistrate  to  hear  the  parties  afresh  on  the
           question of acceptance of the police report and pass a  reasoned
           order or to decide for ourselves whether it is a  fit  case  for
           taking cognizance under Section  190(1)(b)  Cr.P.C.  Keeping  in
           view the fact that the case is pending for the last seven  years
           only on the threshold question we do not wish to lake the former
           course as that would only  delay  the  matter  further.  Instead
           thereof we have carefully looked into the police report and  its
           accompaniments keeping in view  the  following  observations  of
           this Court in H.S. Bains. v. State, (1980) 4 SCC 631, with which
           we respectfully agree:
                 “The Magistrate is not bound by the conclusions arrived  at
                 by the police even as he is not bound  by  the  conclusions
                 arrived  at  by  the  complainant  in  a  complaint.  If  a
                 complainant states the relevant facts in his complaint  and
                 alleges that the accused is  guilty  of  an  offence  under
                 Section 307, Indian Penal Code the Magistrate is not  bound
                 by the conclusion of the complainant. He may think that the
                 facts disclosed an offence under Section 324, Indian  Penal
                 Code only and he may take cognizance of  an  offence  under
                 Section 324 instead of Section 307. Similarly if  a  police
                 report mentions that half a dozen persons examined by  them
                 claim to be eye witnesses to a murder but that for  various
                 reasons the witnesses could not be believed, the Magistrate
                 is not bound to accept the opinion of the police  regarding
                 the credibility of the witnesses. He may prefer  to  ignore
                 the conclusions of the police regarding the credibility  of
                 the witnesses and take cognizance of  the  offence.  If  he
                 does so, it would be on the basis of the statements of  the
                 witnesses as revealed by the police report.”

      29.   Our such exercise persuades us to hold that the opinion of'  the
           Investigating Officer that  the  allegations  contained  in  the
           F.I.R. were not substantiated by  the  statements  of  witnesses
           recorded during investigation is not a proper one  for  we  find
           that there are sufficient materials for taking cognizance of the
           offences under Sections 354 and 509 I.P.C. We, however,  refrain
           from detailing or discussing those statements and the nature and
           extent of their corroboration of the F.I.R. lest they create any
           unconscious impression  upon  the  Trial  Court,  which  has  to
           ultimately  decide   upon   their   truthfulness,   falsity   or
           reliability, after those statements are translated into evidence
           during trial. For the selfsame reasons we do not wish  to  refer
           to the arguments canvassed by Mr.  Sanghi,  in  support  of  the
           opinion expressed in the police (final) report and  our  reasons
           in disagreement thereto.”
                                                          (emphasis is mine)

Therefore, even though the Magistrate was not  obliged  to  record  reasons,
having passed  a  speaking  order  while  issuing  process,  the  Magistrate
adopted the more reasonable course, though  the  same  was  more  ponderous,
cumbersome and time consuming.
12.   Therefore, in the present set of circumstances, the Magistrate  having
examined the statements recorded during the course  of  investigation  under
Sections 161 and 164 of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  as  also,  the
documents  and   other   materials   collected   during   the   process   of
investigation, was fully justified in recording the basis on  which,  having
taken cognizance, it was decided to issue  process.   I,  therefore,  hereby
find absolutely no merit in the criticism  of  the  Magistrate’s  order,  in
being lengthy and  detailed.   In  passing  the  order  dated  9.2.2011  the
Magistrate  merely  highlighted  the  circumstances  emerging  out  of   the
investigation carried out in the matter, which constituted the basis of  her
decision to issue process.  The Magistrate’s order  being  speaking,  cannot
be stated  to  have  occasioned  failure  of  justice.   The  order  of  the
Magistrate, therefore, cannot be  faulted  on  the  ground  that  it  was  a
reasoned order.
13.   During the course of hearing, the primary  ground  for  assailing  the
order of the Magistrate dated 9.2.2011 was focused on projecting,  that  the
Magistrate  had  not  only  drawn  incorrect  conclusions,  but   had   also
overlooked certain vital factual aspects of the  matter.   Before  examining
the details on the basis whereof the order passed by the  Magistrate  (dated
9.2.2011) can be assailed, it will  be  necessary  to  first  summarize  the
basis whereon the Magistrate perceived, that there was  sufficient  material
for proceeding against the accused in the  present  controversy.   Different
aspects taken into consideration by the  Magistrate  are  accordingly  being
summarized hereunder:
Firstly, based on the statements of Umesh Sharma and Bharti recorded  during
the course of investigation, coupled with the factual position  depicted  in
the first information report, it was sought to  be  inferred,  that  on  the
night of the incident Dr. Rajesh Talwar, Dr. Nupur  Talwar,  Aarushi  Talwar
and Hemraj only were present at the place of the occurrence,  namely,  house
no. L-32 Jalvayu Vihar, Sector 25, Noida.  Being  last  seen  together,  the
needle of suspicion would point at the two surviving persons,  specially  if
it could be established, that the premises had not been broken into.
Secondly, on the basis of the statement of  Mahesh  Kumar  Mishra,  recorded
during the course of investigation, who alleged that  he  was  told  by  Dr.
Rajesh Talwar, that he had seen his daughter Aarushi Talwar on  the  fateful
night upto 11:30 p.m., whereafter, he had locked the room  of  his  daughter
from outside, and had kept the key near his  bed  head.   Coupled  with  the
fact, that the lock on Aarushi Talwar’s room was of a kind  which  could  be
opened from inside without a key  but,  needed  a  key  to  be  opened  from
outside.  And further, coupled with the  fact,  that  the  outer  exit/entry
door(s) to the flat of the Talwars,  had  not  been  broken  into.   It  was
assumed, that there was no outside forced entry, either into the bedroom  of
Aarushi Talwar or the flat of the Talwars, on the night of the twin  murders
of Aarushi Talwar and Hemraj.
Thirdly, the Magistrate noticed from the  investigation  carried  out,  that
the dead body of Hemraj was covered with a panel of a  cooler,  and  on  the
grill a bed sheet had been placed.  Likewise, from  the  fact  that  Aarushi
Talwar’s body was found murdered on her own bed, yet  her  toys  were  found
arranged “as such” behind the bed and also, there were no  wrinkles  on  the
bed sheet.  On the pillow kept behind Aarushi Talwar, there  ought  to  have
been blood stains when she was attacked (as she was hit  on  her  head,  and
her neck had been slit),  but  the  same  were  absent.   These  facts  were
highlighted by  the  Magistrate  to  demonstrate  the  dressing  up  of  the
place(s)  of  occurrence,  to  further  support  the   assumption   of   the
involvement of an insider, as against, an outsider.
Fourthly, based on the statements of  Virendera  Singh,  Sanjay  Singh,  Raj
Kumar, Chandra Bhushan, Devender Singh, Ram Vishal and  Punish  Rai  Tandon,
recorded during the course of investigation, it was sought  to  be  assumed,
that no outsider was  seen  either  entering  or  leaving  house  no.  L-32,
Jalvayu Vihar, Sector 25, Noida,  on  the  night  intervening  15-16.5.2008.
This also, according to the Magistrate, affirmed the  main  deduction,  that
no outsider was involved.
Fifthly, based on the statements of Dr. Anita  Durrani,  Punish  Rai  Tandon
and K.N. Johri, recorded during the course of investigation, it  was  sought
to be inferred, that the other servants connected with the household of  the
Talwar family, namely, Raj Kumar, Vijay Mandal and  Krishna  Thadarai,  were
present elsewhere at the time of the commission of  the  twin  murders,  and
also that, there was no material depicting their prima facie involvement  or
motive  in  the  crime,  specially  because,  no  “…  precious  things  like
jewellery or any other thing from the house of Talwars couple …”  was  found
missing and further that “… no rape on Aarushi  Talwar  had  been  confirmed
…”.  Accordingly, it was  sought  to  be  reasoned,  that  no  outsider  had
entered the premises.
Sixthly, from the statements of Deepak Kanda,  Bhupender  Singh  and  Rajesh
Kumar, recorded during the course of investigation, it was felt that on  the
night when  the  murder  was  committed,  i.e.  the  night  intervening  15-
16.5.2008 the internet connection was regularly used by  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar
from 11:00 p.m. to 12:08 a.m.  In fact, both Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar,  as  also,
Dr. Nupur Talwar themselves confirmed  to  the  witnesses  whose  statements
were recorded during the course of investigation, that the  internet  router
was switched on at 11:00 p.m. and Dr. Rajesh Talwar had thereafter used  the
internet facility.  Based on this factual position  it  was  gathered,  that
both Dr. Rajesh Talwar and Dr. Nupur Talwar were  awake  and  active  at  or
around the time of occurrence (determined in the post-mortem report).
Seventhly, from the statements of Sunil Kumar Dorhe, Naresh Raj, Ajay  Kumar
and Dinesh Kumar recorded during the course of investigation, it was  sought
to be inferred, that the private parts of the deceased Aarushi  Talwar  were
tampered with, inasmuch as, the  white  discharge  was  found  only  in  the
vaginal area of Aarushi Talwar  indicating,  that  her  private  parts  were
cleaned after her death.  The said white  discharge  was  found  not  to  be
originating from the body of the  deceased.   The  aforesaid  inference  was
sought to be further supported by assertions, that the  vaginal  opening  of
Aarushi Talwar, at the time of the post mortem  examination,  was  unusually
wide.  Accordingly, a deduction was made, that evidence  had  been  tampered
with, by those inside the flat, after the occurrence.
Eighthly, it was also sought to  be  assumed,  that  the  death  of  Aarushi
Talwar and Hemraj was occasioned as a consequence of injuries caused  by  an
iron 5 golf club (on the head of both the deceased), as also,  “… injury  on
the neck of both the deceased … caused by a surgically  trained  person  …”.
Since the golf club in question was not  immediately  produced,  and  since,
the accused themselves were surgically trained, it  was  gathered  that  Dr.
Rajesh Talwar and Dr. Nupur Talwar were themselves responsible for the  twin
murders.
Ninthly, in paragraph 15 of the Magistrate’s  order  dated  9.2.2011  it  is
noticed, that  a  request  was  made  to  Dr.  Sunil  Kumar  Dhore  for  not
mentioning the word “rape” in the post  mortem  proceedings.   Investigation
also established, that Dr. Dinesh Talwar (brother  of  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar),
had spoken to Dr. Sunil Kumar Dhore and exerted  influence  over  Dr.  Sunil
Kumar Dhore through Dr. Dogra  who  allegedly  instructed  Dr.  Sunil  Kumar
Dhore in connection with the post mortem examination.  On the basis  of  the
aforesaid material highlighted in the order dated 9.2.2011,  the  Magistrate
further expressed the view, that influence was allegedly  being  exerted  on
behalf of the accused, on the doctor who  was  conducting  the  post  mortem
examination.
Tenthly, based on the statements of  Umesh  Sharma,  Kalpana  Mondal,  Vimla
Sarkar and Punish Tandon, recorded during the course  of  investigation,  it
was sought to be concluded, that the door leading to the  terrace  of  house
no.L-32, Jalvayu Vihar, Sector 25, Noida, had always remained open prior  to
the date of occurrence.  It was gathered therefrom, that  the  lock  on  the
door leading to the terrace  of  the  house  in  question  on  the  date  of
occurrence,  was  affixed  so  that  the  investigating  agency  would   not
immediately recover the body of Hemraj, so as to hamper  the  investigation.
These facts allegedly spell out the  negative  role  played  by  Dr.  Rajesh
Talwar in causing hindrances in the process of investigation.
Eleventhly, based  on  the  statements  of  Rohit  Kocchar  and  Dr.  Rajeev
Varshney, recorded under Section 164 of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,
disclosing, that they had informed  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar,  that  the  terrace
door, the lock on the  terrace  door,  as  also,  the  upper  steps  of  the
staircase had blood stains. They also asserted, that Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  “…
climbed up some steps but immediately came down and  did  not  say  anything
about keys and went inside the house …”.  The aforesaid  narration,  coupled
with the fact, that Dr. Prafull Durrani one of the  friends  of  Dr.  Rajesh
Talwar stated, that he was “… told by Dr. Rajesh Talwar,  that  the  key  of
the terrace used to be with Hemraj.  He did not know about the  key  …”  was
the  basis  for  assuming,  that  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  was  preventing   the
investigating agency from tracing the body of Hemraj, which  was  eventually
found from the terrace, after breaking open the lock on the terrace door.
Twelfthly, Umesh Sharma the driver of the Talwars, stated during the  course
of investigation, that he had placed two golf clubs, i.e. irons 4 and  5  in
the room of Hemraj, when the Santro car owned by the Talwars, was given  for
servicing.  The iron 5 club, which is alleged to  be  the  weapon  of  crime
(which resulted in a V shaped injury on the heads  of  both  Aarushi  Talwar
and Hemraj), remained untraced during the course  of  active  investigation.
The same was recovered from the loft of the house of Dr. Rajesh Talwar,  and
handed over to  the  investigating  agency,  more  than  a  year  after  the
occurrence on 30.10.2009.  The Magistrate noticed, that the loft from  where
it was allegedly found, had been checked several  times  by  the  CBI.    To
which the explanation of Dr. Rajesh Talwar  allegedly  was,  that  one  golf
club might have dropped from the golf kit, and might have been  left  there.
This factual aspect lead to the inference,  that  the  weapon  used  in  the
crime, was deliberately not handed over to the investigating  agency,  after
the occurrence.
Thirteenthly,  another  factual  aspect  emerging  during  the   course   of
investigation was, that  the  body  of  Hemraj  was  recovered  on  the  day
following the murder of  Aarushi  Talwar,  i.e.,  on  17.5.2008.   When  Dr.
Rajesh Talwar was shown the body, he  could  not  identify  it  as  that  of
Hemraj.  The dead body was identified by one of Hemraj’s friend.  Dr.  Nupur
Talwar confirmed, that the body recovered from the terrace  was  of  Hemraj,
on the basis of the inscription on the shirt worn by  him.   From  the  fact
that, neither Dr.  Rajesh Talwar nor Dr. Nupur  Talwar  could  identify  the
body of Hemraj, from its appearance, it was sought to be figured, that  they
were not cooperating with the investigation.
Besides the aforesaid conspicuous facts depicted in the order passed by  the
Magistrate, a large number of other similarly significant facts,  have  also
been recorded, in  the  order  dated  9.2.2011.   The  same  are  not  being
mentioned herein, as the expressive and weighty ones,  essential  to  arrive
at a determination on the  issue  in  hand,  have  already  been  summarized
above.  Based inter alia on  the  inferences  and  the  assumptions  noticed
above, the Magistrate issued process by summoning Dr. Rajesh Talwar and  Dr.
Nupur Talwar.
14.   The facts noticed in  the  foregoing  paragraph  and  the  impressions
drawn thereupon by the Magistrate, are based on  statements  recorded  under
Section 161 of Code of  Criminal  Procedure  (and  in  a  few  cases,  under
Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure), as also,  on  documents  and
other materials collected during the course of  investigation.  Neither  the
aforesaid  statements,  nor  the  documents   and   materials   taken   into
consideration, can at the present juncture be treated as  reliable  evidence
which can be taken into consideration, for  finally  adjudicating  upon  the
guilt or innocence of the accused.  It is only when the witnesses appear  in
court, and make their statements on oath, and  their  statements  have  been
tested by way of cross examination; and only after the documents  and  other
materials relied upon are proved in accordance  with  law,  the  same  would
constitute evidence which can be relied upon to determine  the  controversy.
It is on the basis of such acceptable evidence, that final  conclusions  can
be drawn to implicate the accused.  That stage has not yet arisen.   At  the
present juncture, the Magistrate  was  required  to  examine  the  materials
collected  by  the  investigating  agencies,  and  thereupon,  to  determine
whether  the  proceedings  should  be  dropped  (as  was  suggested  by  the
investigating agency, through  its  closure  report  dated  29.12.2010),  or
whether, a direction should be issued  for  further  investigation  (as  was
suggested in the protest petition filed by Dr. Rajesh Talwar),  or  whether,
there was sufficient ground for proceeding further, by issuing  process  (as
has been done in the present case).  Having examined  the  material  on  the
record, the Magistrate having taken cognizance issued process  on  9.2.2011,
and while doing so, recorded the following observations in  the  penultimate
paragraphs of summoning order dated 9.2.2011:
           “From the analysis of evidence of all above mentioned  witnesses
           prima facie it appears that after investigation, on the basis of
           evidence available in the case diary when this incident occurred
           at that time four members were present in the house – Dr. Rajesh
           Talwar, Dr. Nupur Talwar, Aarushi and servant Hem  Raj;  Aarushi
           and Hem Raj the two out four were found dead.  In the case diary
           there is no such evidence from which it  may  appear  that  some
           person  had  made  forcible  entry  and  there  is  to  evidence
           regarding involvement of the servants.   In  the  night  of  the
           incident internet was switched on and off in the house in regard
           to which this evidence is available in the case  diary  that  it
           was switched on  or  off  by  some  person.   Private  parts  of
           deceased Aarushi were cleaned and deceased Hem Raj  was  dragged
           in injured condition from the flat of Dr. Rajesh  Talwar  up  to
           the terrace and the terrace  was  locked.   Prior  to  15.5.2008
           terrace was not locked.  According to documents available on the
           case diary blood stains were wiped off on  the  staircase,  both
           the deceased were slit with the help of a surgical instrument by
           surgically trained persons and shape of injury on the  head  and
           forehead was V-shaped and according to the evidence available in
           the case diary that appeared to have been  caused  with  a  gold
           stick.  A person coming from outside,  during  the  presence  of
           Talwar couple in the house could have neither used the  internet
           nor could have taken the dead body of deceased Hem  Raj  to  the
           terrace and then locked when the Talwar couple  was  present  in
           the house.  On the basis of evidence available in the case diary
           footprints stained with blood were found in the room of  Aarushi
           but outside that room bloodstained footprints  were  not  found.
           If the assailant would  go  out  after  committing  murder  then
           certainly his footprints would not be confined up to the room of
           Aarushi and for an outsider it is not possible that when  Talwar
           couple were present in the house he would use  liquor  or  would
           try to take dead body on the terrace.  Accused after  committing
           the offence would like to run away immediately so  that  no  one
           could catch him.

           On the  basis  of  evidence  of  all  the  above  witnesses  and
           circumstantial  evidence  available   in   case   diary   during
           investigation it was expected from the investigating officer  to
           submit charge-sheet against Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  and  Dr.  Nupur
           Talwar.  In such type of cases when offence is committed  inside
           a house, there direct evidence cannot be expected.  Here  it  is
           pertinent to mention  that  CBI  is  the  highest  investigating
           agency of the country in which the public  of  the  country  has
           full  confidence.   Whenever  in  a  case  if  any  one  of  the
           investigating agencies of the country remained unsuccessful then
           that case  is  referred  to  CBI  for  investigation.   In  such
           circumstances it is expected of CBI that  applying  the  highest
           standards, after investigation it should submit  such  a  report
           before the court which is just and reasonable on  the  basis  of
           evidence collected in investigation, but it was not done  so  by
           the CBI which is highly disappointing.  If I draw  a  conclusion
           from the circumstances of case diary, then I find that  in  view
           of the facts, the conclusion of the investigating  officer  that
           on account of lack of evidence, case may  be  closed;  does  not
           appear to be just and proper.  When  offence  was  committed  in
           side a house, on the basis of evidence received from case diary,
           a link is made from these circumstances,  and  these  links  are
           indicating prima facie the accused Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  and  Dr.
           Nupur Talwar  to be guilty.  The evidence  of  witness  Shoharat
           that Dr. Rajesh Talwar asked him to paint the wooden portion  of
           a wall between the rooms  of  Aarushi  and  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar,
           indicates towards the conclusion that he wants  to  temper  with
           the evidence.  From the evidence 3 so many in  the  case  diary,
           prima facie evidence is found in this regard.  Therefore in  the
           light of above evidences  conclusion  of  investigating  officer
           given in the final report deserve to be rejected  and  there  is
           sufficient basis for taking prima facie cognizance  against  Dr.
           Rajesh Talwar and Dr. Nupur  Talwar  for  committing  murder  of
           deceased Aarushi and Hem Raj and for tempering with  the  proof.
           At this stage, the principle of law laid down by Hon’ble Supreme
           Court in the case of Jugdish Ram vs. State of Rajasthan reported
           in 2004 AIR 1734 is very important wherein the  Hon’ble  Supreme
           Court held that investigation is the job of Police and taking of
           cognizance is within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate.  If  on
           the record, this much of evidence is available that prima  facie
           cognizance  can  be  taken  then  the  Magistrate  should   take
           cognizance, Magistrate should be convinced that there is  enough
           basis for further proceedings rather for  sufficient  basis  for
           proving the guilt.”


15.   In order to canvass the primary ground raised for assailing the  order
of the Magistrate dated 9.2.2011, it  was  submitted,  that  the  Magistrate
would have arrived at a conclusion, different from  the  one  drawn  in  the
order dated 9.2.2011, if  the  matter  had  been  examined  in  its  correct
perspective, by taking a holistic  view  of  the  statements  and  materials
recorded during investigation. It is sought to be canvassed, that a  perusal
of the impugned order reveals, that too much emphasis was placed on  certain
incorrect  facts,  and  further,  certain  vital  and  relevant  facts   and
materials were overlooked.  In sum and substance it was submitted,  that  if
the factual infirmities were corrected, and the facts overlooked were  given
due weightage, the conclusions drawn by the Magistrate in  the  order  dated
9.2.2011, would  be  liable  to  be  reversed.  To  appreciate  the  instant
contention  advanced  at  the  hands  of  the  learned   counsel   for   the
petitioners, I am summarizing hereunder, the factual aspects highlighted  by
the learned counsel for the petitioner during the course of hearing:-
Firstly, it was submitted, that the inference drawn  by  the  Magistrate  to
the effect, that there was no outsider other than  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar,  Dr.
Nupur Talwar, Aarushi Talwar and Hemraj in  house  no.L-32,  Jalvayu  Vihar,
Sector 25, Noida, on the fateful day, is erroneous. It was  submitted,  that
the said inference was drawn under the belief, that there  was  no  forceful
entry into the premises in question.  To canvass the point, learned  counsel
drew the attention of this  Court  to  the  site  plan  of  the  flat  under
reference, which had been prepared by the U.P. Police (during the course  of
investigation by the U.P. Police), and compared  the  same  with,  the  site
plan prepared by the CBI (after the CBI took over  investigation).   It  was
pointed out, that a reference to the correct site plan  would  reveal,  that
there could have been free access, to and from  the  residence  of  Talwars,
through Hemraj’s room.
Secondly, it was pointed out, after extensively relying upon  the  statement
of Bharti, that the grill and mash door latched  from  the  outside  clearly
evidenced, that after committing the  crime  the  culprits  had  bolted  the
premises  from  outside.  The  absurdity  in  the  inference  drawn  by  the
Magistrate, it was submitted, was obvious from the  fact,  that  the  actual
perpetrator of the murders, while escaping from  the  scene  of  occurrence,
had bolted the Talwars from outside. It was also pointed out, that the  iron
mashing/gauze on the door which was  bolted  from  outside,  would  make  it
impossible for an insider, to bolt the door from outside.
Thirdly, according to the learned counsel, the impression  recorded  in  the
investigation carried out by the CBI reveals, that the stairway  leading  to
the terrace was from inside the flat (of the Talwars), was erroneous.   This
inference was sought to be shown to have been incorrectly recorded,  as  the
stairs leading to the terrace were from outside the  flat,  i.e.,  from  the
common area  of  the  apartment  complex  beyond  the  outermost  grill-door
leading into the house no.L-32, Jalvayu Vihar,  Sector  25,  Noida.  It  was
therefore submitted, that under no circumstances Dr. Rajesh  Talwar  or  Dr.
Nupur Talwar could be linked to the murder of  Hemraj,  since  the  body  of
Hemraj was found at a place, which had no internal connectivity from  within
the flat of the Talwars.
Fourthly, as noticed above, since the flat of the Talwars  was  bolted  from
the outside, neither Dr. Rajesh Talwar  nor  Dr.  Nupur  Talwar  could  have
taken the body of Hemraj to the terrace, even if the inference drawn by  the
CBI, that the murder of Hemraj was committed at a place different  from  the
place from where his body was found, is to be accepted  as  correct.  It  is
sought to be suggested, that the accused cannot, in any case, be  associated
with the murder of Hemraj. And  since,  both  murders  were  presumably  the
handiwork of the same perpetrator(s), the accused could  not  be  associated
with the murder of Aarushi Talwar as well.
Fifthly, substantial material was placed before the Court  to  suggest  that
the purple colored pillow cover belonging to  Krishna  Thadarai,  was  found
smeared with the blood of Hemraj.  In  order  to  substantiate  the  instant
contention reference was made to the  seizure  memo  pertaining  to  Krishna
Thadarai’s pillow cover,  and  thereupon,  the  report  of  the  CFSL  dated
23.6.2008, as also, the report of the CFSL (Bio  Division)  dated  30.6.2008
depicting, that the blood found on the pillow cover was of human origin.  It
was the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner,  that
Krishna Thadarai could not have been given a clean chit, when the  blood  of
Hemraj was found on his pillow cover. It is  necessary  to  record,  that  a
similar submission made before the High Court was turned down  by  the  High
Court, on the basis of a letter dated 24.3.2011 (even though  the  same  was
not a part of the charge papers).  It  was  submitted,  that  the  aforesaid
letter could not have been taken  into  consideration  while  examining  the
veracity of the inferences drawn by the Magistrate. In order to support  the
instant contention, it  was  also  vehemently  submitted,  that  during  the
course of investigation, neither the U.P. Police nor the  CBI,  found  blood
of Hemraj on the clothes of either Dr. Rajesh Talwar or  Dr.  Nupur  Talwar.
The presence of the blood of Hemraj on the pillow cover of Krishna  Thadarai
and the absence of the blood of Hemraj on the apparel of Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar
and Dr. Nupur Talwar, according to learned counsel for the petitioners,  not
only exculpates the accused  identified  in  the  Magistrate’s  order  dated
9.2.2011, but  also  reveals,  that  the  investigation  made  by  the  U.P.
Police/CBI besides being slipshod and sloppy, can also  be  stated  to  have
been carried on without due application of mind.
Sixthly, in continuation of the preceding issue canvassed on behalf  of  the
petitioners, it was submitted, that the finding recorded by the CBI  in  its
closure report, that DNA of none of the servants was found  on  any  of  the
exhibits collected from the scene  of  crime,  was  wholly  fallacious.  The
Magistrate  having  assumed  the  aforesaid  factually  incorrect  position,
exculpated all the servants of blame, in respect  of  the  twin  murders  of
Aarushi Talwar and Hemraj. It was submitted,  that  as  a  matter  of  fact,
scientific  tests  shorn  of  human  considerations,  clearly  indicate  the
involvement of Krishna Thadarai with the  crime  under  reference.  In  this
behalf the Court’s attention was also drawn to  the  narco  analysis,  brain
mapping and polygraph tests conducted on Krishna Thadarai.
Seventhly, the investigating agency, it was contended,  was  guilty  of  not
taking the investigative process to its logical conclusion. In  this  behalf
it was submitted, that finger prints were found on a  bottle  of  Ballantine
Scotch Whiskey, found on the dining table, in the Talwar flat. The  accused,
according to learned counsel, had  requested  the  investigating  agency  to
identify the fingerprints through touch  DNA  test.  The  accused  had  also
offered to bear  the  expenses  for  the  same.  According  to  the  learned
counsel, the identification of the fingerprints on the  bottle,  would  have
revealed the identity of  the  perpetrator(s)  to  the  murders  of  Aarushi
Talwar and Hemraj.  It  is  therefore  sought  to  be  canvassed,  that  the
petitioner Dr. Nupur Talwar and her husband Dr. Rajesh Talwar, had  unfairly
been accused of the crime under reference, even though  there  was  material
available to determine the exact identity of the culprit(s) in the matter.
Eighthly, it was submitted, that footprints were found  in  the  bedroom  of
Aarushi Talwar, i.e., from the room  where  her  dead  body  was  recovered.
These footprints according to learned counsel, did not  match  the  footwear
impressions of shoes and  slippers  of  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  and  Dr.  Nupur
Talwar. This according to the  learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  also
indicates, that  neither  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  nor  Dr.  Nupur  Talwar  were
involved in the murder of  their  daughter  Aarushi  Talwar.  The  murderer,
according  to  learned  counsel,  was  an   outsider.   And   it   was   the
responsibility of the CBI to determine the identity of such person(s)  whose
footwear matched the footprints found in the room  of  the  Aarushi  Talwar.
Lack of focused investigation  in  the  instant  matter,  according  to  the
learned counsel for the petitioners, had resulted in a gross  error  at  the
hands of the Magistrate, who has unfairly summoned  Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  and
Dr. Nupur Talwar as the accused, rather than the actual culprit(s).
Ninthly, learned counsel for  the  petitioner  also  referred  to  the  post
mortem  report  of  Aarushi  Talwar  dated  16.5.2008,  and  in  conjunction
therewith the statement of  Dr.  Sunil  Kumar  Dhore  dated  18.7.2008,  the
report of the High Level Eight Member Expert Body dated 9.9.2008  (of  which
Dr. Sunil Kumar Dhore was a member),  and  the  further  statements  of  Dr.
Sunil Kumar Dhore dated 3.10.2008, 30.9.2009 and 28.5.2010.  Based  thereon,
learned counsel submitted, that in the post mortem report conducted  by  Dr.
Sunil Kumar Dhore, he had expressly recorded NAD (No  Abnormality  Detected)
against the column at serial  no.7,  pertaining  to  the  private  parts  of
Aarushi Talwar. It was submitted, that the aforesaid  position  came  to  be
substantially altered by the subsequent oral statements made  by  Dr.  Sunil
Kumar  Dhore.   It  was  submitted,  that  the  different  factual  position
narrated by Dr. Sunil Kumar Dhore, subsequent to the submission of the  post
mortem report, cannot be taken into consideration. Viewed from  the  instant
perspective, it was also submitted, that the investigating agencies  utterly
failed in carrying out a disciplined and proper investigation.  It was  also
asserted, that Dr. Sunil Kumar Dhore had been persuaded to turn  hostile  to
the contents of his  own  document,  i.e.,  the  post  mortem  report  dated
16.5.2008. Even though originally Dr. Sunil Kumar Dhore  found,  that  there
was no abnormality detected in the private parts of  Aarushi  Talwar,  after
the lapse of two years his  supplementary  statements  depict  a  number  of
abnormalities.  It was submitted, that the  Magistrate  having  referred  to
the last of such statements dated 25.5.2010, inferred  therefrom,  that  the
private parts of Aarushi Talwar had been cleaned after her  murder.  It  was
submitted, that the absurdity and improbability of the assumption  could  be
established from the fact, that the white discharge found  from  the  vagina
of Aarushi Talwar, was sent for pathological examination, which showed  that
no  spermatozoa  was  detected  therein.  The  instant  inference   of   the
Magistrate, according to learned counsel, had resulted in grave  miscarriage
of justice.
Tenthly, it was contended, that the dimension of the injury on the heads  of
Aarushi Talwar and Hemraj, was stated to match with the  dimension  of  a  5
iron golf club. It was pointed out, that the  5  iron  golf  club  recovered
from the premises of the Talwars, did not have any traces of blood.  It  was
submitted, that the said golf club as a  possible  weapon  of  offence,  was
introduced by the second team of the  CBI  in  September/October  2009.  The
Magistrate, according to learned counsel, had erroneously  recorded  in  the
impugned order dated 9.2.2011, that experts had opined that the injuries  in
question (on the heads of Aarushi Talwar and Hemraj) were possible with  the
golf club in question. It was sought to be highlighted, that no  expert  had
given any such opinion during  the  entire  investigative  process,  and  as
such, the finding recorded by the Magistrate was contrary to the record.
Eleventhly, it was asserted,  that  the  Magistrate  ignored  to  take  into
consideration, the fact that the clothes of Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  were  found
only with the blood of Aarushi Talwar.  But it was noticed, that  there  was
no blood of Aarushi Talwar on the clothes of Dr. Nupur Talwar. This fact  is
also erroneous because the blood of Aarushi Talwar  was  actually  found  on
the clothes of Dr. Nupur Talwar also.  According  to  learned  counsel,  the
discovery of blood of Aarushi Talwar on  the  clothes  of  her  parents  was
natural. What is important, according to learned counsel, is the absence  of
blood of Hemraj, on the clothes of the accused. It was submitted,  that  the
prosecution had never denied, that the blood of Hemraj was not found on  the
clothes of either Dr. Rajesh  Talwar  or  Dr.  Nupur  Talwar.  This  factual
position, for the  same  reasons  as  have  been  indicated  at  serial  no.
fourthly above establishes the innocence of the accused in the matter.
16.   Just as in the case of the  reasons  depicted  in  the  order  of  the
Magistrate  (based  on  the  statements  recorded  during  the   course   of
investigation and the documents and other materials placed before her),  the
factual submissions advanced at the hands of the  learned  counsel  for  the
petitioners (noticed in the foregoing paragraph), cannot be  placed  on  the
pedestal of reliable evidence.  It is only when statements are  recorded  in
defence, which are tested by  way  of  cross  examination,  and  only  after
documents and material relied upon (in defence), are  proved  in  accordance
with the law, the same would constitute evidence,  which  can  constitute  a
basis, for determining the factual position in the controversy.  It is  only
on the basis of such acceptable evidence,  that  final  conclusions  can  be
drawn. That stage has not arisen.   Even  though  the  demeanor  of  learned
counsel representing the petitioners was emphatic, that no  other  inference
beside the one suggested by them was possible, I am of the  view,  that  the
stage is not yet right for such emphatic conclusions.  Just as  the  learned
counsel for the petitioner had endeavored to find  fault  with  the  factual
inferences depicted in the  order  dated  9.2.2011  (which  constituted  the
basis of issuing process), learned counsel for the CBI submitted,  that  the
factual foundation raised by  the  petitioner  (details  whereof  have  been
summarized above) were based on surmises and  conjectures.   Even  though  I
have recorded a summary of the factual basis, on which the  learned  counsel
for the petitioner have based their  contentions,  I  am  intentionally  not
recording the reasons whereby  their  veracity  was  assailed.   That  then,
would have required me  to  further  determine,  which  of  the  alternative
positions were correct.  I am of the view, that such an  assessment  at  the
present stage would be wholly inappropriate.  My dealing  with  the  factual
contours of the present controversy, at a juncture well before evidence  has
been recorded by the trial court, would have  adverse  consequences  against
one or the other party.  Even though, while dealing with issues  as  in  the
instant case, High Courts and this Court have repeatedly observed  in  their
orders, that the trial court would determine  the  controversy  uninfluenced
by observations made.  Yet, inferences and  conclusions  drawn  by  superior
courts, on matters which are pending adjudication before  trial  courts  (or
other  subordinate  courts)  cannot  be  easily  brushed  aside.   I  shall,
therefore,  endeavor  not  to  pre-maturely  record  any  inferences   which
could/would prejudice one or the other side.
17.    Having  recorded  the  aforesaid  observations,  in  respect  of  the
submissions  advanced  at  the  hands  of  the  learned  counsel   for   the
petitioner, I shall now proceed to  determine  the  validity  of  the  order
passed by the Magistrate  on  9.2.2011,  as  also,  the  legitimacy  of  the
defences raised by the learned counsel  for  the  petitioner.   Although  it
would seem,  that  there  would  be  a  common  answer  to  the  proposition
canvassed, I am of the view, after having  heard  learned  counsel  for  the
rival parties, that the issue canvassed  ought  to  compartmentalized  under
two heads.  Firstly, I  shall  examine  the  validity  of  the  order  dated
9.2.2011, and thereafter, I will deal with the  substance  of  the  defences
raised at the hands of the petitioner.  That is  how  the  matter  is  being
dealt with in the following paragraphs.
18.   The basis and parameters of issuing process, have been provided    for
in  Section  204  of  the  Code  of   Criminal   Procedure.    Section   204
aforementioned is extracted hereunder :
      “204.       Issue of process –

      (1)   If in the opinion  of  a  Magistrate  taking  cognizance  of  an
           offence there is sufficient ground for proceeding, and the  case
           appears to be –


           (a)   a  summons-case,  he   shall   issue   his   summons   for
                 the attendance of the accused, or
           (b)   a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if  he  thinks
                 fit, a  summons,  for  causing  the accused to  be  brought
                 or to appear  at  a  certain  time  before such  Magistrate
                 of  (if  he  has  no  jurisdiction  himself)  some    other
                 Magistrate  having jurisdiction.

      (2)   No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused  under
           sub-section (1) until a list of the  prosecution  witnesses  has
           been filed.

      (3)   In a proceeding instituted upon a  complaint  made  in  writing,
           every summons or warrant issued under sub-section (1)  shall  be
           accompanied by a copy of such complaint.

      (4)   When by any law for the time being in force any process-fees  or
           other fees are payable, no process shall  be  issued  until  the
           fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid within a reasonable
           time, the Magistrate may dismiss the complaint.

      (5)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions
           of section 87.

The criterion which needs to  be  kept  in  mind  by  a  Magistrate  issuing
process, have been repeatedly delineated by this Court.  I shall  therefore,
first examine the declared position of law on  the  subject.   Reference  in
this behalf may be made to the decision rendered by this  Court  in  Cahndra
Deo  vs.  Prokash Chandra Bose alias Chabi Bose and Anr., AIR 1963 SC  1430,
wherein it was observed as under :
      “(8)  Coming to the second ground, we have no  hesitation  is  holding
           that the test propounded by the learned single judge of the High
           Court is wholly wrong.  For determining the question whether any
           process is to be issued or not, what the Magistrate  has  to  be
           satisfied is whether there is “sufficient ground for proceeding”
           and not whether  there  is  sufficient  ground  for  conviction.
           Whether the evidence is adequate for supporting  the  conviction
           can be determined only at the trial and  not  at  the  stage  of
           enquiry.  A number of decisions were cited at the bar  in  which
           the question of the scope of the enquiry under Section  202  has
           been  considered.   Amongst  those  decisions  are  :  Parmanand
           Brahmachari  v.  Emperor, AIR 1930 Pat 20; Radha Kishun Sao   v.
           S.K. Misra, AIR 1949 Pat 36; Ramkisto Sahu  v.  State of  Bihar,
           AIR 1952 Pat 125; Emperor  v.  J.A. Finan, AIR 1931 Bom 524  and
           Baidya Nath Singh  v.  Muspratt, ILR 14 Cal 141.  In  all  these
           cases, it has been held that the object  of  the  provisions  of
           Section 202 is to enable the Magistrate to form an opinion as to
           whether process should be issued or not and to remove  from  his
           mind any hesitation that he may have felt upon the mere  perusal
           of the complaint and  the  consideration  of  the  complainant’s
           evidence on oath.  The courts have also  pointed  out  in  these
           cases that what the Magistrate has to see is  whether  there  is
           evidence in support of the allegations of  the  complainant  and
           not whether the evidence is sufficient to warrant a  conviction.
           The learned Judges in some of these cases have been at pains  to
           observe that an enquiry under Section 202 is not to  be  likened
           to a trial which can only take place after  process  is  issued,
           and that there can be only one trial.  No doubt,  as  stated  in
           sub-section (1) of Section 202 itself, the object of the enquiry
           is to ascertain the truth or falsehood of the complaint, but the
           Magistrate making the enquiry has to do this only with reference
           to the intrinsic quality of the statements made  before  him  at
           the enquiry which would naturally mean the complaint itself, the
           statement on oath made by the  complainant  and  the  statements
           made before him by persons  examined  at  the  instance  of  the
           complainant.”
                                                          (emphasis is mine)

The same issue was examined by this Court in  M/s.  India  Carat  Pvt.  Ltd.
vs.  State of Karnataka and Anr., (1989) 2 SCC 132, wherein this Court  held
as under :
      “(16)       The position is, therefore, now  well  settled  that  upon
           receipt of a police report under Section 173(2) a Magistrate  is
           entitled  to  take  cognizance  of  an  offence  under   Section
           190(1)(b) of the Code even if the police report is to the effect
           that no case is made out against the  accused.   The  Magistrate
           can take into account the statements of the  witnesses  examined
           by the police during the investigation and  take  cognizance  of
           the offence complained of and order the issue of process to  the
           accused.  Section 190(1)(b) does not lay down that a  Magistrate
           can take cognizance of an  offence  only  if  the  investigating
           officer gives an opinion that the investigation has made  out  a
           case  against  the  accused.   The  Magistrate  can  ignore  the
           conclusion  arrived  at  by  the   investigating   officer   and
           independently apply his mind to  the  facts  emerging  from  the
           investigation and take cognizance of the case, if he thinks fit,
           in exercise of his powers under Section 190(1)(b) and direct the
           issue of process to the accused.  The Magistrate is not bound in
           such a situation to follow the procedure laid down  in  Sections
           200 and 202 of the Code for taking cognizance of  a  case  under
           Section 190(1)(a) though it is open to him to act under  Section
           200 or Section 202 also.  The High Court was,  therefore,  wrong
           in taking the view that the Second Additional Chief Metropolitan
           Magistrate was not entitled to direct the registration of a case
           against the second respondent and order the issue of summons  to
           him.
      (17)  The fact that in this case the investigation had not  originated
           from a complaint preferred to the Magistrate but had  been  made
           pursuant to a report given to the police  would  not  alter  the
           situation in any manner.  Even if the appellant had preferred  a
           compliant before the learned Magistrate and the  Magistrate  had
           ordered investigation under Section  156(3),  the  police  would
           have had to submit a report under Section 173(2).  It  has  been
           held in Tula Ram  v.  Kishore Singh, (1977) 4 SCC 459,  that  if
           the police, after making an investigation, send a report that no
           case was made out against  the  accused,  the  Magistrate  could
           ignore the conclusion drawn by the police and take cognizance of
           a case under Section 190(1)(b)  and  issue  process  or  in  the
           alternative he can take cognizance of the original complaint and
           examine the complainant and his witnesses and  thereafter  issue
           process to the accused, if he is of opinion that the case should
           be proceeded with.”
                                                          (emphasis is mine)

The same issue was examined by this Court in  Jagdish  Ram   vs.   State  of
Rajasthan and Anr., (2004) 4 SCC 432, wherein this Court held as under:
      “(10)       The contention urged is that though the  trial  court  was
           directed to consider the entire material on record including the
           final report before  deciding  whether  the  process  should  be
           issued against the appellant or not, yet the entire material was
           not considered.   From perusal of order passed by the Magistrate
           it cannot be said that the entire material was  not  taken  into
           consideration.   The  order  passed  by  the  Magistrate  taking
           cognizance is a well-written order.  The order not  only  refers
           to the witnesses recorded by the Magistrate under  Sections  200
           and 202  of  the  Code  but  also  sets  out  with  clarity  the
           principles required to be kept in mind at the  stage  of  taking
           cognizance and reaching a prima facie view.  At this stage,  the
           Magistrate had only to decide whether sufficient  ground  exists
           or not for further proceeding in the matter.  It is well settled
           that notwithstanding the opinion of the police, a Magistrate  is
           empowered to take cognizance if the material on record makes out
           a case for the said purpose.  The investigation is the exclusive
           domain of the police.  The taking of cognizance of  the  offence
           is an area exclusively within the domain of  a  Magistrate.   At
           this stage, the Magistrate has to be satisfied whether there  is
           sufficient ground for proceeding for proceeding and not  whether
           there is sufficient ground for conviction.  Whether the evidence
           is adequate for supporting the  conviction,  can  be  determined
           only at the trial and not at the stage of inquiry.  At the stage
           of issuing the process to the accused,  the  Magistrate  is  not
           required to record reasons.  (Dy. Chief Controller of Imports  &
           Exports  v.  Roshanlal Agarwal, (2003) 4 SCC 139).”
                                                          (emphasis is mine)

All along having made a reference to the words “there is  sufficient  ground
to proceed” it has been held by this Court, that for the purpose of  issuing
process, all that the concerned Court  has  to  determine  is,  whether  the
material  placed  before  it  “is  sufficient  for  proceeding  against  the
accused”.  The observations recorded by this Court extracted above,  further
enunciate, that the term “sufficient to proceed” is different  and  distinct
from the term “sufficient to prove and  established  guilt”.   Having  taken
into consideration the factual position based  on  the  statements  recorded
under Section 161 of Code of Criminal Procedure (as also, under Section  164
thereof), and the documents appended to  the  charge  sheet,  as  also,  the
other materials available on the file; I have  no  doubt  whatsoever  in  my
mind, that the Magistrate was fully justified in issuing process, since  the
aforesaid  statements,  documents  and  materials,   were   most   certainly
sufficient to proceed against the accused.   Therefore,  the  order  issuing
process under Section 204 passed by the Magistrate  on  9.2.2011  cannot  be
faulted on the  ground,  that  it  had  been  passed  in  violation  of  the
provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, or in violation  of  the  declared
position of  law  on  the  subject.   Despite  my  aforesaid  conclusion,  I
reiterate, that the material taken  into  consideration  by  the  Magistrate
will have to be substituted by cogent evidence recorded  during  the  trial;
before any inferences,  assumptions,  views  and  deductions  drawn  by  the
Magistrate, can be made the basis  for  implicating  the  accused.   As  the
matter proceeds to the next stage, all the earlier  conclusions  will  stand
effaced, and will have to be redrawn, in accordance with law.
19.   Rolled along with the contention in hand, it  was  the  submission  of
learned counsel representing the petitioner, that if the defences raised  by
the petitioner are taken into consideration, the entire case set up  by  the
prosecution would fall.  I shall  now  advert  to  the  defences  raised  on
behalf of the  petitioner.   All  the  defences  raised  on  behalf  of  the
petitioner have already been summarized above.  Based on the  said  defences
it was sought to be canvassed, that the Magistrate (while passing the  order
dated 9.2.2011) had taken into consideration some facts  incorrectly  (while
the  factual  position  was  otherwise),  and  certain  vital   facts   were
overlooked.  On the subject under reference, it would first  be  appropriate
to examine the settled legal position.  In  this  behalf  reference  may  be
made to the decision rendered by this Court in  Cahndra  Deo   vs.   Prokash
Chandra Bose alias Chabi Bose and Anr., AIR 1963 SC  1430,  wherein  it  was
observed as under :
      “(7)  Taking the first ground, it seems to us clear  from  the  entire
           scheme of Ch. XVI of the Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  that  an
           accused person does not  come  into  the  picture  at  all  till
           process is issued.  This does not mean that he is precluded from
           being present when an enquiry is held by a Magistrate.   He  may
           remain present either in person or through a  counsel  or  agent
           with a view to be informed of what is going on.  But  since  the
           very question for  consideration  being  whether  he  should  be
           called upon to face an accusation, he has no right to take  part
           in the proceedings nor has the Magistrate  any  jurisdiction  to
           permit him to do so.  It would follow from this, therefore, that
           it would not be open to the Magistrate to put  any  question  to
           witnesses at the instance of the person  named  as  accused  but
           against whom process has not been issued; nor can he examine any
           witnesses at the instance of such  a  person.   Of  course,  the
           Magistrate  himself  is  free  to  put  such  questions  to  the
           witnesses produced before him by the complainant as he may think
           proper in the interests of justice.  But beyond that, he  cannot
           go.  It was, however, contended by Mr. Sethi for respondent No.1
           that the very object of the provisions of Ch. XVI of the Code of
           Criminal Procedure is to prevent an accused  person  from  being
           harassed by a frivolous complaint and, therefore, power is given
           to a Magistrate before whom complaint is made  to  postpone  the
           issue of summons to the accused person pending the result of  an
           enquiry made either by himself or by a Magistrate subordinate to
           him.  A privilege conferred by these provisions,  can  according
           to Mr. Sethi, be waived by the accused person and  he  can  take
           part in the proceedings.  No doubt, one of  the  objects  behind
           the provisions of Section  202,  Cr.  P.C.   is  to  enable  the
           Magistrate to scrutinize carefully the allegations made  in  the
           complaint with a view to  prevent  a  person  named  therein  as
           accused from being called upon to face  an  obviously  frivolous
           complaint.   But  there  is  also  another  object  behind  this
           provision and it is to  find  out  what  material  there  is  to
           support the allegations  made  in  the  complaint.   It  is  the
           bounden duty of the Magistrate while making an enquiry to elicit
           all facts not merely with a view to protect the interests of  an
           absent accused person, but als with a view to bring  to  book  a
           person or persons  against  whom  grave  allegations  are  made.
           Whether the complaint is frivolous or not has,  at  that  stage,
           necessarily to be determined on the basis of the material placed
           before him by the complainant.  Whatever defence the accused may
            have can only be enquired into at the trial.  An enquiry  under
           Section 202 can in no sense be characterized as a trial for  the
           simple reason that in law there can be  but  one  trial  for  an
           offence.  Permitting an accused person to intervene  during  the
           enquiry would frustrate its very object  and  that  is  why  the
           legislature has made no specific provision permitting an accused
           person to take part in an enquiry.  It is true that there is  no
           direct evidence in th case before us that the  two  persons  who
           were examined  as  court  witnesses  were  so  examined  at  the
           instance of respondent No.1 but from the  fact  that  they  were
           persons  who  were  alleged  to  have  been  the  associates  of
           respondent No.1  in  the  first  information  report  lodged  by
           Panchanan Roy and who were alleged to have been arrested on  the
           spot by some of the local  people,  they  would  not  have  been
           summoned by the Magistrate unless suggestion to that effect  had
           been made  by  counsel  appearing  for  respondent  No.1.   This
           inference is irresistible and we hold that on this  ground,  the
           enquiry made by the enquiring Magistrate is vitiated.   In  this
           connection, the observations of this court  in  Vadilal  Panchal
           v.  Dattatraya Dulaji, (1961) 1 SCR 1 at p.9 : (AIR 1960 SC 1113
           at p. 1116) may usefully be quoted :

                 “The enquiry is for the purpose of ascertaining  the  truth
                 or falsehood of the complaint; that  is,  for  ascertaining
                 whether there is evidence in support of the complaint so as
                 to  justify  the  issue  of  process  and  commencement  of
                 proceedings against the person concerned.  The section does
                 not say that a regular trial for  adjudging  the  guilt  or
                 otherwise of the  person  complained  against  should  take
                 place at that stage, for the person complained against  can
                 be legally  called  upon  to  answer  the  accusation  made
                 against him only when a process has issued and he is put on
                 trial.”

                                                          (emphasis is mine)


Recently an examination of the defence(s) of an accused,  at  the  stage  of
issuing process, came to be examined by this  Court  in  CREF  Finance  Ltd.
vs.  Shree Shanthi Homes (P) Ltd. and Anr., (2005) 7 SCC 467,  wherein  this
Court held as under :
      “10.  In  the  instant  case,  the  appellant  had  filed  a  detailed
           complaint before the Magistrate.   The  record  shows  that  the
           Magistrate took cognizance and fixed the matter for recording of
           the statement of  the  complainant  on  1-6-2000.   Even  if  we
           assume, though that is not the case, that the words  “cognizance
           taken” were not to be found in the order recorded by him on that
           date, in our view that would make no difference.  Cognizance  is
           taken of the offence and not of  the  offender  and,  therefore,
           once the court on perusal of the complaint is satisfied that the
           complaint discloses the commission of an offence and there is no
           reason to reject the  complaint  at  that  stage,  and  proceeds
           further in the matter, it must be held to have taken  cognizance
           of the offence.  One should not  confuse  taking  of  cognizance
           with issuance of process.  Cognizance is taken  at  the  initial
           stage when the Magistrate peruses the complaint with a  view  to
           ascertain whether the commission of any  offence  is  disclosed.
           The  issuance  of  process  is  at  a  later  stage  when  after
           considering the material placed before it, the court decides  to
           proceed against the offenders against whom a prima facie case is
           made out.  It is possible that a complaint may be filed  against
           several persons, but the Magistrate may choose to issue  process
           only against some of the accused.  It may  also  be  that  after
           taking cognizance and examining the  complainant  on  oath,  the
           court may come to the conclusion that no case is  made  out  for
           issuance of process and it may reject  the  complaint.   It  may
           also be that having considered  the  complaint,  the  court  may
           consider it appropriate to send the complaint to the police  for
           investigation under Section  156(3)  of  the  Code  of  Criminal
           Procedure.  We can conceive of many other situations in which  a
           Magistrate may not take cognizance at all, for instance, a  case
           where he finds that the complaint is not made by the person  who
           in law can lodge the complaint, or that  the  complaint  is  not
           entertainable by that court, or that cognizance of  the  offence
           alleged to have been  committed  cannot  be  taken  without  the
           sanction of the competent authority, etc.  These are cases where
           the Magistrate will refuse to take  cognizance  and  return  the
           complaint to the complainant.  But if he  does  not  do  so  and
           proceeds to examine the complainant and such other  evidence  as
           the complainant may produce before him then, it should  be  held
           to have taken cognizance of the offence and proceeded  with  the
           inquiry.  We are, therefore, of the opinion that  in  the  facts
           and circumstances of this case, the High Court erred in  holding
           that the Magistrate had not taken cognizance, and that being   a
           condition precedent, issuance of process was illegal.

      11.   Counsel for the respondents submitted that  cognizance  even  if
           taken was  improperly  taken  because  the  Magistrate  had  not
           applied his mind to the facts of the case.   According  to  him,
           there was  no  case  made  out  for  issuance  of  process.   He
           submitted that the debtor was the Company itself and  Respondent
           2 had issued the cheques on  behalf  of  the  Company.   He  had
           subsequently stopped payment of those cheques.   He,  therefore,
           submitted that the liability not being the personal liability of
           Respondent 2, he could not be prosecuted, and the Magistrate had
           erroneously issued process against him.  We find no merit in the
           submission.  At this stage,  we  do  not  wish  to  express  any
           considered opinion on the argument advanced by him, but  we  are
           satisfied that so far as taking of cognizance is  concerned,  in
           the facts and circumstances of this  case,  it  has  been  taken
           properly after  application  of  mind.   The  Magistrate  issued
           process only after considering the material placed  before  him.
           We, therefore, find that the judgment  and  order  of  the  High
           Court is unsustainable and must be set aside.   This  appeal  is
           accordingly allowed and the impugned judgment and order  of  the
           High Court is set aside.  The trial court will now proceed  with
           the complaint in accordance with law from the stage at which the
           respondents   took   the   matter   to    the    High    Court.”



                                                          (emphasis is mine)

A perusal of  the  legal  position  expressed  by  this  Court  reveals  the
unambiguous legal position, that possible defence(s) of an accused need  not
be taken into consideration at the time of issuing process.  There may be  a
situation, wherein, the defence(s) raised by  an  accused  is/are  factually
unassailable, and the same are also not controvertable, it  would,  demolish
the foundation of the case raised by the prosecution.   The  Magistrate  may
examine such a defence  even  at  the  stage  of  taking  cognizance  and/or
issuing process.  But  then,  this  is  not  the  position  in  the  present
controversy.  The defences raised by the learned counsel for the  petitioner
are factual in nature.  As against the aforesaid defences,  learned  counsel
for the CBI has made detailed submissions.  In fact, it was  the  submission
of the learned counsel  for  the  CBI,  that  the  defences  raised  by  the
petitioner were merely conjectural.  Each of the defences was contested  and
controverted, on the basis of material on the file. In this case  it  cannot
be  said  that  the  defences  raised  were  unassailable   and   also   not
controvertable.  As already noticed above, I do not wish  to  engage  myself
in the  instant  disputed  factual  controversy,  based  on  assertions  and
denials.  The factual position is yet to be  established  on  the  basis  of
acceptable evidence.  All that needs to be observed at the present  juncture
is, that it was not necessary for the Magistrate to take into  consideration
all possible defences, which could have been raised by  the  petitioner,  at
the stage of issuing process.  Defences as  are  suggested  by  the  learned
counsel  for  the  petitioner,  which  were  based  on  factual  inferences,
certainly ought not to have been taken into consideration.  Thus  viewed,  I
find no merit in the  instant  contention  advanced  at  the  hands  of  the
learned counsel for the petitioner.   The  instant  determination  of  mine,
should not be treated as a rejection of the defences  raised  on  behalf  of
the petitioner.  The defences raised on behalf of the accused will  have  to
be substantiated through cogent evidence and thereupon,  the  same  will  be
examined on merits, for the exculpation of the accused, if so made out.
20.   The submissions dealt with hereinabove constituted the  primary  basis
of challenge, on behalf of the petitioner.  Yet, just before the  conclusion
of the hearing of the matter, learned counsel  representing  the  petitioner
stated, that the petitioner would be satisfied even if, keeping in mind  the
defences raised on behalf of the petitioner, further investigation could  be
ordered.  This according to learned counsel will ensure, that vital  aspects
of the controversy which had remained unraveled, will be  brought  out  with
the possibility of identifying the real culprits.   This  according  to  the
learned counsel for the petitioner would meet the ends of justice.
21.   The contention advanced at the hands of the learned  counsel  for  the
petitioner, as has been noticed in the foregoing paragraph, seems  to  be  a
last ditch effort, to  savage  a  lost  situation.   The  plea  for  further
investigation, was raised by Dr.  Rajesh  Talwar  in  his  protest  petition
dated 25.1.2011.  The prayer for further investigation, was declined by  the
Magistrate in her order dated 9.2.2011.  Dr. Rajesh Talwar  who  had  raised
the aforesaid prayer, did not assail  the  aforestated  determination.   The
plea for further  investigation  therefore  attained  finality.   Dr.  Nupur
Talwar,  the  petitioner  herein,  did  not  make  a  prayer   for   further
investigation, when she assailed the order passed by  the  Magistrate  dated
9.2.2011 before the High Court (vide Criminal Revision Petition  no.1127  of
2011).  Having not pressed the aforesaid prayer before the  High  Court,  it
is not open to the petitioner Dr. Nupur Talwar, to  raise  the  same  before
this Court, in a proceeding which emerges out of the determination  rendered
by the High Court (in Criminal  Revision  Petition  no.1127  of  2011).   I,
therefore, find no merit in the instant contention advanced by  the  learned
counsel for the petitioner.
22.   I shall now embark upon the last aspect of  the  matter,  namely,  the
propriety of the petitioner in filing  the  instant  Review  Petition.   The
parameters within which an order taking cognizance and/or an  order  issuing
process needs to be passed, have already  been  dealt  with  above.   It  is
apparent from my determination, that the matter of taking cognizance  and/or
issuance of notice, is based on the satisfaction of the Magistrate.  In  the
conclusions  recorded  hereinabove,  while  making  a  reference   to   past
precedent, I have concluded, that it is  not  essential  for  the  concerned
Magistrate to record reasons or to pass a speaking order  demonstrating  the
basis of the satisfaction, leading to  issuance  of  process.   Despite  the
same, the Magistrate while issuing process vide order  dated  9.2.2011,  had
passed a detailed reasoned order.  The order brings out  the  basis  of  the
Magistrate’s satisfaction.  The aforesaid order dated 9.2.2011  came  to  be
assailed by the petitioner before the High Court of judicature at  Allahabad
through Criminal Revision Petition no.1127 of 2011.  The High  Court  having
concluded,  that  the  satisfaction  of  the  Magistrate  was  well   found,
dismissed the Revision Petition vide an order  dated  18.3.2011.   The  High
Court expressly affirmed that the order dated 9.2.2011 had  been  passed  on
the basis of record available before the High Court, and  on  the  basis  of
the Magistrate’s satisfaction, that process  deserved  to  be  issued.   The
petitioner  approached  this  Court  by  filing   Special   Leave   Petition
(Criminal) no.2982 of 2011 (renumbered as Criminal Appeal no. 16  of  2011).
While dismissing the aforesaid Criminal Appeal  vide  order  dated  6.1.2012
this Court in paragraph 11 observed as under :
      “…Obviously at this stage we cannot weigh evidence.  Looking into  the
      order of Magistrate, we find that he applied his mind in coming to the
      conclusion relating to taking of cognizance.  The Magistrate has taken
      note of the rejection report and gave his prima facie  observation  on
      the controversy upon a consideration of the materials that surfaced in
      the case. …”
                                                         (emphasis is mine)

Thereafter, the matter was disposed of, by  this  Court,  by  recording  the
following observations :
      “24.  In the above state of affairs, now the question is what  is  the
           jurisdiction and specially the duty of  this  Court  in  such  a
           situation under Article 136?

      25.   We feel constrained to observe that at this  stage,  this  Court
           should exercise utmost restrain and caution  before  interfering
           with an order of taking cognizance by the Magistrate,  otherwise
           the holding of a trial will be  stalled.   The  superior  Courts
           should maintain this restrain to uphold  the  rule  of  law  and
           sustain the faith of the common man  in  the  administration  of
           justice.
      26.   Reference in this connection may be made to a three Judge  Bench
           decision of this Court in the case of M/s  India  Carat  Private
           Ltd.  vs.   State  of  Karnataka  &  Anr.,  (1989)  2  SCC  132.
           Explaining the relevant principles  in  paragraphs  16,  Justice
           Natarajan,  speaking  for  the  unanimous  three  Judge   Bench,
           explained the position so succinctly that we could rather  quote
           the observation as under  :-

                 “The position is, therefore, now  well  settled  that  upon
                 receipt  of  a  police  report  under  Section   173(2)   a
                 Magistrate is entitled to take  cognizance  of  an  offence
                 under Section 190(1)(b) of the  Code  even  if  the  police
                 report is to the effect that no case is  made  out  against
                 the accused.  The Magistrate  can  take  into  account  the
                 statements of the witnesses examined by the  police  during
                 the  investigation  and  take  cognizance  of  the  offence
                 complained of an order the issue of process to the accused.
                  Section 190(1)(b) doest not lay down that a Magistrate can
                 take cognizance of an offence  only  if  the  investigating
                 officer gives an opinion that the  investigation  has  made
                 out a case against the accused.  The Magistrate can  ignore
                 the conclusion arrived at by the investigating officer; and
                 independently apply his mind to the facts emerging from the
                 investigation and take cognizance of the case, if he thinks
                 fit, in exercise of his powers under Section 190(1)(b)  and
                 direct the issue of process to the accused…”


      27.   These well settled  principles  still  hold  good.   Considering
           these propositions of law, we are of the view that we should not
           interfere with the concurrent order of the Magistrate  which  is
           affirmed by the High Court.

      28.   We are deliberately not going into various  factual  aspects  of
           the case which have been raised before us so that in  the  trial
           the accused persons  may  not  be  prejudiced.   We,  therefore,
           dismiss this appeal with the observation that in the trial which
           the accused persons will face, they should not be prejudiced  by
           any observation made by us in this order or in the order of  the
           High Court or those made in the Magistrate’s order while  taking
           cognizance.  The accused must be given all opportunities in  the
           trial they are to face.  We, however,  observe  that  the  trial
           should expeditiously held.
      29.   The appeal is accordingly disposed of.”
                                                     (emphasis is mine)


Unfortunately, while addressing submissions during the course of hearing  no
reference whatsoever was made either to the order passed by the High  Court,
and more significantly, to the order passed by this Court  (dated  6.1.2012)
of which review has been sought.  No error whatsoever  was  pointed  out  in
the order passed by this Court on 6.1.2012.  Learned  counsel  for  the  CBI
during the course of hearing, was therefore fully  justified  in  repeatedly
canvassing, that through the instant review  petition,  the  petitioner  was
not finding fault with the order dated 6.1.2012 (of which  review  has  been
sought), but with the order passed by the Magistrate dated 9.2.2011.   That,
I may say, is correct.  The order of this Court  did  not  fall  within  the
realm of the petitioner’s rational acceptability.  This, in  my  view,  most
certainly  amounts  to  misuse  of  jurisdiction  of  this  Court.   It  was
sufficient for this Court, while determining a challenge to an order  taking
cognizance and/or issuing process to affirm,  that  the  Magistrate’s  order
was based on satisfaction.   But  that  has  resulted  in  the  petitioner’s
lamentation.  This Court has been required to  pass  a  comprehensive  order
after  hearing  detailed  submissions  for  days  at  end,  just   for   the
petitioner’s satisfaction.  I have noticed, that every single  order  passed
by the Magistrate, having any repercussion, is being assailed  right  up  to
this Court.  Of course, the right to avail a remedy under law, is the  right
of  every  citizen.  But  such  a  right,  cannot  extend   to   misuse   of
jurisdiction.  The  petitioner’s  attitude  expresses  discomfort  at  every
order not acceding to her point of view.   Even  at  the  earlier  juncture,
full dress arguments, as have been addressed  now,  had  been  painstakingly
advanced.  Determination on  the  merits  of  the  main  controversy,  while
dealing with  the  stage  of  cognizance  and/or  issuance  of  process,  if
deliberated upon, is bound to prejudice one or the other party.   It  needed
extreme restraint not to deal with the individual factual aspects  canvassed
on behalf of the petitioner, as have been noticed above,  even  though  each
one of them was sought to be repudiated on behalf of the CBI.  I am  of  the
considered view, that the very filing of the  instant  Review  Petition  was
wholly uncalled for, specially when this Court emphatically pointed out  its
satisfaction in its earlier order  dated  6.1.2012  (which  is  the  subject
matter of review) not only in  paragraph  11  thereof,  but  also,  for  not
accepting the prayers made on behalf of the  petitioner  in  the  subsequent
paragraphs which have been extracted hereinabove.  As of now, I  would  only
seriously caution the petitioner from such behaviour in future.  After  all,
frivolous litigation takes up a large chunk of precious court  time.   While
the state of mind of the accused can be  understood,  I  shall  conclude  by
suggesting, that the accused should henceforth abide by the advice  tendered
to  her,  by  learned  counsel  representing  her.   For,  any  uncalled  or
frivolous proceedings initiated by the  petitioner  hereinafter,  may  evoke
exemplary costs.
23.   As a matter of caution I direct the Magistrate, not to  be  influenced
by any observations made by the High Court or by this Court,  while  dealing
with the order dated 9.2.2011, specially insofar as the  factual  parameters
are concerned.
24.   Dismissed.

                                            …………………………….J.
                                            (Jagdish Singh Khehar)
New Delhi;
June 7, 2012.

                                                                  Reportable

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    REVIEW PETITION (CRL.) NO. 85 OF 2012
                                     IN
                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.68 OF 2012

Nupur Talwar                                                    …
Petitioner

                                   Versus

Central Bureau of Investigation & Anr.      … Respondents





                                  O R D E R

A. K. PATNAIK, J.

      I have carefully read the order of my learned brother Khehar,  J.  and
I agree with his conclusion that  this  Review  Petition  will  have  to  be
dismissed, but I would like to give my own reasons for this conclusion.

2.    As the facts have been dealt  with  in  detail  in  the  order  of  my
learned brother, I have not felt the necessity of  reiterating  those  facts
in my order, except stating the following few facts:  The  Magistrate  by  a
detailed order dated 09.02.2011 rejected the  closure  report  submitted  by
the CBI and took cognizance under Section 190  Cr.P.C.  and  issued  process
under Section 204, Cr.P.C. to the petitioner and  her  husband,  Dr.  Rajesh
Talwar, for the offence of murder  of  their  daughter  Aarushi  Talwar  and
their domestic servant Hemraj on 16.05.2008 under  Section  302/34  IPC  and
for the offence of  causing  disappearance  of  evidence  of  offence  under
Section 201/34 IPC.  The  order  dated  09.02.2011  of  the  Magistrate  was
challenged by the petitioner in Criminal Revision  No.1127  of  2009  before
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, but the High Court dismissed  the
Criminal Revision by order dated 18.03.2011.  The order of  the  High  Court
was thereafter challenged by the petitioner  in  S.L.P.  (Crl.)  No.2982  of
2011 in which leave was granted by this Court and the S.L.P.  was  converted
to Criminal Appeal No.16 of  2011.   Ultimately,  however,  by  order  dated
06.01.2011, this Court dismissed the Criminal Appeal and the petitioner  has
filed the present Review Petition against the order dismissing the  Criminal
Appeal.

   3. The petitioner is aggrieved by the  order  dated  09.02.2011  of  the
      Magistrate taking cognizance under Section under Section 190 Cr. P.C.
      and issuing process under Section 204 Cr.P.C.  against  her  and  her
      husband.  As admittedly there are offences committed  in  respect  of
      the two deceased persons, Aarushi and Hemraj,  there  cannot  be  any
      infirmity in the order of the Magistrate taking  cognizance.   Hence,
      the only question that we are called upon to decide  is  whether  the
      Magistrate was justified in issuing the process to the petitioner and
      her husband by her order dated 09.02.2011.

   4. Sub-section (1) of Section 204 Cr.P.C.  under  which  the  Magistrate
      issued the process against the petitioner is extracted hereinbelow:
        “Section  204(1).  If  in  the  opinion  of  a  Magistrate   taking
        cognizance of an offence there is sufficient ground for proceeding,
        and the case appears to be—


            a)  a  summons-case,  he  shall  issue  his  summons  for   the
               attendance of the accused, or


            b) a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant,  or,  if  he  thinks
               fit, a summons, for causing the accused to be brought or  to
               appear at a certain time before such Magistrate  or  (if  he
               has no jurisdiction himself) some  other  Magistrate  having
               jurisdiction.”


It  is  clear  from  sub-section  (1)  of  Section  204,  Cr.P.C.  that  the
Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence shall issue the  process  against
a person if in  his  opinion  there  is  sufficient  ground  for  proceeding
against him.

5.    The standard of scrutiny of the evidence which the Magistrate  has  to
adopt for deciding whether  or  not  to  issue  process  under  Section  204
Cr.P.C. in a case exclusively triable by the Sessions Court  has  been  laid
down by this Court  in Kewal Krishan v. Suraj Bhan & Anr. [1980  (Supp)  SCC
499] this Court thus:
        “At the stage of Sections 203 and 204, Criminal Procedure Code in a
        case exclusively triable by the Court  of  Session,  all  that  the
        Magistrate has to do is to see whether on a cursory perusal of  the
        complaint and the evidence recorded during the preliminary  inquiry
        under Sections 200 and 202, Criminal Procedure Code, there is prima
        facie evidence in  support  of  the  charge  levelled  against  the
        accused. All that he  has  to  see  is  whether  or  not  there  is
        “sufficient ground for proceeding” against  the  accused.  At  this
        stage, the Magistrate is not to weigh the evidence meticulously  as
        if he were the trial court. The  standard  to  be  adopted  by  the
        Magistrate in scrutinising the evidence is not the same as the  one
        which is to be kept in view at the stage of framing  charges.  This
        Court has held in Ramesh Singh case  that  even  at  the  stage  of
        framing charges the truth, veracity  and  effect  of  the  evidence
        which the complainant produces or proposes to adduce at the  trial,
        is not to  be  meticulously  judged.  The  standard  of  proof  and
        judgment, which is to be applied finally before finding the accused
        guilty or otherwise, is not exactly to be applied at the  stage  of
        framing charges. A fortiori, at the stage of Sections  202/204,  if
        there is prima facie evidence in support of the allegations in  the
        complaint relating to a case exclusively triable by  the  Court  of
        Session, that will be a sufficient ground for  issuing  process  to
        the accused and committing them for trial to the Court of Session.”


Thus, in a case exclusively triable by the Court of Session,  all  that  the
Magistrate has to do at the stage of Section 204 Cr.P.C. is to  see  whether
on a perusal of the evidence there is  “sufficient  ground  for  proceeding”
against the accused and at this stage, the Magistrate  is  not  required  to
weigh the evidence meticulously as if he was  the  trial  court  nor  is  he
required to scrutinise the evidence  by  the  same  standard  by  which  the
Sessions Court scrutinises the evidence to decide whether to  frame  or  not
to frame charges under Section 227/228, Cr.P.C.

6. Keeping in mind these distinctions between the standards of  scrutiny  at
   the stages of issue of process, framing of charges  and  the  trial,  the
   contentions of the parties can be now considered.  Learned senior counsel
   for the petitioner, Mr. Harish Salve, produced before  us  the  materials
   which were collected during the investigation and submitted that had  the
   Magistrate considered all the relevant materials, she would have come  to
   the conclusion that sufficient  grounds  did  not  exist  for  proceeding
   against the petitioner and her husband and would  have  directed  further
   investigation as prayed by Dr. Rajesh Talwar, but unfortunately the order
   dated 09.02.2011 does not disclose that  the  Magistrate  considered  all
   relevant  materials  collected  during   investigation.    The   relevant
   materials on which the petitioner relies upon have been discussed in  the
   order of my learned Brother at length.   Mr.  Siddharth  Luthra,  learned
   senior counsel for the CBI, on the other hand, submitted that the  entire
   case diary including all the materials (statements recorded under Section
   161 Cr.P.C., the post mortem and scientific reports and material objects)
   collected  in  the  course  of  investigation  were  placed  before   the
   Magistrate and, therefore, the argument of Mr. Salve that the  Magistrate
   has not looked into all the materials collected during  investigation  is
   misconceived.
7. By writing a long order dated 09.02.2011 and not  referring  to  some  of
   the  relevant  materials  on  which  the  petitioner  relies  upon,   the
   Magistrate has exposed herself to the criticism of  learned  counsel  for
   the petitioner that she had  applied  her  mind  only  to  the  materials
   referred to in her order and not to other relevant materials collected in
   course of investigation.  Sub-section (1) of Section 204, Cr.P.C.  quoted
   above itself does not impose a legal requirement  on  the  Magistrate  to
   record reasons in support of the order to issue a  process  and  in  U.P.
   Pollution Control Board v. Mohan Meakins Ltd. & Ors. [(2000) 3  SCC  745]
   and Deputy Chief Controller of Improts & Exports v. Roshallal  Agarwal  &
   Ors. [(2003) 4 SCC 139] this Court has held that the  Magistrate  is  not
   required to record reasons at the stage of issuing  the  process  against
   the accused.  In the absence of any  legal  requirement  in  Section  204
   Cr.P.C. to issue process, it was not legally necessary for the Magistrate
   to have given detailed reasons in her order dated 09.02.2011 for  issuing
   process to the petitioner and her husband Dr. Rajesh Talwar.

8.    The fact, however, remains that  the  Magistrate  has  given  detailed
   reasons in the order dated 09.02.2011 issuing process and the order dated
   09.02.2011 itself does not disclose that the  Magistrate  has  considered
   all the relevant materials collected in  course  of  investigation.   Yet
   from the mere fact that some of  the  relevant  materials  on  which  the
   petitioner relies on have  not  been  referred  to  in  the  order  dated
   09.02.2011, the High Court could not have come to the conclusion  in  the
   revision filed by the petitioner that these relevant materials  were  not
   considered.  Moreover, this Court has held in Smt.  Nagawwa  v.  Veeranna
   Shivalingappa Konjalgi & Ors. [(1976) 3 SCC 736] that whether the reasons
   given by the Magistrate issuing process under Section 202 or 204  Cr.P.C.
   were good or bad, sufficient or insufficient, cannot be examined  by  the
   High Court in the revision.  All that the High Court, however,  could  do
   while exercising its powers of revision under Section 397/401 Cr.P.C when
   the order issuing process under Section 204 Cr.P.C. was  under  challenge
   was to examine whether there were materials before the Magistrate to take
   a view that there  was  sufficient  ground  for  proceeding  against  the
   persons to whom the processes have been issued under Section 204  Cr.P.C.
   In the present case, the High Court has not examined whether  there  were
   materials before the Magistrate to take a view that there was  sufficient
   ground for proceeding against the petitioner and her husband,  but  while
   hearing the Review Petition,  we  have  perused  the  relevant  materials
   collected in the course of the investigation and we cannot hold that  the
   opinion of the Magistrate that there was  sufficient  ground  to  proceed
   against the petitioner and her husband under Section 204 Cr.P.C was not a
   plausible view on the materials collected in course of investigation  and
   placed before her along with the closure report.  As we have  seen,  sub-
   section (1) of Section 204 Cr.P.C. provides  that  the  Magistrate  shall
   issue the process (summons or  warrant)  if  in  his  opinion  there  was
   sufficient ground for proceeding and  therefore  so  long  as  there  are
   materials to support  the  opinion  of  the  Magistrate  that  there  was
   sufficient  ground  for  proceeding  against  the  persons  to  whom  the
   processes have been issued, the High Court in exercise of its  revisional
   power will not interfere with the same only because it forms a  different
   opinion on the same materials.

9. Mr. Harish Salve, however, cited the judgment of this Court in  State  of
   Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy & Ors. [(1977) 2 SCC 699]  in  which  the  High
   Court in exercise of its power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has quashed  the
   proceedings before the Sessions Court on the ground of  insufficiency  of
   evidence and this Court agreed with  the  view  of  the  High  Court  and
   dismissed the appeal.  The decision of this Court in the case of State of
   Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy & Ors. (supra) does not relate to a case at the
   stage of issue of process by the Magistrate under  Section  204  Cr.P.C.,
   and as the facts of that case indicate, that was a case  where  the  High
   Court was of the view that the material on which the prosecution proposed
   to rely against the respondents in that case  was  wholly  inadequate  to
   sustain the charge against them in the case which was pending before  the
   Sessions Court.  As has been clarified by this Court in Kewal Krishan  v.
   Suraj Bhan & Anr. (supra), at  the  stage  of  Section  204  Cr.P.C.  the
   standard to be adopted by the Magistrate in scrutinizing the evidence  is
   not the same as the one which is to be kept  in  view  at  the  stage  of
   framing of charges by the Sessions Court.

10.   The result of  the  aforesaid  discussion  is  that  the  order  dated
   09.02.2011 of the Magistrate taking cognizance under Section 190  Cr.P.C.
   and issuing process against the petitioner and her husband under  Section
   204 Cr.P.C. could not have been interfered with by the High Court in  the
   Revision filed by the  petitioner.   Moreover,  once  the  order  of  the
   Magistrate taking cognizance and issuing process against  the  petitioner
   and her husband was sustained, there is no scope for granting the  relief
   of further investigation for the purpose of finding out  whether  someone
   other than the petitioner and her husband had committed the  offences  in
   respect of the deceased persons Aarushi and/or Hemraj.  As has been  held
   by this Court in Randhir  Singh  Rana  v.  State  (Delhi  Administration)
   [(1997) 1 SCC 361], once a Magistrate  takes  cognizance  of  an  offence
   under  Section  190  Cr.P.C.,  he  cannot  order  of  his   own   further
   investigation  in  the  case  under  Section  156(3)   Cr.P.C.   but   if
   subsequently the Sessions Court passes an order discharging  the  accused
   persons, further  investigation  by  the  police  on  its  own  would  be
   permissible, which may also result in submission of fresh charge-sheet.

11. For these reasons, I agree with my learned brother Khehar, J. that  this
   Review Petition has no merit and should be dismissed.

                                                                ….………………….J.

(A. K. Patnaik)


New Delhi,
June 07, 2012.

                                 Correction



      In paragraph No.8 of the order pronounced by Hon'ble Mr. Justice  A.K.
      Patnaik, for Section 397 Cr.P.C. read Section 397/401 Cr.P.C.

-----------------------
60
