
Supreme Court of India
Assoo vs State Of M.P on 26 April, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 1863 of 2008

                                                      1





                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1863 OF 2008




         ASSOO                                                  ...    APPELLANT

                                                  VERSUS

               STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                             ....    RESPONDENT

                                        O R D E R 

         1.          This appeal, by way of special leave, arises out of 

         the following facts:

         1.1         Jummi   Bai   deceased   had   been   married   with   the 

         appellant Assoo, about five years prior to the incident. 

         At the time of the marriage, her parents had promised to 

         give   her   a   radio-   set   and   watch   in   the     dowry.     It 

         appears,   however,   that   due   to   their   poor   financial 

         condition,   they   were   not   able   to   fulfill   the   demand. 

         The appellant was, accordingly, upset  with this refusal 



         and   started   harassing   the   deceased   to   bring   the 



         aforesaid   articles.     Frustrated   thereby,   on   21st  April, 



         1990   at   about   6.30   p.m.,Jummi   Bai   committed   suicide   by 



         setting   herself   on   fire.                 The   fact   that   she   had 



         committed   suicide   was   reported   to   the   police   by   the 



         appellant   himself.                  A   daily   diary   entry   was, 



         accordingly, made.   The dead body was also sent for its 


Crl.A. No. 1863 of 2008

                                                 2





         post mortem examination and   the doctor opined that the 



         cause of the death was complications arising out of 100% 



         burn   injuries.     On   investigation,   however,   the   police 



         found  that a case under Section 304-B IPC was made out 



         against   the   appellant   as   he   had   made   repeated   demands 



         for   the   aforesaid   articles   and   on   the   inability   of   her 



         parents   to   meet   the   demand   he   had   harassed   her   and 



         driven her to suicide.

         1.2         The   prosecution   in   support   of   its   case   placed 



         reliance   on   the     evidence   of   PW1   Rajjab   Khan   and     PW2 



         Peer   Khan,     the   father   and   brother   of   the   deceased 



         respectively. The trial court, on a consideration of the 



         aforesaid evidence, found that a case under Section 304-

         B IPC was proved against the appellant and, accordingly, 



         convicted him under that provision and sentenced him to 



         seven   years   rigorous   imprisonment.             An   appeal   was 



         thereafter  taken  to  the  High  Court.      The  High    Court, 



         vide   judgment   dated   13th  December,   2006,   partly   allowed 



         the   appeal   and   set-aside   the   conviction   and   sentence 



         awarded   by   the   trial   court   and   convicted   the   appellant 



         under   Section   306   IPC   instead   and   sentenced   him   to 



         undergo   rigorous   imprisonment   for   three   years.     Hence, 



         this appeal by way of special leave.

Crl.A. No. 1863 of 2008

                                                   3
         2.          The   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant   has   at   the 



         very outset, pointed out that the evidence of PWs 1 and 



         2   could   not   be   believed   as   they   were   relatives   of   the 



         deceased     and   that   PW3   None   Lal,     another   prosecution 



         witness,   had   completely   disowned   the   prosecution   story 



         and had given a different version all   together, which, 



         if   accepted,   would   absolve   the   appellant   of   any 



         misconduct.     He   has   further   argued   that   even   assuming 



         that there had been a quarrel between the appellant and 



         his  wife,  it  was  not  of  such  a  nature  which  would  have 



         led her to commit suicide as envisaged under Section 306 



         IPC.

         3.          Mr.   Vibha   Dutta   Makhija,   the   learned   counsel 



         appearing for the State has, however, has supported the 



         judgment   of   the   High   Court   and   submitted   that     the 



         evidence clearly showed that appellant had harassed his 



         wife on account of her inability to bring the radio and 



         the   watch   as   demanded   and   that   the     ill-treatment   had 



         driven her to suicide.  

         4.          We   have   considered   the   arguments   advanced   by   the 



         learned   counsel.     At   the   very   outset   we   must   note   that 



         the   appellant   has   been   acquitted   by   the   High   Court   of 



         the   charge   under   Section   304-B   IPC.     The   question   now 


Crl.A. No. 1863 of 2008

                                                   4





         arises   as   to   his   culpability   under   Section   306   of   the 



         IPC.   We   have   perused   the   evidence   of   PWs   1   and   2,   the 



         father   and   brother   of   the   deceased   .   PW   -   1   testified 



         that his daughter had been reprimanded by the appellant 



         as   she was not manufacturing enough beedis and that he 



         had also beaten her  as she was not able to fulfill his 



         demand   for   a   watch   and   a   radio.     PW2   Peer   Khan,   the 



         brother   of   the   deceased,   however,   admitted     in   his 



         cross-examination   that   the   appellant   had   not   made   a 



         demand   for   a   radio   and   watch   but   they   had   themselves 



         promised   to   supply   these   items   although   they   had   not 



         been able to keep their word. 

         5.          We   are   of   the   opinion   that   besides   the   evidence 



         of   Pws   1   and   2,   which   itself   is   extremely   shaky,   there 



         is     no   other   statement   to   show   any   misbehaviour   or 



         demands  for  dowry.    There  is  also  no  indication    as  to 



         when these demands had been made.  It must be noted that 



         every   quarrel   between   a   husband   and   wife   which   results 



         in   a     suicide   cannot   be   taken   as   an   abetment   by   the 



         husband   and   the   standard   of   a   reasonable   and   practical 



         woman   as   compared   to   a   headstrong   and   over   sensitive 



         one,   has   to   be   applied.       Taking   the   evidence   against 



         the   appellant,   as   it   is,   we   find   that   no   abetment   of 



         suicide is made out.  We have  also perused the evidence 


Crl.A. No. 1863 of 2008

                                                5





         of PW 3 None Lal, a neighbour, and one of the first to 



         arrive   at   the   spot.     He   gave   a   story   which   completely 



         dislodges the statements of PWs 1 and 2.   He deposed in 



         his cross-examination that Shri Bai, a neighbour of the 



         appellant,  had made allegations against the deceased in 



         the   presence   of   Ghaffoor   and   Ishaq   that            she   was 



         involved   in   illicit   activities   while   her   husband   was 



         away and   that she would reveal all to her husband when 



         he   returned   home   and   that   immediately   after   these 



         remarks   the   appellant   had   returned   home   on   which   the 



         deceased   had   gone   inside   and   set   herself   ablaze.     We 



         take   it,   therefore,   as   if   the   prosecution   had   accepted 



         the   statement   of   PW3   as     true,   as   the   witenss   had   not 



         been declared hostile. 

         6.          We,   accordingly,   set-aside   the   impugned   judgment 



         and  allow the appeal. The appellant stands acquitted.

                                               .........................J

                                               [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                ..........................J

                                               [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD] 

         NEW DELHI.

         APRIL 26, 2011.

