
Supreme Court of India
Pradeep Bisoi @ Ranjit Bisoi vs The State Of Odisha on 10 October, 2018Author: A Bhushan
Bench: A Bhushan, A Sikri
                                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1192 OF 2018
                          (arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 6225 of 2017)


                PRADEEP BISOI @ RANJIT BISOI                                 … APPELLANT(S)

                                                    VERSUS

                THE STATE OF ODISHA                                          … RESPONDENT(S)

                                             J U D G M E N T

                ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.


                         This appeal has been filed by the accused against

                the judgment of Orissa High Court dated 25.01.2017. The

                Orissa      High     Court    vide        the    impugned      judgment     has

                dismissed     the    criminal       appeal       filed   by    the    appellant

                questioning his conviction under Section 304 Part II of

                the      Indian    Penal     Code    and        sentence      of   five   years

                rigorous imprisonment awarded by the trial court.



                2.       The prosecution case as is revealed from the record

                is that Bhaskar Sahu (deceased) on 28.11.1990 in the

                morning     at     7.00    A.M.     was       going   near    Belapada    by   a
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.10.10
16:40:18 IST
                bicycle.      Near the Belapada bridge, the accused threw a
Reason:


                bomb towards the deceased, which hit the right leg of

                Bhaskar Sahu, the deceased, due to which he fell down on


                                                          1
the road.        Bhaskar Sahu when started running to save his

life, accused came running before the deceased and dealt

a kati blow on right shoulder of Bhaskar Sahu on which

he fell down thereafter the accused poured acid on head,

face and chest of Bhaskar Sahu.                    Thereafter the accused

and   his   friends       left   that      place.         One    Khalia        Pati

belonging    to     the     village     of    Bhaskar        Sahu      took    the

deceased with the help of bicycle.                     Thereafter brother

of Bhaskar Sahu – Surendra Nath Sahu after receiving the

news of assault came with Tarini Sahu, Kasinath Bisoi

and   Bidyadhar      Babu    belonging        to    the   village       and    got

admitted    Bhaskar       Sahu   in     Berhampur         Medical       College.

Suurendra Nath Sahu, the brother of Bhaskar Sahu lodged

a First Information Report naming the accused.                                First

Information         Report       was       lodged         under         Sections

324/326/286/34       IPC.     The      I.O.        visited      the    spot      on

30.11.1990 and seized one blood stained stone and sample

stone and one yellow colour banian with smell of acid

and prepared the seizure list.                     Some sample earth, one

towel with smell of acid was also noticed.                            Thereafter

the I.O. examined the witnesses.                   The I.O. on 05.12.1990

showed arrest of the accused.                  On 05.12.1990 the I.O.

recorded the statement of Bhaskar Sahu under Section 161

Cr.P.c.     in    which     statement        Bhaskar      Sahu        named     the




                                       2
accused, the persons, who has thrown the bomb, hit with

kati and thrown acid on his face and head.                The accused

was challaned and PW1, the informant, PW2 - Dandopani

Dass and PW3 – Prafulla Leuman Sahu were examined by the

prosecution.       I.O.    (PW4)       –    Prithandhi   Moghi    also

appeared in the witness box.               The deceased while still

in hospital died on 25.03.1991.               Defence examined two

witnesses namely DW1 – Ramesh Chandra Sahu and DW2 –

Bidyadhar Sahu.


3.   The   trial   court   after       analyzing   the   evidence   on

record and hearing the counsel for the parties convicted

the accused under Section 304 Part II of the I.P.C. and

awarded five years rigorous imprisonment.                Aggrieved by

the judgment of the trial court, the appeal was filed by

the accused in the High Court, which has been dismissed

by the High Court by the impugned judgment.


4.   Learned   counsel     for   the       appellant   contends   that

there is contradiction in the evidence of PW1 with other

witnesses.     There is contradiction as to who took the

injured to the hospital.         The victim became unconscious

and it is unbelievable that he informed the PW1 that it

was accused, who attacked him.             The statement of injured

recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. cannot be treated as



                                   3
a    dying    declaration          in    view       of   the    well    settled

principle      of     law    enunciated        by    a   Constitution      Bench

judgment      of      this    Court       in        Laxman     Vs.   State     of

Maharashtra, (2002) 6 SCC 710, as to who is the author

of   the     crime,    both     the     Courts       below    arrived   at    the

findings based on surmises and conjectures and not on

evidence on record.


5.     Learned        counsel      for       the      State     refuting      the

submission of counsel for the appellant contends that on

the basis of evidence on record, both the Courts have

rightly held the charge proved against the accused.                            No

error has been committed by the Courts below relying on

the statement made by the injured on 05.12.1990 recorded

by the I.O.         Further, evidence of PW1, to whom deceased

had informed that it was accused, who threw bomb and

made   kati     attack       and    threw      acid,     has    rightly      been

believed by the Courts below.                   It is submitted that the

statement made by the injured on 05.12.1990 was fully

admissible and no error has been committed by the Courts

below in relying the same.                      Learned counsel for the

State has placed reliance on judgment of this Court in

Mukeshbhai Gopalbhai Barot Vs. State of Gujarat, (2010)

8 SCALE 477 and Sri Bhagwan Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh,

(2013) 12 SCC 137.


                                         4
6.      We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and have perused the records.


7.      The    main   thrust    of   submission   of    the    learned

counsel for the appellant is that statement recorded by

I.O. on 05.12.1990 of the victim cannot be treated as

dying declaration since death occurred after more than

three months.         He submits that both Courts committed

error     in     treating      the   said   statement     as     dying

declaration.


8.      Section 32 of the Evidence Act deals with cases in

which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead

or cannot be found etc. is relevant.              Section 32 in so

far as relevant in the present case is as follows:-

     S.32. Cases in which statement of relevant
     fact by person who is dead or cannot be found,
     etc., is relevant. –– Statements, written or
     verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who
     is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has
     become incapable of giving evidence, or whose
     attendance cannot be procured without an
     amount of delay or expense which under the
     circumstances of the case appears to the Court
     unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in
     the following cases: ––

     (1) When it relates to cause of death. –– When
     the statement is made by a person as to the
     cause of his death, or as to any of the
     circumstances   of   the   transaction   which
     resulted in his death, in cases in which the
     cause of that person’s death comes into
     question.

                                     5
           Such statements are relevant whether the
      person who made them was or was not, at the
      time when they were made, under expectation of
      death, and whatever may be the nature of the
      proceeding in which the cause of his death
      comes into question.

                              xxxxxxxxxxxxxx

           Illustrations:

           (a) The question              is,   whether    A   was
      murdered by B; or

           A  died   of injuries  received in  a
      transaction in the course of which she was
      ravished. The question is whether she was
      ravished by B; or

           The question is, whether A was killed by
      B under such circumstances that a suit would
      lie against B by A’s widow.

           Statements made by A as to the cause of
      his or her death, referring respectively to
      the murder, the rape and the actionable wrong
      under consideration, are relevant facts.


9.    Other provisions relevant to be noticed are Section

161 and Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Section    161    deals   with      examination    of    witnesses   by

police.     Section 162 deals with “statements to police

not   to   be    signed   –   Use   of    Statements     in   evidence”.

Section 162 Cr.P.C. is as follows:-

      162. Statements to police not to be signed:
      Use   of  statements  in   evidence.—(1) No
      statement made by any person to a police
      officer in the course of an investigation
      under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to
      writing, be signed by the person making it;
      nor shall any such statement or any record
      thereof,  whether  in  a  police   diary or


                                     6
      otherwise, or any part of such statement or
      record, be used for any purpose, save as
      hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial
      in respect of any offence under investigation
      at the time when such statement was made:

            Provided that when any witness is called
      for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial
      whose statement has been reduced into writing
      as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if
      duly proved, may be used by the accused, and
      with the permission of the Court, by the
      prosecution, to contradict such witness in the
      manner provided by section 145 of the Indian
      Evidence Act , 1872 (1 of 1872); and when any
      part of such statement is so used, any part
      thereof may also be used in the re-examination
      of such witness, but for the purpose only of
      explaining any matter referred to in his
      cross-examination.

      (2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
      apply to any statement falling within the
      provisions of clause (1) of section 32 of the
      Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); or to
      affect the provisions of section 27 of that
      Act.

           Explanation.—An omission to state a fact
      or circumstance in the statement referred to
      in    sub-section   (1)    may   amount    to
      contradiction if the same appears to be
      significant and otherwise relevant having
      regard to the context in which such omission
      occurs and whether any omission amounts to a
      contradiction in the particular context shall
      be a question of fact.


10.   Sub-section (2) to Section 162 incorporate a clear

exception to what has been laid down in sub-section (1).

The   statement   recorded   by       police   under   Section   161,

falling within the provisions of clause (1) of Section

32 of Indian Evidence Act, thus, is clearly relevant and



                                  7
admissible.     In Mukeshbhai Gopalbhai Barot (supra), this

Court had occasion to consider Sections 161 and 162 of

Cr.P.C. and Section 32 of the Evidence Act.                         In the

above case, the victim, who received burn injuries on

14.09.1993      was   admitted    to    Civil        Hospital.         Her

statement was recorded by Executive Magistrate and by

the   Police.     The   statement      recorded      by   police     under

Section   161    Cr.P.C.   was   discarded      by    the    High    Court

taking the view that it had no evidentiary value.                      The

view of the High Court was not accepted by this Court.

In paragraph Nos. 4 and 5, this Court held that the

statement of persons recorded under Section 161 can be

treated as dying declaration after death.                   In paragraph

Nos. 4 and 5, following has been laid down:-

      “4. We have considered the arguments advanced
      by the learned counsel for the parties. At the
      very outset, we must deal with the observa-
      tions of the High Court that the dying decla-
      rations Ex.44 and 48 could not be taken as ev-
      idence in view of the provisions of Section
      161 and 162 of the Cr.P.C. when read cumula-
      tively. These findings are, however, erro-
      neous. Sub-Section (1) of Section 32 of the
      Indian Evidence Act, 1872 deals with several
      situations including the relevance of a state-
      ment made by a person who is dead. The provi-
      sion reads as under:
               Sec.32.    Cases     in     which
          statements   of  relevant    fact   by
          person who is dead or cannot be
          found,    etc.,   is   relevant.     -
          Statements, written or verbal, of
          relevant facts made by a person who
          is dead, or who cannot be found, or



                                  8
    who has become incapable of giving
    evidence, or whose attendance cannot
    be procured without an amount of
    delay or expense which, under the
    circumstances of the case, appears
    to   the  Court   unreasonable,  are
    themselves relevant facts in the
    following cases:-

    (1) When it relates to cause of
    death. - When the statement is made
    by a person as to the cause of his
    death,   or   as    to   any   of   the
    circumstances    of   the   transaction
    which resulted in his death, in
    cases in which the cause of that
    person's death comes into question.

         Such statements are relevant
    whether the person who made them was
    or was not, at the time when they
    were made, under expectation of
    death, and whatever may be the
    nature of the proceeding in which
    the cause of his death comes into
    question."

     We see that the aforesaid dying declara-
tions are relevant in view of the above provi-
sion. Even otherwise, Section 161 and 162 of
the Cr.P.C. admittedly provide for a restric-
tive use of the statements recorded during the
course of the investigation but sub-Section
(2) of Section 162 deals with a situation
where the maker of the statement dies and
reads as under:

         "(2) Nothing in this section
    shall be deemed to apply to any
    statement falling within the provi-
    sions of clause (1) of Section 32 of
    the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of
    1872), or to affect the provisions
    of section 27 of that Act."

                       9
      5. A bare perusal of the aforesaid provision
      when read with Section 32 of the Indian Evi-
      dence Act would reveal that a statement of a
      person recorded under Section 161 would be
      treated as a dying declaration after his
      death. The observation of the High Court that
      the dying declarations Ex.44 and 48 had no ev-
      identiary value, therefore, is erroneous. In
      this view of the matter, the first dying dec-
      laration made to the Magistrate on 14th Sep-
      tember 1993 would, in fact, be the First In-
      formation Report in this case.”



11.   A similar view has been expressed by this Court in

Sri Bhagwan (supra), where this Court had occasion to

consider   Section   161   Cr.P.C   .and   Section   32   of   the

Indian Evidence Act.       This Court dealt with a statement

under Section 161 Cr.P.C. subsequent to death of the

victim.    In Para 20 to 24, following has been held:-

      “20. While keeping the above prescription in
      mind, when we test the submission of the
      learned counsel for the appellant in the case
      on hand at the time when Section 161 CrPC
      statement of the deceased was recorded, the
      offence registered was under Section 326 IPC
      having regard to the grievous injuries sus-
      tained by the victim. PW 4 was not contemplat-
      ing to record the dying declaration of the
      victim inasmuch as the victim was seriously
      injured and immediately needed medical aid.
      Before sending him to the hospital for proper
      treatment PW 4 thought it fit to get the ver-
      sion about the occurrence recorded from the
      victim himself that had taken place and that
      is how Exhibit Ka-2 came to be recorded. Un-
      doubtedly, the statement was recorded as one
      under Section 161 CrPC. Subsequent development
      resulted in the death of the victim on the
      next day and the law empowered the prosecution



                               10
to rely on the said statement by treating it
as a dying declaration, the question for con-
sideration is whether the submission put forth
on behalf of the respondent counsel merits ac-
ceptance.

21. Mr Ratnakar Dash, learned Senior Counsel
made a specific reference to Section 162(2)
CrPC in support of his submission that the
said section carves out an exception and cre-
dence that can be given to a Section 161 CrPC
statement by leaving it like a declaration un-
der Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act under
certain exceptional circumstances. Section
162(2) CrPC reads as under:

    “162. (2) Nothing in this section
    shall be deemed to apply to any
    statement falling within the provi-
    sions of clause (1) of Section 32 of
    the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of
    1872), or to affect the provisions
    of Section 27 of that Act.”

22. Under Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act it
has been provided as under:

    “32. Cases in which statement of
    relevant fact by person who is dead
    or cannot be found, etc. is rele-
    vant.—Statements, written or verbal,
    of relevant facts made by a person
    who is dead, or who cannot be found,
    or who has become incapable of giv-
    ing evidence, or whose attendance
    cannot be procured without an amount
    of delay or expense which under the
    circumstances of the case appears to
    the court unreasonable, are them-
    selves relevant facts in the follow-
    ing cases:

    (1) When it relates to cause of
    death.—When the statement is made by
    a person as to the cause of his
    death, or as to any of the circum-
    stances of the transaction which re-

                      11
    sulted in his death, in cases in
    which the cause of that person’s
    death comes into question.
    Such statements are relevant whether
    the person who made them was or was
    not, at the time when they were
    made, under expectation of death,
    and whatever may be the nature of
    the proceeding in which the cause of
    his death comes into question.”

23. Going by Section 32(1) of the Evidence
Act, it is quite clear that such statement
would be relevant even if the person who made
the statement was or was not at the time when
he made it was under the expectation of death.
Having regard to the extraordinary credence
attached to such statement falling under Sec-
tion 32(1) of the Evidence Act, time and again
this Court has cautioned as to the extreme
care and caution to be taken while relying
upon such evidence recorded as a dying decla-
ration.

24. As far as the implication of Section
162(2) CrPC is concerned, as a proposition of
law, unlike the excepted circumstances under
which Section 161 CrPC statement could be re-
lied upon, as rightly contended by the learned
Senior Counsel for the respondent, once the
said statement though recorded under Section
161 CrPC assumes the character of dying decla-
ration falling within the four corners of Sec-
tion 32(1) of the Evidence Act, then whatever
credence that would apply to a declaration
governed by Section 32(1) should automatically
deemed to apply in all force to such a state-
ment though was once recorded under Section
161 CrPC. The above statement of law would re-
sult in a position that a purported recorded
statement under Section 161 of a victim having
regard to the subsequent event of the death of
the person making the statement who was a vic-
tim would enable the prosecuting authority to
rely upon the said statement having regard to
the nature and content of the said statement
as one of dying declaration as deeming it and
falling under Section 32(1) of Evidence Act


                      12
      and thereby commend all the credence that
      would be applicable to a dying declaration
      recorded and claimed as such.”


12.   It is relevant to refer to judgment of this Court

in Najjam Faraghi @ Nijjam Faruqui Vs. State of West

Bengal,    (1998)   2   SCC    45.     In   the   above   case,   the

kerosene oil was poured on the victim and she was put on

fire on 13.06.1985.           She lived for about a month and

died on 31.07.1985.           This Court referring to Section

32(1) held that mere fact that victim died long after

making    the   dying   declaration,    the   statement    does   not

looses its value.       In Para 9, following has been held:-

      “9. There is no merit in the contention that
      the appellant’s wife died long after making
      the dying declarations and therefore those
      statements have no value. The contention over-
      looks the express provision in Section 32 of
      the Evidence Act. The second paragraph of sub-
      section (1) reads as follows:

           “Such   statements    are   relevant
           whether the person who made them was
           or was not, at the time when they
           were made, under expectation of
           death, and whatever may be the na-
           ture of the proceeding in which the
           cause of his death comes into ques-
           tion.”

      No doubt it has been pointed out that when a
      person is expecting his death to take place
      shortly he would not be indulging in false-
      hood. But that does not mean that such a
      statement loses its value if the person lives
      for a longer time than expected. The question
      has to be considered in each case on the facts
      and circumstances established therein. If


                                  13
       there is nothing on record to show that the
       statement could not have been true or if the
       other evidence on record corroborates the con-
       tents of the statements, the court can cer-
       tainly accept the same and act upon it. In the
       present case both courts have discussed the
       entire evidence on record and found that two
       dying declarations contained in Exs. 5 and 6
       are acceptable.”


13.    Much emphasis has been given by the learned counsel

for the appellant on Constitution Bench judgment of this

Court in Laxman Vs. State of Maharashtra (supra).                The

above constitution Bench was constituted to resolve the

conflict between two Three-Judge Bench judgment of this

Court, i.e. Paparambaka Rosamma and Others Vs. State of

A.P.    (1999)   7   SCC   695   and   Koli   Chunilal   Savji   and

Another Vs. State of Gujarat, (1999) 9 SCC 562.                  The

facts of the case and conflicting views expressed in the

above two cases has been noticed in Paragraph Nos. 1 and

2, which are to the following effect:-


         “In this criminal appeal, the conviction of
       the accused-appellant is based upon the dying
       declaration of the deceased which was recorded
       by the Judicial Magistrate (PW 4). The learned
       Sessions Judge as well as the High Court held
       the dying declaration made by the deceased to
       be truthful, voluntary and trustworthy. The
       Magistrate in his evidence had stated that he
       had contacted the patient through the medical
       officer on duty and after putting some ques-
       tions to the patient to find out whether she
       was able to make the statement; whether she
       was set on fire; whether she was conscious and
       able to make the statement and on being satis-

                                  14
fied he recorded the statement of the de-
ceased. There was a certificate of the doctor
which indicates that the patient was con-
scious. The High Court on consideration of the
evidence of the Magistrate as well as on the
certificate of the doctor on the dying decla-
ration recorded by the Magistrate together
with other circumstances on record came to the
conclusion that the deceased Chandrakala was
physically and mentally fit and as such the
dying declaration can be relied upon. When the
appeal against the judgment of the Aurangabad
Bench of the Bombay High Court was placed be-
fore a three-Judge Bench of this Court, the
counsel for the appellant relied upon the de-
cision of this Court in the case of Paparam-
baka Rosamma v. State of A.P., (1999) 7 SCC
695 and contended that since the certification
of the doctor was not to the effect that the
patient was in a fit state of mind to make the
statement, the dying declaration could not
have been accepted by the Court to form the
sole basis of conviction. On behalf of the
counsel appearing for the State another three-
Judge Bench decision of this Court in the case
of Koli Chunilal Savji v. State of Gujarat
(1999) 9 SCCC 562 was relied upon wherein this
Court has held that if the materials on record
indicate that the deceased was fully conscious
and was capable of making a statement, the dy-
ing declaration of the deceased thus recorded
cannot be ignored merely because the doctor
had not made the endorsement that the deceased
was in a fit state of mind to make the state-
ment in question. Since the two aforesaid de-
cisions expressed by two Benches of three
learned Judges was somewhat contradictory the
Bench by order dated 27-7-2002 referred the
question to the Constitution Bench.
  2. At the outset we make it clear that we
are only resolving the so-called conflict be-
tween the aforesaid three-Judge Bench decision
of this Court, whereafter the criminal appeal
will be placed before the Bench presided over
by Justice M.B. Shah who had referred the mat-
ter to the Constitution Bench. We are, there-
fore, refraining from examining the evidence
on record to come to a conclusion one way or



                      15
      the other and we are restricting our consider-
      ations to the correctness of the two decisions
      referred to supra.”


14.   The Constitution Bench approved the view taken by

later judgment in    Koli Chunilal Savji (supra).      In

Paragraph No. 5, following has been laid down:-


        “5. The Court also in the aforesaid case
      relied upon the decision of this Court in Har-
      jit Kaur v. State of Punjab4 wherein the Mag-
      istrate in his evidence had stated that he had
      ascertained from the doctor whether she was in
      a fit condition to make a statement and ob-
      tained an endorsement to that effect and
      merely because an endorsement was made not on
      the declaration but on the application would
      not render the dying declaration suspicious in
      any manner. For the reasons already indicated
      earlier, we have no hesitation in coming to
      the conclusion that the observations of this
      Court in Paparambaka Rosamma v. State of A.P.
      (1999) 7 SCC 695 (at SCC p. 701, para 8) to
      the effect that

          “in the absence of a medical certi-
          fication that the injured was in a
          fit state of mind at the time of
          making the declaration, it would be
          very much risky to accept the sub-
          jective satisfaction of a Magistrate
          who opined that the injured was in a
          fit state of mind at the time of
          making a declaration”


      has been too broadly stated and is not the
      correct enunciation of law. It is indeed a hy-
      pertechnical view that the certification of
      the doctor was to the effect that the patient
      is conscious and there was no certification
      that the patient was in a fit state of mind
      especially when the Magistrate categorically
      stated in his evidence indicating the ques-

                            16
       tions he had put to the patient and from the
       answers elicited was satisfied that the pa-
       tient was in a fit state of mind whereafter he
       recorded the dying declaration. Therefore, the
       judgment of this Court in Paparambaka Rosamma
       v. State of A.P. (1999) 7 SCC 695      must be
       held to be not correctly decided and we affirm
       the law laid down by this Court in Koli Chuni-
       lal Savji v. State of Gujarat (1999) 9 SCC
       562.”


15.     The     view     expressed          by       Three-Judge         Bench     in

Paparambaka       Rosamma      (supra)          that       in    the    absence    of

medical       certification        that     the      injured      was    in   a   fit

state of mind at the time of making the declaration, it

would    be     very    much       risky       to    accept      the     subjective

satisfaction of a Magistrate who opined that the injured

was in a fit state of mind at the time of making a

declaration, does not lay down a correct law.                             Thus, the

Constitution bench was only considering the question of

nature    of     medical      certification            regarding        fitness    of

victim to make a dying declaration.                              The proposition

laid    down     in    the   above    case          does   not    in    any   manner

support the contention raised by the counsel for the

appellant in the present case.                       Present is a case where

a statement was recorded by I.O. under Section 161 of

the victim on 05.12.1990.                  Both the trial court and the

High     Court    held       the    statement          relevant         and   placed

reliance on the said statement.


                                          17
16.   We have noticed that this Court has laid down that

statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C., which is covered

under Section 32(1) is relevant and admissible.                       Thus,

we do not find any error in the judgment of the trial

court as well as of the High Court in relying on the

statement     of    the    injured     recorded     by    the    I.O.    on

05.12.1990.        It is also relevant to notice that I.O. in

his cross-examination has stated that he went on the

night of 30.11.1990 to the Medical College to record the

statement but as his condition was serious, he was not

examined.      Thus,      reliance     on   the    statement     made     on

05.12.1990 to the I.O. does not lead to any suspicious

circumstances       so    as   to    discard      the    value   of     such

statement.     The statement, which was made by the victim

on 05.12.1990 was to the following effect:-


      “My name is Bhaskar Sahu, S/o. Kaibalya Sahu,
      present/permanent Resident of Village - Langal
      Dei, P.S. Digapahandi Dist. Gangnam, Today,
      i.e. on 05.12.1920, being at the Medical
      College ward I hereby give my verbal statement
      that, I was going to Belapada from our Village
      Langal Del on 28.11.1990 at about 6:30 to 7:00
      O'clock on my bi-cycle. On my way near the
      bridge of Belapada Village, inhabitant of our
      village namely Pradeep Bisoi, S/o. Madhab
      Bisoi and some of his friends were waiting to
      kill me. They had come by a Scoter. I don't
      know others. Near the Belapada Bridge, all of
      a sudden Pradeep Bisoi threw a Bomb towards me
      which was defused after hitting my right leg



                                     18
       for which I fell down on the road. When I
       started running, trying to save my life, at
       that time Pradeep Bisoi came running after me
       and dealt a kati blow on my right solder, for
       which I fell down bloodstained. Thereafter
       from a bottle carried by him, he poured acid
       on my head, face, chest and also on my entire
       body To save my life. I threw away my black
       color vest from my body. Looking at my
       critical condition, Pradeep Bisoi and his
       friends left that place. After that, the son
       of Khalia Pati of our village saw me, and
       while taking me by the help of a cycle, my
       brother Surendar Sahu got that news and Tarini
       Sahu, and Kishnath Bisoi and Bidhyadhara Babu
       of our village reached to me and my brother
       immediately admitted me in the Berhampur
       Medical Collage. Otherwise I would have died
       on the spot. Because of our previous enmity,
       Pradeep Bisoi was trying to kill me. But I was
       just saved. There is no chance of my
       survival.”


17.    The   trial   court    after    appreciation    of   evidence

recorded the findings that deceased had acid injuries as

well as bomb blast injuries.           In the acid attack, he has

lost his eye-sight and also lost his right foot.                 The

trial court has rightly held that statement of deceased

made    on   05.12.1990      is   admissible   under   Section    32

because it is regarding his cause of death and how he

was injured.     In para 8 of the judgment, trial court has

recorded as follows:-

       “8. From the medical report it is clear that
       the deceased was having acid injury and bomb
       blasting injury and during the treatment he
       died in the hospital.   Now it is to be seen
       who has caused those acid and bomb blast
       injuries on the person of the deceased. There



                                  19
       is no eye witness to the occurrence.       The
       deceased had given information to the P.W.1
       and also to the I.O. P.W.1 says that he learnt
       from the deceased that accused assaulted him
       and threw acid on his face, and other parts of
       his body and he reported the matter to the
       police, after knowing the fact from the
       deceased, vide Ext. 12. It is also clear from
       the evidence of P.W.3 that he carried the
       deceased to the hospital, who had sustained
       injuries.   The statement of the deceased to
       P.W.1 is admissible under 32 of the Evidence
       Act. Because, it gives regarding his cause of
       death and how he was injured.”


18.    The injuries on the body of deceased fully support

the    prosecution    case.      The   statement    made     by   the

deceased on 05.12.1990, thus, finds corroboration from

the injuries on the body of deceased and the sequences

of the events and manner of incidents as claimed by the

prosecution.    The PW1, the informant has fully supported

the prosecution case.


19.    The High Court while dismissing the appeal has also

made    observation   that    conviction   and   sentence    of   the

accused was for a lesser offence and lenient one.


20.    We having gone through the evidence on record are

fully satisfied that the trial court did not commit any

error in convicting the appellant.               High Court while

deciding the appeal has also analysed the evidence on

record and has rightly dismissed the appeal.               We, thus,



                                 20
do   not   find   any   merit   in   this   appeal,   which   is

dismissed.


                                     ......................J.
                                         ( A.K. SIKRI )




                                     ......................J.
                                         ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
New Delhi,
October 10, 2018.


                                21

