
Supreme Court of India
B.Chandramathi vs N.Prakash on 20 January, 2012Bench: Aftab Alam, Ranjana Prakash Desai
                                                              NON-REPORTABLE


                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 


            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 181 OF 2012

      [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 10537 OF 2010]





B. CHANDRAMATHI                           ...           APPELLANT


                                Versus


N. PRAKASH                                ...           RESPONDENT




                             O R D E R 

1.    Leave granted.

2.    This   appeal,   by   grant   of   special   leave,   is   directed 


against the judgment and order dated 19.8.2008 passed by 


the   High   Court   of   Karnataka   at   Bangalore   dismissing 


Criminal   Revision   Petition   No.639   of   2007   filed   by   the 


appellant. 

3.    The appellant-accused obtained a loan of Rs.4 lakhs on 


22.7.2002 from the respondent-complainant on execution of 


                                     2



promissory note and agreed to repay the same with interest 


at 18% per annum.   On 23.10.2002, the appellant issued a 


cheque   bearing   No.   069725   for   Rs.2   lakhs   towards   the 


repayment of the  loan amount. When the said cheque  was 


presented   to   the   banker   the   same   was   returned   with   an 


endorsement "Insufficient Funds." The respondent served a 


legal   notice   upon   the   appellant   on   30.10.2002   and   called 


upon her to pay the cheque amount. The appellant replied to 


the said notice on 12.12.2010 and sought three months time 


to repay the amount. She did not repay the amount. On the 


basis   of   the   bounced   cheque,   the   respondent   filed   a 


complaint bearing No. CC 1217/03 before the Principal JMFC 


Court,   Davanagere.     Learned   JMFC   convicted   the   appellant 


for offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments 


Act and sentenced her to simple imprisonment for one year 


and   to   pay   a   fine   of   Rs.5,000/-.     Learned   JMFC   further 


directed the appellant to pay compensation of Rs.2,20,000/- 

to   the   respondent.     On   appeal   learned   Additional   Sessions 


Judge   confirmed   the   order   of  the  trial   court.     The  Criminal 


                                      3



Revision Petition filed by the appellant was dismissed by the 


High   Court   by   the   impugned   order.     The   High   Court   thus 


confirmed the conviction and sentence of the appellant. 

4.    We have heard learned counsel for the appellant. 

      On   11.3.2011   a   statement   was   made   by   learned 


counsel   for   the   appellant   that   the   appellant   has   deposited 


the   amount   of   compensation   i.e.   Rs.2,20,000/-.   A   copy   of 


the   money   receipt   dated   15.11.2010   issued   by   the   JMFC 


Court,   Davanagere   was   filed   in   support   of   the   statement. 

On   that   day,   fresh   notice   was   issued   to   the   respondent   to 


show-cause   why   the   Special   Leave   Petition   may   not   be 


disposed   of   by   passing   appropriate   orders   at   the   stage   of 


admission   after   hearing   both   the   sides.   Despite   service   of 


notice,   the   respondent   has   neither   appeared   before   this 


Court   in   person   nor   has   he   engaged   any   lawyer.     We, 


therefore, proceed to dispose of this appeal. 

5.    We   have   carefully   perused   the   impugned   order.     The 


High   Court   has   confirmed   the   concurrent   findings   of   the 


                                      4



courts   below.   The   High   Court's   order   cannot   be 


characterized as perverse. Learned counsel for the appellant 


was   unable   to   persuade   us   to   take   any   other   view   of   the 


matter.     The   appellant   admitted   her   signature   on   the 


cheque. She sought time to repay the amount.  She did not 


enter the witness box. In the circumstances, in our opinion, 


no interference is necessary with the order of conviction. 

6.    However, we find from the record that the appellant is 


about 51 years of age. She is a poor widow who is eking out 


a living for herself and her family by making jowar rotis and 


selling them.   She is the only earning member of her family. 

She   has   two   children   to   look   after.     It   appears   that   the 


appellant   is   unwell.   She   is   stated   to   have   suffered   from 


depression.  

7.    As of today, the appellant has undergone the sentence 


for a period of about 2= months before she was released on 


bail.   Considering   the   fact   that   the   appellant   has   deposited 


the amount of compensation i.e. Rs.2,20,000/- and the fact 


                                       5



that   the   appellant   is   a     widow   and     is     the   only   earning 


member in the family  and  considering the  fact that though 


served with notice   the respondent has not cared to appear 


in this Court,   we are of the opinion that sentence already 


undergone   by   her   should   be   treated   as   a   sentence   for   the 


offence   under   Section   138   of   the   Negotiable   Instruments 


Act.   Order   accordingly.   The   appellant   is   on   bail.   Her   bail 


bond stands discharged.   Needless to say that this order is 


passed in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case. 

8.    Appeal is disposed of in the aforestated terms. 

                                       .....................................................J.

                                                  (AFTAB ALAM)




                                       .....................................................J.

                                            (RANJANA PRAKASH DESAI)


NEW DELHI,

JANUARY 20, 2012.

