
Supreme Court of India
Sunita Devi vs Union Of India And Ors. Ministry Of ... on 20 February, 2019Author: S Nazeer
                                                    1

                                                              NON-REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                              WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 188 OF 2015


     SMT. SUNITA DEVI AND ANR.                                 ….. PETITIONERS



                                                VERSUS


     UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                                   ….. RESPONDENTS


                                          JUDGMENT

     S.ABDUL NAZEER, J.

     1.                  Smt. Seema Garg, daughter-in-law of petitioner No.1, and her

     two children were murdered on 24.07.2001. FIR No.221 of 2001 to

     this effect was lodged in Police Station Pilakhwa, District Ghaziabad,

     U.P. under Sections 302/394 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short

     ‘the IPC’). After investigation, the police filed a final report on

     17.08.2001 against Nitin Garg, husband of Seema Garg, Manveer @

     Mintoo and Mukesh for the offences punishable under Sections 302,
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.02.21

     109, read with Section 34 IPC. During the course of trial, accused
10:34:17 IST
Reason:

     Nitin Garg was also murdered.
                                   2
2.   The Trial Court by its judgment dated 16.10.2004 acquitted the

accused persons, namely, Manveer @ Mintoo and Mukesh. In the

course of judgment the Trial Court observed that the investigation has

not been carried on properly.

3.   The case of murder of Nitin Garg was also investigated by the

State Police and a chargesheet was filed against certain persons.

Those persons were acquitted by the Sessions Court. The High Court

confirmed the said judgment. Special Leave Petition filed challenging

the said judgment of the High Court was dismissed by this Court.

4.   Several other proceedings were initiated by the petitioners herein

before the High Court and before this Court in relation to the aforesaid

cases and it is not necessary at this stage to refer to all those

proceeding.

5.   The petitioners filed the above writ petition for constitution of a

Court-monitored investigation/SIT to re-investigate the aforesaid cases

pertaining to FIR Nos. 221 of 2001 and 228 of 2002 registered at

Police Station Pilakhwa, Uttar Pradesh.    This Court by Order dated

8.2.2018 rejected the prayer for re-investigation of the case pertaining

to FIR No. 228 of 2002. This Court directed constitution of a SIT for
                                   3

re-investigation of FIR No.221 of 2001.   The relevant portion of the

order is as under:

          "9. As noted above, in the judgment passed by
          the sessions court in Criminal Case No.221 of
          2001, the court has categorically observed that
          the investigation has not been conducted fairly. It
          is evident that the real culprits responsible for
          murder for petitioners’ family have not been
          subjected to trial.       It is clear that the
          investigating    agency    showed   lackadaisical
          approach in carrying/proceeding with the
          investigation.   We are of the view that it is
          necessary to have a fair, honest and complete
          investigation.

          10. Having examined the entire materials placed
          on record, we deem it proper to constitute a
          Special Investigating Team (SIT) to re-investigate
          FIR No.221 of 2001 titled “State v. Manvir
          Singh and Anr.” registered at Police Station
          Pilakhua, District Ghaziabad, U.P. Shri M.L.
          Sharma, IPS (retired), former Special Director,
          CBI, is appointed as the Chairman of the SIT.
          Shri M.L. Sharma is permitted to take assistance
          of two officers of his choice of the CBI as its
          members.      We direct the SIT to proceed as
          regards further investigation in respect of FIR
          No.221 of 2001 and to submit its report within a
          period of three months from today. Needless to
          say that appropriate secretarial assistance and
          logistic support shall be made available to the SIT
          by the Government of Uttar Pradesh. The
          Government of Uttar Pradesh is also directed to
          provide to the Chairman and the members of the
          SIT all travelling, boarding and lodging expenses
          while discharging their responsibility entrusted to
          them. "

6.   Accordingly, SIT was constituted to re-investigate FIR No.221 of
                                   4

2001.   The SIT filed its report dated 8 th February, 2018 before this

Court. The findings and recommendations of the SIT are at para 11

which are as under:

          "FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

          11.1       On a thorough re-investigation in the
          case and taking into consideration the evidence
          on record, the SIT is of the opinion that accused
          Manveer and Mukesh were involved in the
          murder of Seema and her two children Bhavya
          and Pratyaksh at the behest of Nitin Garg in
          pursuance of a criminal conspiracy hatched
          between them. It bears repetition that as per
          statements of Sanjay Sharma and Sonu Tomar
          (who is no more), recorded by IO Mehra, CBI and
          SIT, Manveer was last seen at the house of
          deceased Seema by him and his employee Sonu
          Tomar between 4:30 to 5:00 p.m. on 24.07.2001,
          just before these gruesome murders. Further,
          Manveer's post-crime conduct by way of
          disappearing from Pilkhua from 24th to 30th July,
          2001, before his arrest by the police also points
          towards his involvement in the crime. Co-accused
          Mukesh left village Shyamli and was not seen at
          Pilkhua after the incident and was picked up
          from village Pachak, Moradabad, by the police on
          the night intervening 29th, 30th July, 2001. More
          importantly, the disclosure statements made by
          Manveer and Mukesh before the police leading to
          the recovery of weapons of offence and their blood
          stained clothes link them with the crime. All
          these recoveries were admitted by them during
          the trial. These articles were found to have
          human blood on them by FSL, Agra. In addition
          to the above, as per the Report of CFSL, New
          Delhi, accused Manveer gave deceptive responses
          in   the    Polygraph    Test   on    all  critical
          questions/issues relating to this incident. The
          expert has further opined that in Forensic
                        5

Psychological      Assessment     and     Forensic
Statement Analysis, he had been found to be
deceptive in his statements about his knowledge
and involvement in this gruesome crime. As
regards accused Mukesh, he could not be
subjected to Polygraph Test because of his
medical condition but he was subjected to
Forensic Psychological Assessment and Forensic
Statement Analysis and as per the expert
opinion, he was found to be deceptive in his
statements about his knowledge and involvement
in these murders. It is pertinent to mention here
that Manveer was a long time employee of Nitin
Garg and he had no personal enmity with
deceased Seema Garg and her two children.
Manveer's disclosure to the police that Nitin had
tasked him to eliminate Seema as he suspected
her fidelity finds resonance in the letter dated
08.07.2001 of Sunil Bansal to Seema's
father-in-law Rajendra Prasad, wherein he (Sunil
Bansal) mentioned that Nitin and his family were
suspecting Seema's character, while Seema
suspected Nitin's involvement with a girl of Delhi
and Seema's apprehension of danger to her life
for these reasons. This letter was delivered by
Irshad Malik to Rajendra Prasad personally at the
behest of Sunil Bansal.
11.2       All these facts and circumstances
establish that Nitin had reasons to perpetuate
the crime in question and he hatched a criminal
conspiracy with his confidante Manveer, who, in
turn, tied up with Mukesh, for the aforesaid
purpose. The theory propounded by the
petitioner's side is not supported by evidence on
record.
11.3       It is most respectfully submitted that
the findings of the SIT are consistent with the
charge sheet filed by the local police for the
reasons discussed in the preceding paras of this
report. A young lady and her two innocent
children were brutally murdered in cold blood
but nobody has been held accountable for this
diabolical crime. This report is being most
                                     6

           respectfully submitted before this Hon'ble Court
           for such directions as deemed fit in the interest of
           justice.
           11.4       As     regards      the     professional
           mis-conduct of IO Puran Singh Mehra (since
           retired from service), it is most respectfully
           submitted that even though he filed the charge
           sheet against the actual culprits, he did not carry
           out investigation with professional rigour, as
           brought out in para 9 supra. In view of the
           above, this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue
           directions to the Govt. of Uttar Pradesh/Director
           General of Police, (U.P.) to initiate departmental
           action against him.
           11.5       Further, as regards the allegations
           against the CBI investigation team briefly
           discussed in para 10 above, this Hon'ble Court
           may be pleased to direct Director, CBI, to cause
           an enquiry into the matter at his end for
           appropriate action."

7.   Ms.   Kamini     Jaiswal,   learned   counsel   appearing    for   the

petitioners, in the course of her arguments and in the written

submissions, mainly raised the following contentions:

           "i.    The SIT strangely has not investigated the
                  truth and falsity of the statement made by
                  Head Constable, Chander Pal;
           ii.    Not even an endeavor to investigate the facts
                  mentioned by the Petitioner himself was
                  ever undertaken by the SIT. The SIT report
                  discloses a pre-disposed state of mind and
                  complete negation of the confidence reposed
                  in them by this Hon'ble Court;
           iii.   The SIT however at page 61 of its report
                  refers to murder of Nitin Garg which seems
                  to be a case of contract killing and killers
                  have gone unpunished. The SIT, therefore
                  suggests investigation of the FIR No.228 of
                                    7

                2002 and same needs to be followed up."

8.   Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioners and having

perused the report of the SIT and the objections filed by the petitioners

to the said report, we are of the view that the CBI has to look into the

report of the SIT and take a decision in the matter.            We order

accordingly.

9.   The writ petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.

                                               …..……………………..…J.
                                            (A.K. SIKRI)



                                               ….…………………………J.
                                            (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
New Delhi;
February 20, 2019.

