
Supreme Court of India
Sudhir Kumar Jain vs The State Of Rajasthan on 31 July, 2019Author: R. Banumathi
Bench: R. Banumathi, A.S. Bopanna
                                                          1

                                                                              NON-REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1392 OF 2008


             SUDHIR KUMAR JAIN                                                 ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

             THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN                                            ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                J U D G M E N T

             R. BANUMATHI,J.


             1.                This appeal arises out of the impugned judgment dated

             03.04.2008 passed by the High Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur

             Bench in            Criminal Appeal No. 1717 of 2003 in and by which the

             High Court has affirmed the conviction of the appellant-accused

             under Section 302 IPC and Section 3 read with 25 of the Arms

             Act and the sentence of life imprisonment imposed upon him. On

             17.04.2003 at around 09.45 a.m., deceased Rajendra Sahu came to

             the auto-stand near Baheti Hospital in his auto rickshaw. At

             around 12 noon when he was sitting on his auto-rickshaw, he saw

             one Maruti 800 bearing No. RJ-06C-3432 coming and three persons

             were sitting in the Car. Out of them, one of the occupants of

             the         car    opened    the   left   front    side   door    of   the   car   and

             signalled Rajendra Sahu to come nearer to the car. The deceased

             - Rajendra Sahu got out from his auto-rickshaw and went near
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2019.08.05
17:29:18 IST
Reason:      the car. At that time, the appellant who was sitting                          on the

             left front side of the said car armed with desi katta opened

             fire at deceased as a result of which he received injuries just
                                        2

above his navel and blood started oozing out. On hearing the

sound, Farooq (PW-17), Dilip Kumar (PW-9), Shambhu (PW-2) and

Iqbal (PW-4) came running on which persons sitting in the car

drove away. Iqbal (PW-4) then took the deceased to the hospital

in   auto-rickshaw.    In      the   hospital,    PW-22    ASI    recorded    the

parcha bayan of deceased based on which FIR was registered

under section 307 read with section 34 IPC. After the deceased

succumbed to his injuries, FIR was altered to Section 302 IPC.

Dr. R.K.Sharma (PW-26) who conducted the post-mortem opined

that cause of death was shock as a result of firearm injuries

to intestine and liver which were sufficient to cause death in

the ordinary course of nature. On completion of investigation,

charge-sheet was filed against the appellant viz. Sudhir Kumar

Jain and co-accused Shailendra Gautam.

2.       In the Trial Court, eye witnesses                   Farooq (PW-17),

Dilip Kumar (PW-9), Shambhu (PW-2) and Iqbal (PW-4) who took

the deceased to hospital were examined. All the witnesses viz.

Farooq (PW-17), Dilip Kumar (PW-9), Shambhu (PW-2) and Iqbal

(PW-4)   have   turned    hostile.      The   prosecution        also   examined

Harishankar (PW-3) and         Nannu Khan (PW-5) as eye witnesses who

have also not supported the prosecution case and were declared

hostile.   However,      the     prosecution      relied   upon     the     dying

declaration     -   parcha     bayan   of   the   deceased       Rajendra    Sahu

recorded by PW-22 ASI. Suresh Kumar, Constable (PW-18)                    in his

evidence stated that he was travelling in the Maruti Car along

with the accused. PW-18 Constable further stated that at about

12 noon when they came near Baheti Hospital, he got down from
                                           3

the Maruti Car and started moving and one of the accused called

auto driver and, thereafter, Constable (PW-18) heard the sound

of firing. PW-18 stated that when he turned, he could not see

anything and the car from which he got down was standing there

and PW-18 moved from there and went to the Juvenile Court. The

Trial    Court    held   that    the     parcha     bayan     statement         of     the

deceased was corroborated by the evidence of PW-18 Constable

who travelled in the Maruti Car along with the accused. Based

on   parcha     bayan    and   the     evidence     of   PW-18        Constable        and

recovery of the country made pistol from the appellant-accused,

the Trial Court convicted the appellant-accused under Section

302 IPC and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment. The

Trial Court also convicted the appellant under Section 3 read

with 25 of the Arms Act and sentenced him to undergo two years

imprisonment and imposed a fine of Rs.1,000/- with default

clause. The Trial Court acquitted the co-accused Shailender

Gautam.    In    appeal,       the     conviction       and     the     sentence       of

imprisonment was affirmed by the High Court as aforesaid.

3.        We have heard Ms. Gouri Karuna Das Mohanti, learned

counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant as well as Mr.

Harsha    Vinoy,    learned      counsel       appearing      on      behalf    of     the

respondent-State of Rajasthan.

4.        The    Trial   Court       mainly    relied    upon      parcha      bayan    of

deceased recorded by PW-22 ASI. Of course, Dr. Renu Raonka (PW-

28) stated that at the time of recording parcha bayan, deceased

Rajendra Sahu was conscious. But in the parcha bayan, deceased

Rajendra Sahu though narrated about the incident and firing by
                                                  4

one    of    the     occupants         of   the       car,    has    neither     named   the

assailants nor mentioned the identity of the occupants of the

car    who       opened    the    door      and   who    fired      at    him.   Since   the

deceased has not mentioned the names of the assailants, FIR

also does not mention the names of the appellant-accused and

the co-accused Shailendra Gautam.                       The eye witnesses who were

examined by the prosecution namely Farooq (PW-17), Dilip Kumar

(PW-9), Shambhu (PW-2) and two other witnesses viz. Harishankar

(PW-3)       and          Nannu    Khan      (PW-5)      have       not    supported     the

prosecution case and all of them were declared hostile. Thus,

none of the eye witnesses examined by the prosecution have

supported the prosecution case.

5.           The    evidence      relied      upon      by    the   prosecution     is   the

evidence of Suresh Kumar, Constable (PW-18) who claimed to have

travelled in the Maruti Car bearing                          Registration No. RJ-06C-

3432 along with the accused. PW-18 stated that on his way to

the Court he travelled in the car along with the accused and

got down near Baheti Hospital and started moving. After moving

some distance, he heard the sound of firing and when he turned

he could not see anything; but he found that the car from which

he got down was standing there. The Trial Court mainly relied

upon     the       evidence       of     PW-18        Constable      and     took   it    as

corroborating evidence to substantiate the parcha bayan. It is

pertinent to note that PW-18 Constable though claims to have

heard the firing and saw the car standing there he has not

given his statement regarding the occurrence at the earliest

point       of     time.    Though       occurrence          was    of    17.04.2003,    his
                                              5

statement      was    recorded        after   lapse   of    about     18   days       i.e.

04.05.2003. PW-18 in his evidence claimed that though he was

going to the Court he was in plain clothes and that he kept his

uniform in the Bag. The delay in recording statement of PW-18

constable and not reporting the matter to the police station

about the occurrence by PW-18 raises serious doubt about the

credibility of the testimony of PW-18.

6.       The other evidence relied upon by the prosecution is

the    recovery      of   12    bore     country    made    pistol    based      on    the

disclosure statement of the appellant. It is to be pointed out

that the witnesses for recovery of the country made pistol from

the    accused       under     Ex.P-15    (Recovery       Memo)   namely,     Mahender

Gurjar(PW-11) and Mahender Mayuri (PW-12) have not supported

the case of the prosecution. PW-12 turned hostile; while PW-11

stated that he has taken the signatures in Ex.P-15 (Recovery

Memo) in the police station. Of course, it is well settled that

merely because the independent witnesses have not supported the

recovery memo, the case of the prosecution as to the recovery

cannot    be     doubted.        Considering       the     recovery    and       Ex.P-37

(Ballistic Report) it is seen that three packets marked as A, B

and C were sent to the Ballistic Expert (PW-25). Description of

Articles as under:

     Packet 'A'           contained two lead pellets

     Packet 'B'           contained nineteen lead pellets

     Pactet 'C'           Contained one 12-bore country made Pistol,
                          marked W/1


Upon   examination        of    the    country     made    pistol    and   the    other
                                            6

packets, PW-25      opined as under:

       1.     One 12-bore country made pistol (W/1) from
       packet 'C' is not a serviceable firearm in the
       present   condition due  to some   defect in  its
       mechanism. However, after repair it can be made
       serviceable.

       2.     The   examination   of   the   barrel residue
       indicates that submitted 12-bore country made pistol
       (W/1) had been fired. However, the definite time of
       its last fire could not be ascertained.

        3.     Twenty one lead pellets from packet 'A' & 'B'
        are normally used in 12-bore ammunition. These
        pellets could have been fired from 12-bore country
        made pistol (W/1) from packet 'C'.


7.       The      accused    was     arrested        on   the   same     day       i.e.

17.04.2003 at 5.50 p.m. and the 12-bore country made pistol

was    recovered     immediately         thereafter.      The   opinion      of     the

ballistic expert that the 12 bore country made pistol from

packet 'C' is not serviceable firearm in the present condition

due to some defect in its mechanism raises doubt about the

weapon used in the occurrence. Of course PW-25 has stated that

the twenty one lead pellets contained in Packet 'A' and 'B'

are    normally    used     in    12-bore       ammunition    and   these    pellets

could have been fired from 12-bore country made pistol (W/1)

from    packet 'C'. Since the 12-bore country made pistol (W/1)

recovered      pursuant      to    the      disclosure       statement      made     by

appellant was not in working condition due to some defects in

its mechanism, this raises doubt about the user of the weapon.

Considering the fact that all the eye witnesses have turned

hostile, in our view, it is unsafe to rely upon the recovery

of the weapon and the opinion of the ballistic expert to
                                          7

     sustain    the   conviction.   Learned     counsel   appearing   for    the

     respondent-State has submitted that the deceased Rajendra Sahu

     has stated about the Maruti Car bearing No. RJ-06C-3432             which

     was recovered in front of Niranjan Kumar who is the father of

     the appellant. It is pointed out that the prosecution has not

     produced RC of the car to show that it stands in the name of

     Niranjan Kumar. In any event, the piece of evidence regarding

     the recovery of the Maruti Car in front of the father of the

     appellant alone cannot form basis for conviction.

 8.            Considering the totality of the circumstances and that

 all the eye witnesses have turned hostile and the FIR does not

 mention        the    names   of   the       accused   coupled   with      other

 circumstances, we hold that the prosecution has not established

 the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt. The Trial

 Court and the High Court erred in basing the conviction upon

 evidence of PW-18 Constable and which in our view cannot be

 sustained. The conviction of the appellant under Section 302

 IPC      cannot be sustained and is liable to be set aside. The

 conviction of the appellant is set aside and the appellant is

 acquitted under Section 302 IPC and under Section 3/25 of the

 Arms Act.

9.             The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.


                                                  ...................J.
                                                  [R. BANUMATHI]


NEW DELHI                                         ....................J.
31ST JULY, 2019                                   [A.S. BOPANNA]

