
Supreme Court of India
Yashwant Sinha vs Central Bureau Of Investigation ... on 14 November, 2019Author: Hon'Ble The Justice
Bench: Hon'Ble The Justice, Sanjay Kishan Kaul, K.M. Joseph
                                                                                  Reportable

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL/CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                        Review Petition (Crl.) No.46 of 2019

                                                         IN

                                        Writ Petition (Crl.) No.298 of 2018



                         YASHWANT SINHA & ORS.                                 ….Petitioners


                                                      Versus


                         CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
                         Through its DIRECTOR & ANR.                          ….Respondents

                         (I.A. No. 69008/2019 – CLARIFICATION/DIRECTION, I.A. No.
                         69006/2019 – INTERVENTION APPLICATION, I.A. No.
                         71047/2019 – PRODUCTION OF RECORDS and I.A. No.
                         69009/2019 – STAY APPLICATION)


                         WITH

                         MA 58/2019 in W.P.(Crl.) No. 225/2018 (PIL-W) (I.A. No.
                         182576/2018 – CORRECTION OF MISTAKES IN THE
                         JUDGMENT)
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2019.11.14
                         R.P.(Crl.) No. 122/2019 in W.P.(Crl.) No. 297/2018 (PIL-W)
12:35:57 IST
Reason:




                                                                                               1
MA 403/2019 in W.P.(Crl.) No. 298/2018 (PIL-W)

(I.A. No. 29248/2019    –   INITIATING             CRIMINAL
PROCEEDINGS U/S 340 OF CRPC)

R.P.(C) No. 719/2019 in W.P.(C) No. 1205/2018 (PIL-W)

CONMT.PET.(Crl.) No. 3/2019 in R.P.(Crl.) No. 46/2019 in
W.P.(Crl.) No. 298/2018 (PIL-W)

(I.A. No. 63168/2019 – EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T., I.A.
No.71678/2019 – EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T. and I.A. No.
66253/2019 – EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)



                        JUDGMENT

SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.



(I.A. No. 63168/2019 – EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T., I.A.
No.71678/2019 – EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T. and I.A. No.
66253/2019 – EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)

1.   Allowed subject to just exception.


MA 58/2019 in W.P.(Crl.) No. 225/2018 (PIL-W) (I.A. No.
182576/2018 – CORRECTION OF MISTAKES IN THE
JUDGMENT)



                                                              2
2.    The Union of India has filed the present application seeking

correction of what they claim to be an error, in two sentences in para 25

of the judgment delivered by this Court on 14.12.2018. This error is

stated to be on account of a misinterpretation of some sentences in a note

handed over to this Court in a sealed cover.


3.    The Court had asked vide order dated 31.10.2018 to be apprised of

the details/cost as also any advantage, which may have accrued on that

account, in the procurement of the 36 Rafale fighter jets.            The

confidential note in the relevant portions stated as under:

      “The Government has already shared the pricing details with the
      CAG. The report of the CAG is examined by the PAC. Only a
      redacted version of the report is placed before the Parliament and
      in public domain.”


4.    It is the submission of the learned Attorney General that the first

sentence referred to the sharing of the price details with the CAG. But

the second sentence qua the PAC referred to the process and not what

had already transpired. However, in the judgment this portion had been

understood as if it was already so done.




                                                                        3
5.    On hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that

the confusion arose on account of two portions of the paragraph referring

to both what had been and what was proposed to be done. Regardless,

what we noted was to complete the sequence of facts and was not the

rationale for our conclusion.


6.    We are, thus, inclined to accept the prayer and the sentence in para

25 to the following effect - “The pricing details have, however, been

shared with the Comptroller and Auditor General (hereinafter referred to

as “CAG”), and the report of the CAG has been examined by the Public

Accounts Committee (hereafter referred to as “PAC”). Only a redacted

portion of the report was placed before the Parliament and is in public

domain” should be replaced by what we have set out hereinafter:

      “The Government has already shared the pricing details with the

      CAG. The report of the CAG is examined by the PAC in the usual

      course of business. Only a redacted version of the report is placed

      before the Parliament and in public domain.”


7.    The prayer is accordingly allowed.



                                                                        4
8.    The application stands disposed of.


R.P. (Crl.) No.46/2019 in WP (Crl.) No.298/2018
R.P.(Crl.) No. 122/2019 in W.P.(Crl.) No. 297/2018 (PIL-W)
MA 403/2019 in W.P.(Crl.) No. 298/2018 (PIL-W)

(I.A. No. 29248/2019    –   INITIATING                      CRIMINAL
PROCEEDINGS U/S 340 OF CRPC)

R.P.(C) No. 719/2019 in W.P.(C) No. 1205/2018 (PIL-W)


9.    The review petitions were listed for hearing in Court and elaborate

submissions were made by learned counsel for the parties.


10.   We may note that insofar as the preliminary objection raised by the

Attorney General is concerned qua certain documents sought to be

produced by the petitioners, that aspect was dealt with by our order dated

10.4.2019 and the said preliminary objection was overruled.


11.   We cannot lose sight of the fact that unless there is an error

apparent on the face of the record, these review applications are not

required to be entertained. We may also note that the application under

Section 340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 partly emanates



                                                                         5
from an aspect which has been dealt with in our order passed today on

the application for correction of the order filed by the Union of India.


12.   We have elaborately dealt with the pleas of the learned counsel for

the parties in our order dated 14.12.2018 under the heads of ‘Decision

Making Process’, ‘Pricing’ and ‘Offsets’. However, before proceeding to

deal with these aspects we had set out the contours of the scrutiny in

matters of such a nature. It is in that context we had opined that the

extent of permissible judicial review in matters of contract, procurement,

etc. would vary with the subject matter of the contract and that there

cannot be a uniform standard of depth of judicial review which could be

understood as an across the board principle to apply to all cases of award

of work or procurement of goods/material. In fact, when two of these

writ petitions were listed before the Court on 10.10.2018, we had

embarked on a limited enquiry despite the fact that we were not satisfied

with the adequacy of the averments and the material in the writ petitions.

It was the object of the Court to satisfy itself with the correctness of the

decision making process.


                                                                           6
13.   We cannot lose sight of the fact that we are dealing with a contract

for aircrafts, which was pending before different Governments for quite

some time and the necessity for those aircrafts has never been in dispute.

We had, thus, concluded in para 34 noticing that other than the aforesaid

three aspects, that too to a limited extent, this Court did not consider it

appropriate to embark on a roving and fishing enquiry.          We were,

however, cautious to note that this was in the context of the writ petition

filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, the jurisdiction

invoked.


14.   In the course of the review petitions, it was canvased before us that

reliance had been placed by the Government on patently false documents.

One of the aspects is the same as has been dealt with by our order passed

today on the application for correction and, thus, does not call for any

further discussion.


15.   The other aspect sought to be raised specifically in Review Petition

No.46/2019 is that the prayer made by the petitioner was for registration

of an F.I.R. and investigation by the C.B.I., which has not been dealt with

and the contract has been reviewed prematurely by the Judiciary without

                                                                         7
the benefit of investigation and inquiry into the disputed questions of

facts.


16.      We do not consider this to be a fair submission for the reason that

all counsels, including counsel representing the petitioners in this matter

addressed elaborate submissions on all the aforesaid three aspects. No

doubt that there was a prayer made for registration of F.I.R. and further

investigation but then once we had examined the three aspects on merits

we did not consider it appropriate to issue any directions, as prayed for

by the petitioners which automatically covered the direction for

registration of FIR, prayed for.


17.      Insofar as the aspect of pricing is concerned, the Court satisfied

itself with the material made available. It is not the function of this Court

to determine the prices nor for that matter can such aspects be dealt with

on mere suspicion of persons who decide to approach the Court. The

internal mechanism of such pricing would take care of the situation. On

the perusal of documents we had found that one cannot compare apples

and oranges. Thus, the pricing of the basic aircraft had to be compared

which was competitively marginally lower. As to what should be loaded

                                                                           8
on the aircraft or not and what further pricing should be added has to be

left to the best judgment of the competent authorities.


18.   We have noted aforesaid that a plea was also raised about the

“non-existent CAG report” but then at the cost of repetition we state that

this formed part of the order for correction we have passed aforesaid.


19.   It was the petitioners’ decision to have invoked the jurisdiction of

this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution of India fully conscious of

the limitation of the contours of the scrutiny and not to take recourse to

other remedies as may be available. The petitioners cannot be permitted

to state that having so taken recourse to this remedy, they want an

adjudication process which is really different from what is envisaged

under the provisions invoked by them.


20.   Insofar as the decision making process is concerned, on the basis

of certain documents obtained, the petitioners sought to contend that

there was contradictory material. We, however, found that there were

undoubtedly opinions expressed in the course of the decision making

process, which may be different from the decision taken, but then any


                                                                         9
decision making process envisages debates and expert opinion and the

final call is with the competent authority, which so exercised it. In this

context reference was made to (a) Acceptance of Necessity (‘AON’)

granted by the Defence Acquisition Council (‘DAC’) not being available

prior to the contract which would have determined the necessity and

quantity of aircrafts; (b) absence of Sovereign Guarantee granted by

France despite requirement of the Defence Procurement Procedure

(‘DPP’); (c) the oversight of objections of three expert members of the

Indian Negotiating Team (‘INT’) regarding certain increase in the

benchmark price; and (d) the induction of Reliance Aerostructure

Limited (‘RAL’) as an offset partner.


21.   It does appear that the endeavour of the petitioners is to construe

themselves as an appellate authority to determine each aspect of the

contract and call upon the Court to do the same. We do not believe this

to be the jurisdiction to be exercised. All aspects were considered by the

competent authority and the different views expressed considered and

dealt with. It would well nigh become impossible for different opinions

to be set out in the record if each opinion was to be construed as to be


                                                                        10
complied with before the contract was entered into. It would defeat the

very purpose of debate in the decision making process.


22.   Insofar as the aforesaid pleas are concerned, it has also been

contended that some aspects were not available to the petitioner at the

time of the decision and had come to light subsequently by their

“sourcing” information.    We decline to, once again, embark on an

elaborate exercise of analyzing each clause, perusing what may be the

different opinions, then taking a call whether a final decision should or

should not have been taken in such technical matters.


23.   An aspect also sought to be emphasized was that this Court had

misconstrued that all the Reliance Industries were of one group since the

two brothers held two different groups and the earlier arrangement was

with the Company of the other brother. That may be so, but in our

observation this aspect was referred to in a generic sense more so as the

decision of whom to engage as the offset partner was a matter left to the

suppliers and we do not think that much can be made out of it.




                                                                       11
24.   It is for the aforesaid reasons also that we find that there was no

ground made out for initiating prosecution under Section 340 Cr.P.C.


25.   We are, thus, of the view that the review petitions are without any

merit and are accordingly dismissed, once again, re-emphasising that our

original decision was based within the contours of Article 32 of the

Constitution of India.



CONMT.PET.(Crl.) No. 3/2019 in R.P.(Crl.) No. 46/2019 in
W.P.(Crl.) No. 298/2018 (PIL-W)


26.   The contempt petition emanates from an allegation against Mr.

Rahul Gandhi, the then President of the Indian National Congress, on

account of utterances made in the presence of several media persons on

10.4.2019 by him alleging that the Supreme Court had held that

“Chowkidar (Mr. Narendra Modi, Prime Minister) is a thief.”            The

Supreme Court was also attributed to having held in consonance with

what his discourse was, i.e., that the Prime Minister of India stole money

from the Air Force and gave it to Mr. Anil Ambani and that the Supreme




                                                                        12
Court had admitted that Mr. Modi had indulged in corruption. It was

stated that the Supreme Court had said that the Chowkidar is a thief.


27.      On notice being issued, reply affidavit dated 22.4.2019 was filed

averring that the comments were made on the basis of a bona fide belief

and general understanding of the order even though the contemnor had

not himself had the opportunity to see, read or analyse the order at that

stage.     It was further averred that there had not been the slightest

intention to insinuate anything regarding the Supreme Court proceedings

in any manner as the statements had been made by the contemnor in a

“rhetorical flourish in the heat of the moment” and that his statement has

been used and misused by his political opponents to project that he had

deliberately attributed the utterances to the Supreme Court.       In that

context, it was averred that “nothing could be farther from my mind. It is

also clear that no Court would ever do that and hence the unfortunate

references (for which I express regret) to the Court order and to the

political slogan in juxtaposition the same breath in the heat of political

campaigning ought not to be construed as suggesting that the Court had

given any finding or conclusion on that issue.”



                                                                        13
28.   The acceptance of such an affidavit was opposed by the petitioner,

a BJP Member of Parliament, in the contempt petition. It was stated that

instead of expression of any remorse or apology, attempt was made to

justify the contemptuous statement as having been made in the heat of the

moment.


29.   On arguments having taken place in this context, and realizing the

seriousness of the matter and the inadequacy of the affidavit, learned

counsel for the contemnor took liberty to file an additional affidavit.

Vide order dated 30.4.2019, this Court left the admissibility and

acceptance of such an affidavit to be considered on the subsequent date.

An additional affidavit was filed on 8.5.2019 stating that the contemnor

held this Court in the highest esteem and respect and never intended to

interfere with the process of administration of justice. An unconditional

apology was tendered by him by stating that the attributions were entirely

unintentional, non-willful and inadvertent.


30.   The matter was, once again, addressed by the learned counsel. We

have given our thoughtful consideration to this issue.



                                                                       14
31.   We must note that it is unfortunate that without verification or

even perusing as to what is the order passed, the contemnor deemed it

appropriate to make statements as if this Court had given an imprimatur

to his allegations against the Prime Minister, which was far from the

truth. This was not one sentence or a one off observation but a repeated

statement in different manners conveying the same.         No doubt the

contemnor should have been far more careful.


32.   The matter was compounded by filing a 20 page affidavit with a

large number of documents annexed rather than simply accepting the

mistake and giving an unconditional apology. Better wisdom dawned on

the counsel only during the course of arguments thereafter when a

subsequent affidavit dated 8.5.2019 was filed.      We do believe that

persons holding such important positions in the political spectrum must

be more careful. As to what should be his campaign line is for a political

person to consider. However, this Court or for that matter no court

should be dragged into this political discourse valid or invalid, while

attributing aspects to the Court which had never been held by the Court.

Certainly Mr. Gandhi needs to be more careful in future.


                                                                        15
33.   However, in view of the subsequent affidavit, better sense having

prevailed, we would not like to continue these proceedings further and,

thus, close the contempt proceedings with a word of caution for the

contemnor to be more careful in future.


(I.A. No. 69008/2019 – CLARIFICATION/DIRECTION, I.A. No.
69006/2019 – INTERVENTION APPLICATION, I.A. No.
71047/2019 – PRODUCTION OF RECORDS and I.A. No.
69009/2019 – STAY APPLICATION)

34.   In view of the orders passed above, these applications do not

survive for consideration and the same are disposed of. Any other

pending applications also stands disposed.




                                          ..….….…………………….C.J.I.
                                                    [Ranjan Gogoi]



                                             ...……………………………J.
                                                  [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]

New Delhi.
November 14, 2019.


                                                                      16
                                                REPORTABLE

                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    INHERENT JURISDICTION

       REVIEW PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 46 OF 2019

                             IN


        WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 298 OF 2018

YASHWANT SINHA AND OTHERS                ... PETITIONER(S)

                           VERSUS

CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
THROUGH ITS DIRECTOR AND ANOTHER         ... RESPONDENT(S)

                    AND CONNECTED MATTERS

                       J U D G M E N T

K.M. JOSEPH, J.


1.   I have perused the Order proposed by my learned

Brother, Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul. While I agree with the

final decision subject to certain aspects considered by me,

I would, by my separate opinion, give my reasons, which are

as hereunder.

                             1
2.   The   common   judgment   in   four   Writ   Petitions   has

generated three Review Petitions, a Contempt Petition and

a Petition under Section 340 of The Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Cr.PC’ for

short) and an application seeking correction.


3.   Review Petition (Criminal) No. 46 of 2019 is filed by

the petitioners in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 298 of 2018.

In the said Writ Petition, relief sought, inter alia, was

to register an FIR and to investigate the complaint which

was made by the petitioners and to submit periodic status

reports. The reliefs, as are made in the clauses ‘a’ to ‘e’

of the prayer, read as follows:


           “a. Issue writ of mandamus or any other
               appropriate writ directing Respondent
               No.1 to register an F.I.R. on the
               complaint   that   was  made   by   the
                                    th
               Petitioners on the 04 of October, 2018.
           b.   Issue writ of mandamus or any other
                appropriate    writ    directing     the
                Respondent No.1 to investigate the
                offences disclosed in the said complaint



                               2
                in a time bound manner and to submit
                periodic status reports to the Court.
         c.     Issue writ of mandamus or any other
                appropriate    writ    directing     the
                Respondent No.2 to cease and desist from
                influencing or intimidating in any way
                the officials that would investigate the
                offences disclosed in the complaint.
         d.     Issue writ of mandamus or any other
                appropriate    writ     directing    the
                Respondent No.1 and Respondent No.2 to
                not transfer the C.B.I. officials tasked
                with investigation of the offences
                mentioned in the complaint.
         e.     Issue writ of mandamus or any other
                appropriate writ to ensure that the
                relevant records are not destroyed or
                tampered with and are transferred to the
                CBI.”




4.   Review Petition (Criminal) No. 122 of 2019 is filed by

the petitioner in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 297 of 2018.

The reliefs sought in the said Writ Petition is as follows:




              “(a)   to    constitute     a     Special
                     Investigating Team (SIT) under the
                     supervision of the Hon’ble Supreme
                     Court with following mandate:


                               3
i.   to investigate the reasons for
     cancellation of earlier deal
     for the purchase of 126 Rafale
     Fighter Jets.
ii. As to how the figure of 36
    Fighter Jets was arrived at
    without    the     formalities
    associated with such a highly
    sensitive defence procurement.
iii. to look into the alterations
     made by the Respondent No.2
     about the pricing of the Rafale
     Fighter Jets in view of the
     earlier price of Rs.526 crores
     per Fighter Jets alongwith
     requisite equipments, services
     and weapons and Rs.670 crores
     without associated equipments,
     weapons,     India     specific
     enhancements,       maintenance
     support and services; which
     resulted into the escalation of
     price of each Fighter Jets from
     Rs.526 crores to more than 1500
     crores;
iv. to investigate as to how a
    novice company viz. Reliance
    Defence came in picture of this
    highly sensitive defence deal
    involving   Rs.59,000    crores
    without having any kind of
    experience and expertise in
    making of Fighter Jets.
v.   As to why name of ‘Hindustan
     Aeronautics    Limited’  was
     removed from the deal?

           4
      vi. As to whether the decision of
          purchase of only 36 Rafale
          Fighter Jets instead of 126 was
          a compromise with the security
          of the Country or not?
      vii. Whether the Reliance Defence or
           it’s sister concern or any
           other       individual       or
           intermediary company has/have
           influenced the decision making
           of the purchase of Rafale
           Fighter Jets at substantially
           higher prices in the backdrop
           of the statement given by the
           then   President    of   French
           Republic and the investment
           made     by     the    Reliance
           Entertainment into the Julie
           Gayet’s        Firm       Rouge
           International was made with a
           purpose    to   influence   the
           decision of removal of the HAL
           and induction of Reliance
           Defence as partner of the
           Dassault;
(b)   to       terminate/cancel        the
      inter-governmental agreement with
      the Govt. of French Republic signed
      on 23-09-2016 for the purchase of 36
      Rafale Fighter Jets and to give
      direction to the Respondent No.3 to
      lodge an FIR and to report the
      progress of investigation to this
      Hon’ble Court;
(c)   to restore the earlier deal for the
      purchase of 126 Rafale Fighter Jets


                5
                    which was cancelled on 24.06.2015
                    by the Govt. of India.
           (d)      to bar the Dassault Reliance
                    Aerospace Limited (DRAL) from
                    handling/manufacturing the Rafale
                    Fighter Jets;


           (e)      to direct the Respondent 1&2 to
                    propose the Public Sector Company
                    Hindustan Aeronautics Limited as
                    the Indian Offset Partner of
                    Dassault;”




5.   Review Petition (Criminal) No. 719 of 2019 has been

filed again by a sole petitioner in Writ Petition (Criminal)

No. 1205 of 2018. The reliefs sought in the said Writ

Petition is as follows:


         “a) Issue an appropriate writ or order or

             direction directing the respondents to

             file    the   details   of   the   agreement

             entered into between the Union of India

             and Government of France with regard to



                              6
     the purchase of 36 Rafale Fighter Jets

     in a sealed envelope.

b)   Issue an appropriate writ or order or

     direction directing the respondents to

     furnish    in   a       sealed   envelope    the

     information with regard to the present

     cost of Rafale Fighter Jets and also the

     earlier cost of the Rafale Fighter Jets

     during the regime of UPA Government;


c)   Issue an appropriate writ or order or

     direction directing the respondents to

     furnish any other information in sealed

     envelope   before       the   Hon’ble    Supreme

     Court with regard to the controversy

     erupted    in   the      purchase   of    Rafale

     Fighter Jets;”




                         7
THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT


6.   The three Writ Petitions, as also Writ Petition in

which no Review is filed, came to be dismissed. This Court

has referred to the reliefs which have been sought in the

four Writ Petitions. This Court referred to the parameters

of judicial review. The extent of permissible judicial

review of contracts, procurement, etc., was found to vary

with the subject matter of the contract. It was further

observed that the scrutiny of the challenges before the

Court, will have to be made keeping in mind the confines

of national security, the subject of procurement being

crucial to the nation’s sovereignty.


7.   The findings of this Court in paragraph 15 throws light

on the controversy as was understood by the Court. Paragraph

15 reads as follows:


              “15. It is in the backdrop of the above
         facts and the somewhat constricted power of
         judicial review that, we have held, would be
         available in the present matter that we now
         proceed to scrutinise the controversy raised
         in the writ petitions which raise three broad

                             8
         areas   of   concern,   namely,   (i)   the
         decision-making process; (ii) difference in
         pricing; and (iii) the choice of IOP.”
                                  (Emphasis supplied)



8.   Thereafter, this Court had proceeded to consider the

decision-making process, pricing and offsets and did not

find in favour of the petitioners. It is after the

discussion, as aforesaid, it is to be noted that this Court

finally concluded as follows:


           “33. Once again, it is neither appropriate
         nor within the experience of this Court to
         step into this arena of what is technically
         feasible or not. The point remains that DPP
         2013 envisages that the vendor/OEM will
         choose its own IOPs. In this process, the role
         of the Government is not envisaged and, thus,
         mere press interviews or suggestions cannot
         form the basis for judicial review by this
         Court, especially when there is categorical
         denial of the statements made in the Press,
         by both the sides. We do not find any
         substantial material on record to show that
         this is a case of commercial favouritism to
         any party by the Indian Government, as the
         option to choose IOP does not rest with the
         Indian Government.

                             9
            Conclusion
              34. In view of our findings on all the
            three aspects, and having heard the matter in
            detail,   we find     no   reason   for   any
            intervention by this Court on the sensitive
            issue of purchase of 36 defence aircrafts by
            the   Indian Government.      Perception   of
            individuals cannot be the basis of a fishing
            and roving enquiry by this Court, especially
            in such matters. We, thus, dismiss all the
            writ petitions, leaving it to the parties to
            bear their own costs. We, however, make it
            clear that our views as above are primarily
            from the standpoint of the exercise of the
            jurisdiction under Article 32 of the
            Constitution of India which has been invoked
            in the present group of cases.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)




9.   Upon    consideration   of   the   Review   Petitions   and

Applications, by Order dated 26.02.2019, prayer for hearing

in the open court was allowed. We have heard learned

counsel. We heard parties in Review Petition (Criminal) No.

46 of 2019, the learned Attorney General and learned

Solicitor General.


10. As far as petitioners in Review Petition (Criminal) No.
46 of 2019 is concerned, the complaint appears to be that


                               10
this Court has totally overlooked the relief sought in Writ

Petition (Criminal) No. 298 of 2018.


11. The       first   respondent    is    the    Central     Bureau   of

Investigation (CBI) and the second respondent is the Union

of India in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 298 of 2018. The

substance of the Writ Petition is that after following the

due process under the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP),

to procure Advanced Fighter Aircrafts, and as per the

authority under the DPP, the IAF Service Headquarters,

after     a    widely    consultative      process    with    multiple

Institutions, prepared Services Qualitative Requirements

(SQR), specifying the number of aircrafts required as 126.

There was the recommendation of the Committee that Make in

India by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), a Public

Sector Enterprise, under a Transfer Technology Agreement,

should be the mode of procurement. The Defence Acquisition

Council        granted       the   mandatory         Acceptance       of

Necessity      (AON).    A   Request     for    Proposal   (RFP)   was,

accordingly, issued. There were six vendors. In 2011, it


                                   11
was announced that Dassault’s Rafale and Eurofighter GmbH

Typhoon met the IAF requirements. In March of 2014, a Work

Share Agreement was entered into between Dassault Aviation

and HAL. Accordingly, HAL would do 70 per cent of the work

on 108 planes. On 25.03.2015, it is alleged that Dassault

was in the final stages of negotiations with India for 126

aircrafts and HAL was to be the partner of Dassault.


12. It was the further case of the petitioners that a new
deal was, however, inexplicably negotiated and announced

by the Prime Minister without following the due procedure.

Number of aircrafts were reduced to 36. This involved

complete violation of all laid down Defence Procurement

Procedure. There are various allegations made against the

deal to purchase 36 planes in place of 126. In particular,

there is reference to Mr. Anil Ambani not owning any company

engaged in manufacture of products and services mentioned

in the list of products and services eligible for discharge

of offset obligations. A company was incorporated as

Reliance Defence Limited on 28.03.2015, just twelve days


                            12
before the new deal was suddenly announced on 10.04.2015.

There is also the case that DPP was bypassed for collateral

considerations. In the complaint lodged with CBI, there is

reference to the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, as it

stood prior to amendment. Their request is to register an

FIR under the provisions which are mentioned therein which

fall under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and to

investigate the matter. Other reliefs are already referred

to.


13. The petitioners in the said case, premise their case
on the judgment of this Court in Lalita Kumari v. Government

of Uttar Pradesh and others1. It is their case that though

reference was made to the relief at the beginning of the

judgment, thereafter, this Court focused only on the merits

of the matter in terms of the powers available to it under

judicial review. Reliefs sought in other Writ Petitions

were focused upon. The only prayers of the petitioners in

Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 298 of 2018, as noticed, was

1   (2014) 2 SCC 1


                            13
a direction to follow the command of Lalita Kumari (supra)

and to register an FIR as they have filed a complaint which

is produced along with Writ Petition and as no action was

taken as mandated by the Constitution Bench of this Court,

they have approached this Court. The error is apparent in

not even considering the impact of the Constitution Bench

and requires to be redressed through the Review Petition.

The petitioners also, undoubtedly, point out that there was

suppression of facts by the respondents. This Court was

sought to be misled. There is also a case that the

petitioners have obtained documents which suggest that

there were parallel negotiations being undertaken by the

Prime    Minister’s    Office   (PMO)   which   was   strenuously

objected to by the Indian Negotiating Team (INT). The

statement in the judgment that the pricing details have been

shared    with   the   Comptroller   and   Auditor    General   of

India (CAG) and the Report of the CAG has been examined by

the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and that only a redacted

portion of the Report was placed before the Parliament, are

pointed out to be patently false. It is primarily in regard

                                14
to the same that an Application is filed purporting to be

under Section 340 of the Cr.PC. There is an Application for

Correction and there is complaint of wholesale suppression

of facts. Errors are also referred to.


14. The stand of the Government of India is that the Review
Petitions     are      meritless.   This   Court   has   elaborately

considered the matter and found that there was nothing

wrong. It is the case of the Government that the impugned

judgement addresses contentions of the petitioners on

compelling principles with regard to the scope of the

judicial inquiry in cases involving the security and

defence of the nation and it lays down the correct law. It

is pointed out that there is no grave error apparent on the

face of record. Reliance is placed on judgment of this Court

in Mukesh v. State (NCT of Delhi)2. A fishing inquiry is

impermissible. There was additional benefit to the country

as a result of the deal which is sought to be questioned.

Reliance is placed on the findings of the CAG. It is

2   (2018) 8 SCC 149


                                    15
contended that the CAG has conclusively held that the basis

of the benchmark by the INT was unrealistic.


15. The CAG has held that 36 Rafale aircrafts deal was 2.86
per cent lower than the audit aligned price.   Regarding the

offset guidelines being amended initially to benefit an

industrial group, it is stoutly denied. The waiver of

sovereignty/bank guarantee in Government to Government

agreements is pointed out to be not unusual. Support is

sought to be drawn from the Report of the CAG, inter alia,

finding that the French Government was made equally

responsible to fulfil its obligations. The production and

delivery schedule are monitored by high-level Committee

with representatives of both Governments of France and

India.


16. As far as mandate of Lalita Kumari (supra), not being
followed, it is stated that disclosing prima facie that a

cognizable offence is committed is mandatory, which is

lacking in the present case especially once this Court has

concluded that on decision-making process, pricing and

                            16
Indian Offset Partners, there was no reason to intervene.

Once this Court has held that perception of individuals

cannot be the basis for a fishing and roving inquiry, no

cognizable offence is made out prima facie so as to order

registration of an FIR. There is no concealment of facts

or false presentation of facts.


CONTOURS OF REVIEW JURISDICTOIN


17. Article 137 of the Constitution confers jurisdiction
on the Supreme Court of India to exercise power of review.

It reads as follows:


        “137. Review of judgments or orders by the
        Supreme Court Subject to the provisions of
        any law made by Parliament or any rules made
        under Article 145, the Supreme Court shall
        have power to review any judgment pronounced
        or order made by it.”



18. Rules have been made known as The Supreme Court Rules,
2013. Order XLVII of the said Rules, deals with review (In

The Supreme Court Rules, 1966, it was contained in Order

XL) and it reads as follows:


                           17
                “ORDER XLVII
                   REVIEW

    1. The Court may review its judgment or
order, but no application for review will be
entertained in a civil proceeding except on
the ground mentioned in Order XLVII, rule I
of the Code, and in a criminal proceeding
except on the ground of an error apparent on
the face of the record.
    The application for review shall be
accompanied by a certificate of the Advocate
on Record certifying that it is the first
application for review and is based on the
grounds admissible under the Rules.
     2. An application for review shall be by
a petition, and shall be filed within thirty
days from the date of the judgment or order
sought to be reviewed. It shall set out
clearly the grounds for review.
     3. Unless otherwise ordered by the Court
an application for review shall be disposed
of by circulation without any oral arguments,
but the petitioner may supplement his
petition by additional written arguments.
The Court may either dismiss the petition or
direct notice to the opposite party. An
application for review shall as far as
practicable be circulated to the same Judge
or Bench of Judges that delivered the
judgment or order sought to be reviewed.
    4. Where on an application for review the
Court reverses or modifies its former
decision in the case on the ground of mistake
of law or fact, the Court, may, if it thinks
fit in the interests of justice to do so,

                   18
        direct the refund to the petitioner of the
        court-fee paid on the application in whole or
        in part, as it may think fit.
            5. Where an application for review of any
        judgment and order has been made and disposed
        of, no further application for review shall
        be entertained in the same matter.”



19. Thus, a perusal of the same would show that the
jurisdiction of this Court, to entertain a review petition

in a civil matter, is patterned on the power of the Court

under Order XLVII Rule 1 of The Code of Civil Procedure,

1908 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the CPC’, for short).


20. Order XLVII Rule 1 of the CPC, reads as follows:


                   “ORDER XLVII : REVIEW

         1. Application for review of judgement

             (1) Any person considering himself
         aggrieved-
                (a) by a decree or order from which
             an appeal is allowed, but from no appeal
             has been preferred,
                (b) by a decree or order from which
             no appeal is allowed, or
                (c) by a decision on a reference from
             a Court of Small Causes,


                           19
        and who, from the discovery of new and
        important matter or evidence which, after
        the exercise of due diligence was not within
        his knowledge or could not be produced by him
        at the time when the decree was passed or
        order made, or on account of some mistake or
        error apparent on the face of the record or
        for any other sufficient reason, desires to
        obtain a review of the decree passed or order
        made against him, may apply for a review of
        judgement to the Court which passed the
        decree or made the order.

            (2) A party who is not appealing from a
        decree or order may apply for a review of
        judgement notwithstanding the pendency of an
        appeal by some other party except where the
        ground of such appeal is common to the
        applicant and the appellant, or when, being
        respondent, he can present to the Appellate
        Court the case on which he applies for the
        review.
             Explanation.- The fact that the decision
        on a question of law on which the judgement
        of the Court is based has been reversed or
        modified by the subsequent decision of a
        superior Court in any other case, shall not
        be a ground for the review of such judgement.”



21. It will be noticed that in criminal matters, review
lies on an error apparent on the face of record being

established. However, it is necessary to notice what a



                           20
Constitution Bench of this Court laid down in P.N. Eswara

Iyer And Others v. Registrar, Supreme Court of India3:


                 “34. The rule [Ed.:Order 40, Rule 1 of
            the Supreme Court Rules] , on its face,
            affords a wider set of grounds for review for
            orders in civil proceedings, but limits the
            ground vis-a-vis criminal proceedings to
            “errors apparent on the face of the record”.
            If at all, the concern of the law to avoid
            judicial error should be heightened when life
            or liberty is in peril since civil penalties
            are often less traumatic. So, it is
            reasonable to assume that the framers of the
            rules could not have intended a restrictive
            review over criminal orders or judgments. It
            is likely to be the other way about. Supposing
            an accused is sentenced to death by the
            Supreme Court and the “deceased” shows up in
            court and the court discovers the tragic
            treachery of the recorded testimony. Is the
            court helpless to review and set aside the
            sentence of hanging? We think not. The power
            to review is in Article 137 and it is equally
            wide in all proceedings. The rule merely
            canalises the flow from the reservoir of
            power. The stream cannot stifle the source.
            Moreover, the dynamics of interpretation
            depend on the demand of the context and the
            lexical limits of the test. Here “record”
            means any material which is already on record

3   (1980) 4 SCC 680

                               21
            or may, with the permission of the court, be
            brought on record. If justice summons the
            Judges to allow a vital material in, it
            becomes part of the record; and if apparent
            error   is    there,   correction    becomes
            necessitous.

                 35. The purpose is plain, the language
            is elastic and interpretation of a necessary
            power must naturally be expansive. The
            substantive power is derived from Article 137
            and is as wide for criminal as for civil
            proceedings.    Even   the    difference    in
            phraseology in the rule (Order 40 Rule 2)
            must, therefore, be read to encompass the
            same area and not to engraft an artificial
            divergence productive of anomaly. If the
            expression “record” is read to mean, in its
            semantic sweep, any material even later
            brought on record, with the leave of the
            court, it will embrace subsequent events, new
            light and other grounds which we find in Order
            47 Rule 1, CPC. We see no insuperable
            difficulty in equating the area in civil and
            criminal proceedings when review power is
            invoked from the same source.”


                                     (Emphasis supplied)



22. In Suthendraraja Alias Suthenthira Raja Alias Santhan
                                                             4
and others v. State Through DSP/CBI, SIT, Chennai                ,

4   (1999) 9 SCC 323

                               22
referring to the judgement in P.N. Eswara Iyer (supra), it

was, inter alia, held that the scope of review was widened

considerably by the pronouncement.


23. In Haridas Das v. Usha Rani Banik (Smt.) and others5,
the question arose out of an appeal in the High Court,

wherein the High Court accepted the prayer for review. This

Court held as follows:

              “13. … The parameters are prescribed in
            Order 47 CPC and for the purposes of this lis,
            permit the defendant to press for a rehearing
            “on account of some mistake or error apparent
            on the face of the records or for any other
            sufficient reason”. The former part of the
            rule deals with a situation attributable to
            the applicant, and the latter to a jural
            action which is manifestly incorrect or on
            which two conclusions are not possible.
            Neither of them postulate a rehearing of the
            dispute because a party had not highlighted
            all the aspects of the case or could perhaps
            have argued them more forcefully and/or cited
            binding precedents to the court and thereby
            enjoyed a favourable verdict. This is amply
            evident from the Explanation to Rule 1 of
            Order 47 which states that the fact that the
            decision on a question of law on which the
            judgment of the court is based has been
            reversed or modified by the subsequent

5   (2006) 4 SCC 78

                               23
            decision of a superior court in any other
            case, shall not be a ground for the review of
            such judgment. Where the order in question is
            appealable the aggrieved party has adequate
            and efficacious remedy and the court should
            exercise the power to review its order with
            the greatest circumspection. …”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)



24. Jain Studios Ltd. Through Its President v. Shin
Satellite Public Co. Ltd.6 involved an order passed by Judge

in Chambers. It was sought to review the order passed which

is reported in Shin Satellite Public Co. Ltd. v. Jain

Studios Ltd.7. In the Arbitration Petition which was the

main matter, there was a prayer to appoint an Arbitrator

by the review petitioner. The same was heard and rejected.

The learned Judge, in the said circumstances, held as

follows:

                 “11. So far as the grievance of the
            applicant on merits is concerned, the learned
            counsel for the opponent is right in
            submitting that virtually the applicant
            seeks the same relief which had been sought
            at the time of arguing the main matter and had

6(2006)   5 SCC 501
7(2006)   2 SCC 628

                               24
            been negatived. Once such a prayer had been
            refused, no review petition would lie which
            would convert rehearing of the original
            matter. It is settled law that the power of
            review cannot be confused with appellate
            power which enables a superior court to
            correct all errors committed by a subordinate
            court. It is not rehearing of an original
            matter. A repetition of old and overruled
            argument is not enough to reopen concluded
            adjudications. The power of review can be
            exercised with extreme care, caution and
            circumspection and only in exceptional
            cases.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)



25. In State of West Bengal and others v. Kamal Sengupta
and another8, this Court, inter alia, held as follows:



                 “21. At this stage it is apposite to
            observe that where a review is sought on the
            ground of discovery of new matter or
            evidence, such matter or evidence must be
            relevant and must be of such a character that
            if the same had been produced, it might have
            altered the judgment. In other words, mere
            discovery of new or important matter or
            evidence is not sufficient ground for
            review ex debito justitiae. Not only this,
            the party seeking review has also to show that
            such additional matter or evidence was not

8   (2008) 8 SCC 612


                               25
            within its knowledge and even after the
            exercise of due diligence, the same could not
            be produced before the court earlier.”
                                    (Emphasis supplied)



26. In Moran Mar Basselios Catholicos and another v. Most
Rev. Mar Poulose Athanasius and others9, the question, which

fell for consideration was, whether misconception of the

court about a concession by counsel, furnished a ground for

review. A court may pronounce a judgement on the basis that

a concession had been made by the counsel when none had been

made. The court may also misapprehend the terms of the

concession     or     the   scope   of   a   concession.   When   such

misconception underscores a judgment, whether review would

lie? Answering the said question, this Court proceeded to

hold as follows:


                “36. … Patanjali Sastri, J. (as he then
            was) sitting singly in the Madras High Court
            definitely took the view in Rekhanti Chinna
            Govinda      Chettiyar v. S.       Varadappa
            Chettiar [AIR   1940   Mad.   17]   that   a
            misconception by the court of a concession

9   AIR 1954 SC 526


                                    26
made by the advocate or of the attitude taken
up by the party appears to be a ground
analogous to the grounds set forth in the
first part of the review section and affords
a good and cogent ground for review. The
learned Attorney-General contends that this
affidavit and the letters accompanying it
cannot be said to be part of “the record”
within the meaning of Order 47 Rule 1. We see
no reason to construe the word “record” in the
very restricted sense as was done by Denning,
L.J., in Rex v. Northumberland Compensation
Appeal Tribunal Ex parte Shaw [(1952) 2 KB
338 at pp. 351-52] which, was a case of
certiorari and include within that term only
the    document     which    initiates     the
proceedings,    the    pleadings    and    the
adjudication and exclude the evidence and
other parts of the record. Further, when the
error complained of is that the court assumed
that a concession had been made when none had
in fact been made or that the court
misconceived the terms of the concession or
the scope and extent of it, it will not
generally appear on the record but will have
to be brought before the court by way of an
affidavit as suggested by the Privy Council
as well as by this Court and this can only be
done by way of review. The cases to which
reference has been made indicate that the
misconception of the court must be regarded
as sufficient reason analogous to an error on
the face of the record. In our opinion it is
permissible to rely on the affidavit as an
additional ground for review of the
judgment.”
                         (Emphasis supplied)


                   27
27. It is pertinent to notice that this Court did not
confine the word “record” in the narrow sense in which it

was interpreted as in the case of an application of Writ

of Certiorari. This Court also sanctioned support being

drawn from an affidavit by the counsel in this regard, as

additional ground for review. Misconception by a court, was

found     embraced      within   the   scope   of   the   expression

“sufficient reasons”.


28. Non-advertence to the particular provision of the
Statute, which was pertinent and relevant to the lis, was

held to be a ground to seek review. In Girdhari Lal Gupta

v. D.N. Mehta and another10, this Court held as follows:



                “16. The learned counsel for the
            respondent State urges that this is not a case
            fit for review because it is only a case of
            mistaken judgment. But we are unable to agree
            with this submission because at the time of
            the arguments our attention was not drawn
            specifically to sub-section 23-C(2) and the


10   AIR 1971 SC 2162

                                  28
            light it throws on the interpretation of
            sub-section (1).”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)


29. Also, see in this regard, judgment in Deo Narain Singh
v. Daddan Singh and others11 where finding that this Court

had decided the case on the basis of a Statute, which was

inapplicable in the facts, review was granted.


30. In Sow Chandra Kante and another v. Sheikh Habib12, the
judgment involved a request to review the decision of this

Court refusing special leave to appeal in a matter, this

Court held as follows:


                 “… A review of a judgment is a serious
            step and reluctant resort to it is proper only
            where a glaring omission or patent mistake or
            like grave error has crept in earlier by
            judicial fallibility. A mere repetition,
            through different counsel, of old and
            overruled arguments, a second trip over
            ineffectually covered ground or minor
            mistakes of inconsequential import are
            obviously insufficient. …”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)

11   1986 (Supp) SCC 530
12(1975)   1 SCC 674

                               29
31. Two documents, which were part of the record, were
considered by the Judicial Commissioner to allow review by

the High Court. This Court, in appeal, in the judgement in

Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma and

others13, found as follows:


                 “4. In the present case both the grounds
            on which the review was allowed were hardly
            grounds for review. That the two documents
            which were part of the record were not
            considered by the Court at the time of issue
            of a writ under Article 226 cannot be a ground
            for review especially when the two documents
            were not even relied upon by the parties in
            the affidavits filed before the Court in the
            proceedings under Article 226. Again that
            several instead of one writ petition should
            have been filed is a mere question of
            procedure which certainly would not justify
            a review. We are, therefore, of the view that
            the Judicial Commissioner acted without
            jurisdiction in allowing the review. The
            order of the Judicial Commissioner dated
            December 7, 1967 is accordingly set aside and
            the order dated May 25, 1965, is restored. The
            appeal is allowed but without costs.”

                                     (Emphasis supplied)




13   (1979) 4 SCC 389


                               30
32. M/s. Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. v. Lt.
Governor of Delhi14 was a case which fell to be considered

under Article 137 of the Constitution of India. The relevant

discussion is found in paragraphs 8 and 9. They read as

follows:


              “8. It is well-settled that a party is not
            entitled to seek a review of a judgment
            delivered by this Court merely for the
            purpose of a rehearing and a fresh decision
            of the case. The normal principle is that a
            judgment pronounced by the Court is final,
            and departure from that principle is
            justified only when circumstances of a
            substantial and compelling character make it
            necessary to do so: Sajjan Singh v. State of
            Rajasthan [AIR 1965 SC 845 : (1965) 1 SCR 933,
            948 : (1965) 1 SCJ 377] . For instance, if the
            attention of the Court is not drawn to a
            material statutory provision during the
            original hearing, the Court will review its
            judgment: G.L. Gupta v. D.N. Mehta [(1971)
            3 SCC 189 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 279 : (1971) 3 SCR
            748, 750]. The Court may also reopen its
            judgment if a manifest wrong has been done and
            it is necessary to pass an order to do full
            and          effective          justice: O.N.
            Mohindroo v. Distt. Judge, Delhi [(1971) 3
            SCC 5 : (1971) 2 SCR 11, 27] . Power to review
14(1980)   2 SCC 167


                               31
its judgments has been conferred on the
Supreme Court by Article 137 of the
Constitution, and that power is subject to
the provisions of any law made by Parliament
or the rules made under Article 145. In a
civil proceeding, an application for review
is entertained only on a ground mentioned in
Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, and in a criminal proceeding on
the ground of an error apparent on the face
of the record (Order 40 Rule 1, Supreme Court
Rules, 1966). But whatever the nature of the
proceeding, it is beyond dispute that a
review proceeding cannot be equated with the
original hearing of the case, and the
finality of the judgment delivered by the
Court will not be reconsidered except “where
a glaring omission or patent mistake or like
grave error has crept in earlier by judicial
fallibility”: Sow Chandra Kante v. Sheikh
Habib [(1975) 1 SCC 674 : 1975 SCC (Tax) 200
: (1975) 3 SCR 933].

  9. Now, besides the fact that most of the
legal material so assiduously collected and
placed before us by the learned Additional
Solicitor General, who has now been entrusted
to appear for the respondent, was never
brought to our attention when the appeals
were heard, we may also examine whether the
judgment suffers from an error apparent on
the face of the record. Such an error exists
if of two or more views canvassed on the point
it is possible to hold that the controversy
can be said to admit of only one of them. If

                   32
            the view adopted by the Court in the original
            judgment is a possible view having regard to
            what the record states, it is difficult to
            hold that there is an error apparent on the
            face of the record.”



33. Question in the said case arose under the Bengal
Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941. The case was based on new

material sought to be adduced by the Revenue to establish

that the transaction amounted to a sale.


34. The       foundations,   which    underlie   the    review

jurisdiction, has been examined by this Court at some length

in the judgment in S. Nagaraj and others v. State of

Karnataka and another15:


              “18. Justice is a virtue which transcends
            all barriers. Neither the rules of procedure
            nor technicalities of law can stand in its way.
            The order of the Court should not be
            prejudicial to anyone. Rule of stare decisis
            is adhered for consistency but it is not as
            inflexible in Administrative Law as in Public
            Law. Even the law bends before justice. Entire
            concept of writ jurisdiction exercised by the
            higher courts is founded on equity and

15   1993 Supp (4) SCC 595


                               33
fairness. If the Court finds that the order was
passed under a mistake and it would not have
exercised the jurisdiction but for the
erroneous assumption which in fact did not
exist and its perpetration shall result in
miscarriage of justice then it cannot on any
principle be precluded from rectifying the
error. Mistake is accepted as valid reason to
recall an order. Difference lies in the nature
of mistake and scope of rectification,
depending on if it is of fact or law. But the
root from which the power flows is the anxiety
to avoid injustice. It is either statutory or
inherent. The latter is available where the
mistake is of the Court. In Administrative Law
the scope is still wider. Technicalities apart
if the Court is satisfied of the injustice then
it is its constitutional and legal obligation
to set it right by recalling its order. Here
as explained, the Bench of which one of us
(Sahai, J.) was a member did commit an error
in placing all the stipendiary graduates in the
scale of First Division Assistants due to
State's failure to bring correct facts on
record. But that obviously cannot stand in the
way of the Court correcting its mistake. Such
inequitable consequences as have surfaced now
due to vague affidavit filed by the State
cannot be permitted to continue.

  19. Review literally and even judicially
means re-examination or re-consideration.
Basic philosophy inherent in it is the
universal acceptance of human fallibility.

                   34
Yet in the realm of law the courts and even
the statutes lean strongly in favour of
finality of decision legally and properly
made. Exceptions both statutorily and
judicially have been carved out to correct
accidental mistakes or miscarriage of
justice. Even when there was no statutory
provision and no rules were framed by the
highest court indicating the circumstances
in which it could rectify its order the courts
culled out such power to avoid abuse of
process or miscarriage of justice. In Raja
Prithwi Chand Lal Choudhury v. Sukhraj
Rai [AIR 1941 FC 1, 2 : 1940 FCR 78 : (1941)
1 MLJ Supp 45] the Court observed that even
though no rules had been framed permitting
the highest Court to review its order yet it
was available on the limited and narrow
ground developed by the Privy Council and the
House of Lords. The Court approved the
principle laid down by the Privy Council
in Rajunder Narain Rae v. Bijai Govind
Singh [(1836) 1 Moo PC 117 : 2 MIA 181 : 1 Sar
175] that an order made by the Court was final
and could not be altered:
     “… nevertheless, if by misprision in
  embodying the judgments, by errors have
  been introduced, these Courts possess, by
  Common law, the same power which the Courts
  of record and statute have of rectifying
  the mistakes which have crept in …. The
  House of Lords exercises a similar power
  of rectifying mistakes made in drawing up
  its own judgments, and this Court must

                   35
  possess the same authority. The Lords have
  however gone a step further, and have
  corrected mistakes introduced through
  inadvertence in the details of judgments;
  or have supplied manifest defects in order
  to enable the decrees to be enforced, or
  have added explanatory matter, or have
  reconciled inconsistencies.”
Basis for exercise of the power was stated in
the same decision as under:
    “It is impossible to doubt that the
  indulgence extended in such cases is
  mainly owing to the natural desire
  prevailing    to    prevent    irremediable
  injustice being done by a Court of last
  resort, where by some accident, without
  any blame, the party has not been heard and
  an order has been inadvertently made as if
  the party had been heard.”
Rectification of an order thus stems from the
fundamental principle that justice is above
all. It is exercised to remove the error and
not for disturbing finality. When the
Constitution was framed the substantive
power to rectify or recall the order passed
by this Court was specifically provided by
Article 137 of the Constitution. Our
Constitution-makers who had the practical
wisdom to visualise the efficacy of such
provision     expressly      conferred    the
substantive power to review any judgment or
order by Article 137 of the Constitution. And
clause (c) of Article 145 permitted this
Court to frame rules as to the conditions

                   36
            subject to which any judgment or order may be
            reviewed. In exercise of this power Order XL
            had been framed empowering this Court to
            review an order in civil proceedings on
            grounds analogous to Order XLVII Rule 1 of the
            Civil Procedure Code. The expression, ‘for
            any other sufficient reason’ in the clause
            has been given an expanded meaning and a
            decree or order passed under misapprehension
            of true state of circumstances has been held
            to be sufficient ground to exercise the
            power. Apart from Order XL Rule 1 of the
            Supreme Court Rules this Court has the
            inherent power to make such orders as may be
            necessary in the interest of justice or to
            prevent the abuse of process of Court. The
            Court is thus not precluded from recalling or
            reviewing its own order if it is satisfied
            that it is necessary to do so for sake of
            justice.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)



35. The decision in S. Nagaraj(supra), has been followed
in various judgements of this Court (See Lily Thomas and

others v. Union of India and others 16 ; Haryana State

Industrial Development Corporation Limited. v. Mawasi and




16   (2000) 6 SCC 224

                               37
others17; Kamlesh Verma v. Mayawati and others18; Usha Bharti

v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others 19 and Vikram Singh

Alias Vicky Walia and another v. State of Punjab and

another20).


36. In Kamlesh Verma (supra), this Court in paragraph 20,
laid down its conclusions, which reads as follows:


              “Summary of the principles
                20. Thus, in view of the above, the
              following grounds of review are maintainable
              as stipulated by the statute:

                20.1. When    the    review    will    be
              maintainable:
                  (i) Discovery of new and important
                matter or evidence which, after the
                exercise of due diligence, was not within
                knowledge of the petitioner or could not
                be produced by him;
                  (ii) Mistake or error apparent on the
                face of the record;
                  (iii) Any other sufficient reason.

17   (2012)   7   SCC   200
18   (2013)   8   SCC   320
19   (2014)   7   SCC   663
20   (2017)   8   SCC   518.

                                38
The words “any other sufficient reason” have
been          interpreted          in Chhajju
Ram v. Neki [(1921-22) 49 IA 144 : (1922) 16
LW 37 : AIR 1922 PC 112] and approved by this
Court       in Moran      Mar       Basselios
Catholicos v. Most     Rev.    Mar    Poulose
Athanasius [AIR 1954 SC 526 : (1955) 1 SCR
520] to mean “a reason sufficient on grounds
at least analogous to those specified in the
rule”. The same principles have been
reiterated in Union of India v. Sandur
Manganese & Iron Ores Ltd. [(2013) 8 SCC 337:
JT (2013) 8 SC 275]

  20.2. When the review will not be
maintainable:
    (i) A repetition of old and overruled
  argument is not enough to reopen concluded
  adjudications.
    (ii) Minor mistakes of inconsequential
  import.
    (iii) Review proceedings cannot be
  equated with the original hearing of the
  case.
    (iv) Review is not maintainable unless
  the material error, manifest on the face
  of the order, undermines its soundness or
  results in miscarriage of justice.
    (v) A review is by no means an appeal in
  disguise whereby an erroneous decision is
  reheard and corrected but lies only for
  patent error.


                   39
             (vi) The mere possibility of two views
           on the subject cannot be a ground for
           review.
             (vii) The error apparent on the face of
           the record should not be an error which has
           to be fished out and searched.
             (viii) The appreciation of evidence on
           record is fully within the domain of the
           appellate court, it cannot be permitted to
           be advanced in the review petition.
             (ix) Review is not maintainable when the
           same relief sought at the time of arguing
           the main matter had been negatived.”


37. In a very recent judgment, in fact, relied upon by the
Union of India, viz., Mukesh (supra), in a review petition

in a criminal appeal, this Court reiterated that a review

is not rehearing of an original matter. Even establishing

another possible view would not suffice [See Vikram Singh

(supra), which was relied upon].


38. The anxiety of this Court that the consideration of
rendering justice remain uppermost in the mind of the Court,

has led to the Constitution Bench judgement in Rupa Ashok




                            40
Hurra v. Ashok Hurra and another21. It is in the said case

that the concept of a curative petition was devised to

empower a litigant to seek a reconsideration of a matter

wherein the review petition also is unsuccessful. Certain

steps have been laid down in this regard which stand

incorporated in The Supreme Court Rules, 2013 [in Part IV

Order XLVIII thereof].


39. Undoubtedly, any error to be an error on the face of
the record, cannot be one which has to be established by

a long drawn out process of reasoning on points where there

may conceivably be two opinions or if the error requires

lengthy and complicated arguments to establish it, a Writ

of Certiorari would not lie (See Satyanarayan Laxminarayan

Hegde and others v. Mallikarjun Bhavanappa Tirumale 22 ).

This principle is equally applicable to a review petition

also.




21   (2002) 4 SCC 388
22   AIR 1960 SC 137

                            41
40. On a conspectus of the above decisions, the following
conclusions appeared to be inevitable and they also provide

the premise for review:


         Justice above all. While a review petition has not

    been understood as an appeal in disguise and a mere

    erroneous decision may not justify a review, a decision

    which betrays an error which is apparent, does entitle

    the court to exercise its jurisdiction under Article

    137 of the Constitution. The founding fathers were

    conscious that this Court was the final Court. There

    are two values, which in any system of law, may collide.

    On   the   one   hand,   recognizing   that   men   are   not

    infallible and the courts are manned by men, who are

    prone to err, there must be a safety valve to check the

    possibility of grave injustice being reached to a

    litigant, consequent upon an error, which is palpable

    or as a result of relevant material despite due

    diligence by a litigant not being made available or

    other sufficient reason. The other value which is


                               42
      ever-present in the mind of the law giver, is, there

      must be finality to litigation. Be it judgments of a

      final    court,    if   it     becomes       vulnerable   to

      indiscriminate    reopening,   unless    a    strong   ground

      exists, which itself is based on manifest error

      disclosed by the judgment or the other two grounds

      mentioned in Order XLVII of the CPC in a civil matter,

      it would spawn considerable inequity.



41.     It must be noticed that the principle well-settled in

regard to jurisdiction in review, is that a review is not

an appeal in disguise. The applicant, in a review, is, on

most occasions, told off the gates, by pointing out that

his remedy lay in pursuing an appeal. In the case of a

decision rendered by this Court, it is to be noticed that

the underpinning based on availability of an appeal, is not

available as this Court is the final Court and no appeal

lies.


                              43
42. It is no doubt true that the Supreme Court Rules, 2013,
certain powers are conferred on the Registrar as also on

the Judge holding Court in Chambers and appeals, indeed,

are provided in respect of certain orders passed by the

Registrar.


43. The fact that no appeal lies from the judgment of this
Court may not, however, result in the jurisdiction of this

Court under Article 137 of the Constitution being enlarged.

However, when the Court is invited to exercise its power

of review, this aspect may also be borne in mind, viz., that

unlike the other courts from which an appeal may be provided

either under the Constitution or other laws, or by special

leave under Article 136 of the Constitution, no appeal lies

from the judgment of this Court, and it is in that sense,

the   final   Court.   The   underlying   assumption   for   the

principle that a review is not an appeal in disguise, being

that the decision is appealable, is really not available

in regard to a decision rendered by this Court, is all that

is being pointed out.


                               44
44. A review petition is maintainable if the impugned
judgment discloses an error apparent on the face of the

record. Unlike a proceeding in Certiorari jurisdiction,

wherein the error must not only be apparent on the face of

the record, it must be an error of law, which must be

apparent on the face of the record, for granting review

under Article 137 of the Constitution read with Order XLVII

Rule 1 of the CPC, the error can be an error of fact or of

law. No doubt, it must be apparent on the face of record.

Such an error has been described as a palpable error or

glaring omission. As to what constitutes an error apparent

on the face of record, is a matter to be found in context

of the facts of each case. It is worthwhile to refer to the

following discussion in this regard by this Court in Hari

Vishnu Kamath v. Ahmad Ishaque and Others23, wherein, this

Court held as follows:


                “23. It may therefore be taken as
            settled that a writ of certiorari could be
            issued to correct an error of law. But it is

23   AIR 1955 SC 233


                              45
essential that it should be something more
than a mere error; it must be one which must
be manifest on the face of the record. The
real difficulty with reference to this
matter, however, is not so much in the
statement of the principle as in its
application to the facts of a particular
case. When does an error cease to be mere
error, and become an error apparent on the
face of the record? Learned counsel on either
side were unable to suggest any clear-cut
rule by which the boundary between the two
classes of errors could be demarcated.
     Mr Pathak for the first respondent
contended on the strength of certain
observations of Chagla, C.J. in Batuk K.
Vyas v. Surat Municipality [AIR 1953 Bom
133] that no error could be said to be
apparent on the face of the record if it was
not self-evident, and if it required an
examination or argument to establish it. This
test might afford a satisfactory basis for
decision in the majority of cases. But there
must be cases in which even this test might
break down, because judicial opinions also
differ, and an error that might be considered
by one Judge as self-evident might not be so
considered by another. The fact is that what
is an error apparent on the face of the record
cannot be defined precisely or exhaustively,
there being an element of indefiniteness
inherent in its very nature, and it must be
left to be determined judicially on the facts
of each case.”
                         (Emphasis supplied)




                   46
45. The view of this Court, in the decision in Girdhari Lal
Gupta (supra) as also in Deo Narain Singh (supra), has been

noticed to be that if the relevant law is ignored or an

inapplicable law forms the foundation for the judgement,

it would provide a ground for review. If a court is oblivious

to the relevant statutory provisions, the judgment would,

in fact, be per incuriam. No doubt, the concept of per

incuriam is apposite in the context of its value as the

precedent but as between the parties, certainly it would

be open to urge that a judgment rendered, in ignorance of

the applicable law, must be reviewed. The judgment, in such

a case, becomes open to review as it would betray a clear

error in the decision.


46. As regards fresh material forming basis for review, it
must be of such nature that it is relevant and it undermines

the verdict. This is apart from the requirement that it

could not be produced despite due diligence.


47. The dismissal of a special leave petition takes place
at two levels. In the first place, the Court may dismiss

                             47
or reject a special leave petition at the admission stage.

Ordinarily, no reasons accompany such a decision. In

matters where a special leave petition is dismissed after

notice is issued, also reasons may not be given ordinarily.

Several elements enter into the consideration of this Court

where a special leave petition is dismissed. The task for

a review applicant becomes formidable as reasons are not

given. An error apparent on the face of the record becomes

difficult to establish. In a writ petition where pleadings

are exchanged and reasons are given in support of the

verdict, a self-evident error is detected without much

argument.   No   doubt,   a   Court,   in   review,   does   not

reappreciate and correct a mere erroneous decision. That

reappreciation is tabooed, is not the same as holding that

a Court will not appreciate the case as reflected in the

pleadings and the law by which the Court is governed.


48. In this case, the short point, which this Court is
called upon to consider, is the effect of the impugned

judgment not dealing with a binding decision rendered by


                              48
a   Constitution   Bench   which   was   relied   upon   by   the

petitioners in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 298 of 2018 and

rendered in Lalita Kumari (supra). It is apposite that I

set out what this Court, speaking through the aforesaid

Constitution Bench judgment, has laid down in paragraph

120:


         “Conclusion/Directions

           120. In view of the aforesaid discussion,
         we hold:

           120.1. The   registration   of   FIR   is
         mandatory under Section 154 of the Code, if
         the information discloses commission of a
         cognizable offence and no preliminary
         inquiry is permissible in such a situation.

           120.2. If the information received does
         not disclose a cognizable offence but
         indicates the necessity for an inquiry, a
         preliminary inquiry may be conducted only to
         ascertain whether cognizable offence is
         disclosed or not.
           120.3. If the inquiry discloses the
         commission of a cognizable offence, the FIR
         must   be   registered.    In   cases    where
         preliminary inquiry ends in closing the
         complaint, a copy of the entry of such closure

                              49
must be supplied to the first informant
forthwith and not later than one week. It must
disclose reasons in brief for closing the
complaint and not proceeding further.

  120.4. The police officer cannot avoid his
duty of registering offence if cognizable
offence is disclosed. Action must be taken
against erring officers who do not register
the FIR if information received by him
discloses a cognizable offence.

  120.5. The scope of preliminary inquiry is
not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the
information received but only to ascertain
whether    the   information    reveals    any
cognizable offence.

  120.6. As to what type and in which cases
preliminary inquiry is to be conducted will
depend on the facts and circumstances of each
case. The category of cases in which
preliminary inquiry may be made are as under:
    (a)      Matrimonial     disputes/family
  disputes
    (b) Commercial offences
    (c) Medical negligence cases
    (d) Corruption cases
    (e) Cases where there is abnormal
  delay/laches    in   initiating    criminal
  prosecution, for example, over 3 months'
  delay in reporting the matter without
  satisfactorily explaining the reasons for
  delay.

  The aforesaid are only illustrations and
not exhaustive of all conditions which may
warrant preliminary inquiry.


                   50
           120.7. While ensuring and protecting the
         rights of the accused and the complainant, a
         preliminary    inquiry    should    be   made
         time-bound and in any case it should not
         exceed 7 days. The fact of such delay and the
         causes of it must be reflected in the General
         Diary entry.

           120.8. Since the General Diary/Station
         Diary/Daily Diary is the record of all
         information received in a police station, we
         direct that all information relating to
         cognizable offences, whether resulting in
         registration of FIR or leading to an inquiry,
         must   be   mandatorily   and   meticulously
         reflected in the said diary and the decision
         to conduct a preliminary inquiry must also be
         reflected, as mentioned above.”
                                  (Emphasis supplied)


49. It is their contention, therefore, that the writ
petition came to be clubbed along with other writ petitions.

This Court proceeded to undertake judicial review of the

processes which led to the decision to purchase 36 planes

going back on the earlier decision which was to purchase

136 planes.


50. According to the petitioners, therefore, this Court
committed a clear error in not focusing on the relief sought

in their writ petition which was based on the Constitution

                            51
Bench of this Court which was binding on a Bench of lesser

strength (three). All this Court is being asked to do,

according to the petitioners, having regard to the law

binding on it, is to direct the registration of the FIR.

There is also relief sought to submit reports in the same.


51. The   procedure,    which    is   to   be   adopted   by   the

authorities, has been elaborated upon. There can be no

escape from the mandatory procedure laid down by this Court.


52. Where   a   party   institutes    a    proceeding,    if   the

proceeding is of a civil nature, there would be a cause of

action. There would be reliefs sought on the basis of the

cause of action. Materials are produced both in support and

against the claim. The Court thereafter renders a judgement

either accepting the case or rejecting the case. When the

Court rejects the case, it necessarily involves refusing

to grant the relief sought for by the plaintiff/petitioner.

It may transpire that the petitioner may not press for

certain reliefs. The Court may, after applying its mind to

the case, find that the petitioner is not entitled to the

                                52
relief and decline the prayers sought. It may also happen

that the court does refer to the reliefs sought but

thereafter does not undertake any discussion regarding the

case for the relief sought and proceeds to non-suit the

party. It is clear that in this case, it is the last aspect

which is revealed by the judgment sought to be reviewed.


53. A judgment may be silent in regard to a relief which
is sought by a party. It is apposite, in this regard, to

notice Section 11 of the CPC. If a decree is silent, as

regards any relief which is claimed by the plaintiff,

Explanation V to Section 11 declares that the relief must

be treated as declined. The Explanation reads as follows:


             “Section 11, Explanation V.- Any relief
         claimed in the plaint, which is not expressly
         granted by the decree, shall, for the
         purposes of this section, be deemed to have
         been refused.”



54. No doubt, if the relief is expressly refused, then
also,   the   matter   would   become   res   judicata.   It   is,

therefore, of vital importance that when a case is decided,


                               53
the Court considers the claim and the relief sought, applies

the Statute which is applicable and the law which is laid

down particularly when it is by a Constitution Bench in

deciding the case. Just as, in the case of a judgement, where

the applicable Statute, not being applied, would result in

a judgment which becomes amenable to be corrected in review,

there can be no reason why when a binding judgment of this

Court, which is enlisted by the party, is ignored, it should

have a different consequence. In fact, since a review under

Article 137 of the Constitution, in a civil matter, is to

be exercised, based on what is contained in Order XLVII Rule

1 of the CPC, the Explanation therein, may shed some light.

The Explanation which was inserted by the Act of 1976,

following the recommendations of the Law Commission of

India, in its 54th Report, declares that the law is laid down

by a superior court reversing an earlier decision, on a

question of law, will not be a ground for the review of a

judgment.


                             54
55. The Law Commission, in fact, in the said Report
reasoned that adopting the view taken by the Kerala High

Court in the decision in Thadikulangara Pylee's son

Pathrose v. Ayyazhiveettil Lakshmi Amma’s son Kuttan and

others24 that a later judgment would amount to discovery of

new and important matter, and in any case an error on the

face of the record, would keep alive the possibility of

review indefinitely. This impliedly would mean that when

a court decides a case, it must follow judgments which are

binding on it. This is not to say that a smaller Bench of

this Court, if it entertains serious doubts about the

correctness of an earlier judgment, may not consider

referring the matter to a larger Bench. However, as long

as it does not undertake any such exercise, it cannot refuse

to follow the judgment and that too of a Constitution Bench.

Any such refusal to follow the decision binding on it, would

undoubtedly disclose an error which would be palpable being

self-evident.


24   AIR 1969 KER 186


                            55
56. In this case, when this Court rendered the judgment,
sought to be reviewed, the judgment of the Constitution

Bench in Lalita Kumari (supra), undoubtedly, held the field

having been rendered on 12.11.2013. The said judgement was,

indeed, pressed before the Court.


57. To put it in other words, having regard to the relief
sought by the petitioners, the dismissal of the writ

petition would be, according to petitioners, in the teeth

of a binding judgment of this Court. Just as in the case

of a binding Statute being ignored and giving rise to the

right to file a review, neither on logic nor in law would

the refusal to follow a binding judgement, qualify for a

different treatment if a review is filed. Be it a civil or

a criminal matter, an error apparent on the face of the

record, furnishes a ground for review.


58. This is not a case where an old argument is being
repeated in the sense that after it has been considered and

rejected, it is re-echoed in review. It is an argument which

was undoubtedly pressed in the original innings. It is not

                            56
the fault of the party if the court chose not even to touch

upon it. No doubt, it may be different in a case where a

ground or relief sought is ignored and it is found justified

otherwise. But where a ground, which is based on principles

laid down by a Constitution Bench of this Court, is not dealt

with at all and it is complained of in review, it will rob

the review jurisdiction of the very purpose it is intended

to serve, if the complaint otherwise meritorious, is not

heeded to.


59. A learned Single Judge, in an arbitration request,
turned down a plea to appoint a person as Arbitrator. In

review, the request was sought to be resurrected. It was

in this context that a learned Single Judge of this Court,

sitting in Chambers, in the decision reported in Jain

Studios Ltd. (supra), laid down that once such a relief was

refused in the main matter, no review petition would lie.

However, following the said judgment, this Court, in the

decision reported in Kamlesh Verma (supra), summarising the

principle, came to declare in paragraph 20.2(ix), that


                             57
review is not maintainable when the same relief sought at

the time of arguing the main matter, has been negatived.


60. With regard to the said principle, the context in which
it was laid down in the decision by a learned Single Judge

in Jain Studios Ltd. (supra), has already been noted. The

said principle, as stated, cannot be treated as one that

is   cast   in   stone   to   apply   irrespective   of   facts.

Illustrations come to the fore where it is better related

to the factual context and not as an immutable axiom not

admitting of exceptions. Take a case where a Writ of

Mandamus is sought for after a demand is made. The demand

is placed on record and is not even controverted. In the

main proceeding, Mandamus is refused on the ground that

there is no demand. It amounts to denial of relief. But the

verdict is clearly afflicted with palpable error, and if

the complaint is made in a review about the denial of relief

on a ground which is patently untenable, certainly, a review

would lie. There can be many other examples where the denial

of relief is palpably wrong and self-evident. It is


                               58
different, if on an appreciation of evidence or applying

the law, and where two views are possible, relief is

refused. In fact, broadly, denial of relief can occur in

two situations. There are situations where the grant of

relief itself is discretionary. There are other situations

where if a certain set of facts are established, the

plaintiff/appellant   cannot be told off the gates. A

defendant, who appeals against a time-barred suit being

decreed, establishes that a suit is time-barred, and the

facts, as stated in the judgment itself, unerringly point

to such premise. If still, the Appellate Court decrees the

suit and denies relief to the defendant/appellant, can it

be said that a review will not lie? The answer can only be

that a review will lie.


61. To test the hypothesis that on the facts this Court was
wrong and manifestly so in declining in not following the

dicta of the Constitution Bench in Lalita Kumari (supra),

a reverse process of reasoning can be employed to appreciate

the matter further. Can it be said that refusing to follow


                            59
a Constitution Bench, laying down the response of the

Officers to a complaint alleging the commission of a

cognizable offence, has not been observed in its breach?

If the review petition, in other words, is rejected, in

substance this Court would be upholding its judgment which

when placed side-by-side with the pronouncement of the

Constitution Bench in Lalita Kumari (supra), the two

judgments cannot be squared. It must co-exist despite the

patent departure, the impugned judgment manifests from the

law laid down by the Constitution Bench. But that being

impossible, the Constitution Bench must prevail and the

impugned judgment stand overwhelmed to the extent it is

inconsistent. It may be true that in view of the fact that

four writ petitions were heard together, this Court has

proceeded to focus on the merits of the matters itself

undoubtedly from the standpoint of the limited judicial

review which it could undertake in a matter of the nature

in question. On the basis of the said exercise, the Court

has concluded that there were no materials for the Court

to interfere. But this is a far cry from holding that it

                           60
will not follow the mandate of the Constitution Bench of

this Court in regard to the steps to be undertaken by the

Officer on receipt of a complaint purporting to make out

the commission of a cognizable offence. This Court may

declare that it was non-suiting the petitioners seeking

judicial review, having regard to the absence of materials

which would have justified holding the award of the contract

in question vulnerable. It would not mean that it is either

precluded or that it was not duty-bound to still direct

that the law laid down by the Constitution Bench in Lalita

Kumari (supra) be conformed to.


62. If the complaint of the petitioner does make out the
commission of the cognizable offence and FIR is to be

registered and matter investigated, it will be no answer

to suggest that this Court, has approved of the matter in

judicial review proceedings under Article 32 of the

Constitution and making it clear that entire exercise must

be viewed from the prism of the limited judicial review the

Court undertakes in such proceedings and this Court would


                            61
end up paying less than lip service to the law laid down

by the Constitution Bench in Lalita Kumari (supra).


63. As far as the judicial review of the award of the
contract is concerned, apart from the fact that a review

does not permit reappreciation of the materials, there is

the aspect of the petitioner seeking judicial review

approaching the court late in the day. There is also the

aspect relating to the court’s jurisdiction not extending

to permit it to sit in judgment over the wisdom of the

Government of the day, particularly in matters relating to

purchase of the goods involved in this case. Therefore, in

regard to review, sought in relation to the findings

relating to the judicial review, they cannot be found to

be suffering from palpable errors.


64. Though, the stand of the Government of India has been
noticed, which is the second respondent in Writ Petition

(Criminal) No. 298 of 2018, the party, which has a say in

the matter or rather a duty in the matter in terms of the

law laid down by this Court in Lalita Kumari (supra),

                           62
is   the   first   respondent,    viz.,   Central   Bureau   of

Investigation (CBI) before which petitioners have moved the

Exhibit P1-complaint. It is quite clear that the first

respondent, the premiere investigating agency in the

country, is expected to act completely independent of the

Government of the day. The Government of India cannot speak

on behalf of the first respondent. Whatever that be, the

fact remains that a decision in terms of what is laid down

in Lalita Kumari (supra), is to be taken.


65. One    objection,    which    has     apparently   weighed

with my learned and noble Brother, is that, this Court,

having dealt with the merits of the case, there could be

no occasion for directing the compliance in terms of Lalita

Kumari (supra) by the first respondent. Reasoning of the

Court has been noticed. This Court has approached the matter

proclaiming that it was doing so in the context of somewhat

constricted power of judicial review. It is further made

clear that the Court found that it is neither appropriate

nor is it within the experience of this Court to step into


                             63
the arena of what is technically feasible. This Court also

did not find any substantial material on record to show it

to be a case of commercial favouritism to any party by the

Indian Government as the option to choose the IOP did not

rest   with   the   Indian    Government.        In    the    concluding

paragraph, it was clearly mentioned that the Court’s views

were   primarily    from     the    standpoint        of   exercise   of

jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution, which

was invoked in this case.


66. The question would, therefore arise, whether in such
circumstances,      the    relief       sought   in    Writ     Petition

(Criminal) No. 298 of 2018, seeking compliance with Lalita

Kumari (supra), was wrongly declined. Differently put, the

question would arise whether the petitioners, having

participated in the proceedings and inviting the Court to

pronounce on the merits as well and cannot persuade the

Court to take a different view on the merits, could still

ask the Court to find an error and that too a grave error




                                   64
in not heeding to the prayer in Writ Petition (Criminal)

No. 298 of 2018.


67. As noticed earlier, it is one thing to say that with
the limited judicial review, available to the Court, it did

not find merit in the case of the petitioners regarding

failure to follow the DPP, presence of over-pricing,

violation of Offset Guidelines to favour a party, and

another thing to direct action on a complaint in terms of

the law laid down by this Court. It is obvious that this

Court was not satisfied with the material which was placed

to justify a decision in favour of the petitioners. It is

also apparent that the Court has reminded itself of the fact

that it was neither appropriate nor within the experience

of the Court to step into the arena. It is equally

indisputable that the entire findings are to be viewed from

the standpoint of the nature of the jurisdiction it

exercised. There are no such restrictions and limitations

on an Officer investigating a case under the law. Present

a case, making out the commission of cognizable offence,


                            65
starting with the lodging of the FIR after, no doubt, making

a preliminary inquiry where it is necessary, the fullest

of amplitude of powers under the law, no doubt, are

available to the Officer. The discovery of facts by Officer

carrying out an investigation, is completely different from

findings of facts given in judicial review by a Court. The

entire proceedings are completely different.


68. In the impugned judgment, under the heading “Offsets”,
there is, at paragraph 28, reference to the complaint that

favouring the Indian Business Group, has resulted in an

offence being committed under the Prevention of Corruption

Act. This Court extracted Clause (4.3) of the Offset Clause

which provides that OEM/Vendor, Tier-1 Sub-Vendor will be

free to select the Indian Offset Partner for implementing

the offset obligation provided it has not been barred from

doing business with the Ministry of Defence. This Court

dealt with the same contentions in paragraph 32 of the

impugned judgment, which reads as follows:




                            66
     “32. It is no doubt true that the
company, Reliance Aerostructure Ltd., has
come into being in the recent past, but the
press release suggests that there was
possibly an arrangement between the parent
Reliance Company and Dassault starting from
the year 2012. As to what transpired between
the two corporates would be a matter best left
to them, being matters of their commercial
interests, as perceived by them. There has
been a categorical denial, from every side,
of the interview given by the former French
President seeking to suggest that it is the
Indian Government which had given no option
to the French Government in the matter. On the
basis of materials available before us, this
appears contrary to the clause in DPP 2013
dealing with IOPs which has been extracted
above. Thus, the commercial arrangement, in
our view, itself does not assign any role to
the Indian Government, at this stage, with
respect to the engagement of IOP. Such matter
is seemingly left to the commercial decision
of Dassault. That is the reason why it has
been stated that the role of the Indian
Government would start only when the
vendor/OEM submits a formal proposal, in the
prescribed manner, indicating details of
IOPs and products for offset discharge. As
far as the role of HAL, insofar as the
procurement of 36 aircrafts is concerned,
there is no specific role envisaged. In fact,
the suggestion of the Government seems to be
that there were some contractual problems and
Dassault was circumspect about HAL carrying
out the contractual obligation, which is also
stated    to    be   responsible    for    the
non-conclusion of the earlier contract.”


                   67
69. The very first statement in paragraph 32 would appear
to point to the Court taking into account Press Release

suggesting that there was possibly an arrangement between

the parent Reliance Company and Dassault starting from the

year 2012. It is stated as to what transpired between the

two Corporates would be best left to them. In this regard,

in the Review Petition, it is pointed out that this Court

has grossly erred in confusing Reliance Industries of which

Mr. Mukesh Ambani is the Chairman with that of Reliance

Infrastructure of which Mr. Anil Ambani is the Chairman.

It is further contended that Mr. Anil Ambani’s Reliance

Infrastructure   is   the   parent   company   of   Reliance

Aerostructure Limited (RAL), which is the beneficiary of

the Offset Contract, and there is no possibility of any

arrangement between Reliance Infrastructure Limited with

Dassault Aviation in 2012. There appears to be considerable

merit in the case of the petitioners that in this regard,

this Court had fallen into clear error that there was

possibly an arrangement between the parent Reliance Company

and Dassault dated back to the year 2012. The parent

                            68
Reliance Company which was referred in the judgment is

Reliance    Industries      which    is    a    completely        different

corporate body from Reliance Infrastructure which appears,

according to the petitioners, to be the parent company of

RAL. Thereafter, there is reference to the denial of the

interview by the Former French President. It is further

noted that on the basis of the materials, the commercial

arrangement    does   not    assign       any    role   to    the    Indian

Government at this stage with reference to the arrangement

of the IOP. After making certain observations about HAL and

role of the Indian Government starting only when the

Vendor/OEM submitted a formal proposal, this Court went on

to make the observation contained in paragraph 33 which has

already been extracted.


70. From the standpoint of the jurisdiction in judicial
review     proceedings      and     under       Article      32     of   the

Constitution, as also absence of any substantial material

to show to be a case of commercial favouritism, it may be

true that the findings other than which has been referred


                                    69
to may not disclose a palpable error. This Court’s lack of

experience of what is technically feasible, as noted by the

Court, has weighed with it.


POWERS OF POLICE OFFICER WIDER AND DIFFERENT FROM THAT OF
WRIT COURT


71. The ‘statutory right of the police to investigate about
a cognizable offence’ is well settled. In King-Emperor v.

Nazir Ahmad Khwaja25, the Privy Council has, inter alia,

held as follows:


                “In India as has been shown there is a
            statutory right on the part of the police to
            investigate the circumstances of an alleged
            cognizable crime without requiring any
            authority from the judicial authorities, and
            it would as their Lordships think, be an
            unfortunate result if it should be held
            possible to interfere with those statutory
            rights by an exercise of the inherent
            jurisdiction of the court. The functions of
            the   judiciary    and   the    police   are
            complementary not overlapping and the
            combination of individual liberty with a due
            observance of law and order is only to be
            obtained by leaving each to exercise its own
            function, always of course subject to the
            right of the Court to intervene in an

25   AIR 1945 PC 18

                              70
            appropriate case when moved under S. 491 of
            the C.P.C. to give directions in the nature
            of habeas corpus. In such a case as the
            present, however, the Courts functions begin
            when a charge is preferred before it and not
            until then. …”


72. Following the same, this Court in M.C. Abraham and
another v. State of Maharashtra and others 26 , held as

follows:


                 “13. This Court held in the case
            of J.A.C. Saldanha [(1980) 1 SCC 554 : 1980
            SCC (Cri) 272] that there is a clear-cut and
            well-demarcated sphere of activity in the
            field   of   crime   detection    and   crime
            punishment. Investigation of an offence is
            the field exclusively reserved by the
            executive through the police department, the
            superintendence over which vests in the State
            Government. It is the bounden duty of the
            executive to investigate, if an offence is
            alleged, and bring the offender to book. Once
            it investigates and finds an offence having
            been committed, it is its duty to collect
            evidence for the purpose of proving the
            offence. …”



73. The Police Officer is endowed with wide powers. Nothing
that constricted or limited this Court in the impugned


26   (2003) 2 SCC 649

                               71
judgment, applies to an Officer who has undertaken an

investigation into the commission of a cognizable offence.

In fact, in this case, the first respondent-CBI is the

premiere investigation agency of the country. It is

equipped to undertake all forms of investigations, be it

technical or otherwise. The factors which concerned this

Court can be recapitulated to bring out the true role of

an Investigator. This Court held, it is neither appropriate

nor within the Court’s experience to step into what is

technical feasible or not. No such limitation applies to

an Investigator of a cognizable offence. What is important

is that it is the duty of the Investigating Officer to

collect all material, be it technical or otherwise, and

thereafter, submit an appropriate report to the court

concerned, be it a final report or challan depending upon

the materials unearthed. This Court relied on absence of

substantial material. This is not a restriction on the

Investigating Officer. Far from it, the very purpose of

conducting an investigation on a complaint of a cognizable

offence being committed, is to find material. There can be

                            72
no dispute that the first respondent is the premiere

investigating agency in the country which assumedly employs

state   of   the   art     techniques   of   investigation.

Professionalism of the highest quality, which embraces

within it, uncompromising independence and neutrality, is

expected of it. Again, the restriction which underlies the

impugned judgment is the limited scope of judicial review

and also the writ jurisdiction under Article 32 of the

Constitution. It is clear as a mountain stream that both

these considerations are totally irrelevant for an Officer

who has before him a complaint making out the commission

of a cognizable offence.


74. However, the directions contained in paragraph 120 of
the Constitution Bench decision in Lalita Kumari (supra)

must be further appreciated. In this case, the petitioners

in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 298 of 2018, have indeed

moved an elaborate written complaint before the first

respondent-CBI. The complaint that is made, attempts to

make out the commission of a cognizable offences under the


                             73
Prevention of Corruption Act. Paragraph 120.1 of Lalita

Kumari (supra), declares registration of FIR is mandatory

if   information   discloses   commission        of   a   cognizable

offence. The Constitution Bench debarred any preliminary

inquiry in such a situation. It is apposite that paragraph

120.5 is noticed at this stage. This Court held that the

scope of the preliminary inquiry is not to verify the

veracity or otherwise of the information received but it

is only to ascertain whether the information reveals any

cognizable offence. Coming back to paragraph 120.2, it is

laid down by this Court that if the information does not

disclose a cognizable offence but indicates the necessity

for an inquiry, a preliminary inquiry may be conducted only

to ascertain whether cognizable offence is disclosed or

not. It is beyond dispute that the offences which are

mentioned in the complaint filed by the petitioners in Writ

Petition   (Criminal)   No.    298   of   2018    are     cognizable

offences. Again, coming back to paragraph 120.3 in Lalita

Kumari (supra) read with paragraphs 120.2 and 120.5, if the

inquiry discloses commission of a cognizable offence, the

                               74
FIR must be registered. Where, however, the preliminary

inquiry ends in closing the complaint, the first informant

must be informed in writing forthwith and not later than

a week. That apart, reasons, in brief, must also be

disclosed.


75. Paragraph 120.6 deals with the type of cases in which
preliminary inquiry may be made. Corruption cases are one

of the categories of cases where a preliminary inquiry may

be conducted. Also, cases where there is abnormal delay or

laches in initiating criminal prosecution, for example over

three   months   delay   in   reporting   the   matter   without

satisfactorily explaining the reasons for the delay. As can

be noticed from paragraph 120.6, medical negligence cases,

matrimonial disputes, commercial offences are also cases

in which a preliminary inquiry may be made. In order to

appreciate the scope of paragraph 120.6, it is necessary

to advert to paragraphs 115 to 119, which read as follows:


         “Exceptions
             115. Although,  we,  in   unequivocal
         terms, hold that Section 154 of the Code

                               75
postulates the mandatory registration of
FIRs on receipt of all cognizable offences,
yet, there may be instances where preliminary
inquiry may be required owing to the change
in genesis and novelty of crimes with the
passage of time. One such instance is in the
case of allegations relating to medical
negligence on the part of doctors. It will be
unfair and inequitable to prosecute a medical
professional only on the basis of the
allegations in the complaint.

    116. In    the   context    of   medical
negligence cases, in Jacob Mathew [Jacob
Mathew v. State of Punjab, (2005) 6 SCC 1:
2005 SCC (Cri) 1369], it was held by this
Court as under: (SCC p. 35, paras 51-52)
      “51. We may not be understood as
    holding that doctors can never be
    prosecuted for an offence of which
    rashness or negligence is an essential
    ingredient. All that we are doing is to
    emphasise the need for care and caution
    in the interest of society; for, the
    service which the medical profession
    renders to human beings is probably the
    noblest of all, and hence there is a need
    for protecting doctors from frivolous or
    unjust prosecutions. Many a complainant
    prefer recourse to criminal process as
    a tool for pressurising the medical
    professional for extracting uncalled
    for or unjust compensation. Such


                   76
malicious proceedings have to be guarded
against.
  52. Statutory rules or executive
instructions    incorporating    certain
guidelines need to be framed and issued
by the Government of India and/or the
State Governments in consultation with
the Medical Council of India. So long as
it is not done, we propose to lay down
certain guidelines for the future which
should govern the prosecution of doctors
for offences of which criminal rashness
or criminal negligence is an ingredient.
A   private   complaint   may   not   be
entertained unless the complainant has
produced prima facie evidence before the
court in the form of a credible opinion
given by another competent doctor to
support the charge of rashness or
negligence on the part of the accused
doctor.   The   investigating    officer
should, before proceeding against the
doctor accused of rash or negligent act
or omission, obtain an independent and
competent medical opinion preferably
from a doctor in government service,
qualified in that branch of medical
practice who can normally be expected to
give an impartial and unbiased opinion
applying     the Bolam [Bolam v. Friern
Hospital Management Committee, (1957) 1
WLR 582 : (1957) 2 All ER 118] test to
the    facts     collected     in    the
investigation. A doctor accused of

              77
    rashness or negligence, may not be
    arrested in a routine manner (simply
    because a charge has been levelled
    against him). Unless his arrest is
    necessary     for     furthering     the
    investigation    or    for    collecting
    evidence or unless the investigating
    officer feels satisfied that the doctor
    proceeded against would not make himself
    available to face the prosecution unless
    arrested, the arrest may be withheld.”

    117. In the context of offences relating
to    corruption,     this     Court     in P.
Sirajuddin [P.     Sirajuddin v. State      of
Madras, (1970) 1 SCC 595 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 240]
expressed the need for a preliminary inquiry
before proceeding against public servants.

     118. Similarly,      in Tapan      Kumar
Singh [CBI v. Tapan Kumar Singh, (2003) 6
SCC 175 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1305] , this Court
has validated a preliminary inquiry prior to
registering an FIR only on the ground that at
the time the first information is received,
the same does not disclose a cognizable
offence.

    119. Therefore, in view of various
counterclaims regarding registration or
non-registration, what is necessary is only
that the information given to the police must
disclose the commission of a cognizable


                   78
        offence. In such a situation, registration of
        an FIR is mandatory. However, if no
        cognizable offence is made out in the
        information given, then the FIR need not be
        registered immediately and perhaps the
        police can conduct a sort of preliminary
        verification or inquiry for the limited
        purpose of ascertaining as to whether a
        cognizable offence has been committed. But,
        if the information given clearly mentions the
        commission of a cognizable offence, there is
        no other option but to register an FIR
        forthwith. Other considerations are not
        relevant at the stage of registration of FIR,
        such as, whether the information is falsely
        given, whether the information is genuine,
        whether the information is credible, etc.
        These are the issues that have to be verified
        during the investigation of the FIR. At the
        stage of registration of FIR, what is to be
        seen is merely whether the information given
        ex facie discloses the commission of a
        cognizable offence. If, after investigation,
        the information given is found to be false,
        there is always an option to prosecute the
        complainant for filing a false FIR.”
                                 (Emphasis supplied)


76. As can be noticed that medical negligence cases
constitute an exception to the general rule which provides

for mandatory registration of FIR in respect of all



                           79
cognizable offences. The Court, in clear terms, held that

it will be unfair and inequitable to prosecute a medical

professional only on the basis of the allegations in the

complaint. It relied on a decision of this Court in Jacob

Mathew v. State of Punjab and another27.


77. In paragraph 117 of Lalita Kumar (Supra), this Court
referred to the decision in P. Sirajuddin, Etc. v. State

of Madras, Etc.28 and took the view that in the context of

offences related to corruption in the said decision, the

Court has expressed a need for a preliminary inquiry before

proceeding against public servants.


78. In      P.   Sirajuddin   (supra),   relied   upon   by   the

Constitution Bench in Lalita Kumari (supra), what this

Court has held, and which has apparently been relied upon

by the Constitution Bench though not expressly referred to

is the following statement contained in paragraph 17:




27   (2005) 6 SCC 1
28   (1970) 1 SCC 595

                                80
              “17. … Before a public servant, whatever
         be his status, is publicly charged with acts
         of dishonesty which amount to serious
         misdemeanour or misconduct of the type
         alleged in this case and a first information
         is lodged against him, there must be some
         suitable preliminary enquiry into the
         allegations by a responsible officer. The
         lodging of such a report against a person,
         specially one who like the appellant occupied
         the top position in a department, even if
         baseless, would do incalculable harm not only
         to the officer in particular but to the
         department he belonged to, in general. …”
                                  (Emphasis supplied)



79. In Lalita Kumari (supra), one of the contentions which
was pressed before the Court was that in certain situations,

preliminary inquiry is necessary. In this regard, attention

of the Court was drawn to CBI Crime Manual. The following

paragraphs of the Lalita Kumari (supra) may be noticed,

which read as follows:

             “89. Besides,     the   learned    Senior
         Counsel relied on the special procedures
         prescribed under the CBI Manual to be read
         into Section 154. It is true that the concept
         of “preliminary inquiry” is contained in
         Chapter IX of the Crime Manual of CBI.
         However, this Crime Manual is not a statute

                            81
and has not been enacted by the legislature.
It is a set of administrative orders issued
for internal guidance of the CBI officers. It
cannot supersede the Code. Moreover, in the
absence of any indication to the contrary in
the Code itself, the provisions of the CBI
Crime Manual cannot be relied upon to import
the concept of holding of preliminary inquiry
in the scheme of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. At this juncture, it is also
pertinent to submit that CBI is constituted
under a special Act, namely, the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 and it
derives its power to investigate from this
Act.

    90. It may be submitted that Sections
4(2) and 5 of the Code permit special
procedures to be followed for special Acts.
Section 4 of the Code lays down as under:

    “4.Trial of offences under the Indian
  Penal Code and other laws.—(1) All
  offences under the Indian Penal Code (45
  of 1860) shall be investigated, inquired
  into, tried, and otherwise dealt with
  according to the provisions hereinafter
  contained.

    (2) All offences under any other law
  shall be investigated, inquired into,
  tried, and otherwise dealt with according
  to the same provisions, but subject to any


                   82
  enactment for the time being in force
  regulating the manner or place of
  investigating, inquiring into, trying or
  otherwise dealing with such offences.”
It is thus clear that for the offences under
the laws other than IPC, different provisions
can be laid down under a special Act to
regulate the investigation, inquiry, trial,
etc. of those offences. Section 4(2) of the
Code protects such special provisions.

    91. Moreover, Section 5 of the Code lays
down as under:
    “5.Saving.—Nothing contained in this
  Code shall, in the absence of a specific
  provision to the contrary, affect any
  special or local law for the time being in
  force, or any special jurisdiction or
  power conferred, or any special form of
  procedure prescribed, by any other law for
  the time being in force.”

Thus, special provisions contained in the
DSPE Act relating to the powers of CBI are
protected also by Section 5 of the Code.

    92. In view of the above specific
provisions in the Code, the powers of CBI
under the DSPE Act, cannot be equated with the
powers of the regular State Police under the
Code.”




                   83
80. It is thereafter that under the caption “Exceptions”,
the Constitution Bench has proceeded to deal with offences

relating to corruption as already noted and contained in

paragraph 117 of Lalita Kumari (supra), which has already

been extracted. Chapter 8 of the CBI Crime Manual deals with

complaints and source of information. Chapter 9 deals with

preliminary enquiries. Clause (8.6) of Chapter 8 provides

for the categories of complaints which are to be considered

fit for verification. It provides, inter alia, complaints

pertaining to subject matters which fall within the purview

of the CBI, either received from official channels or from

well-established and recognized organizations or from

individuals who are known and who can be traced and

examined. Undoubtedly, petitioners are known and can be

traced and examined. A complaint against a Minister or a

Former Minister of the Union Government is to be put up

before the Director of the CBI. The complaints which are

registered for verification, with the approval of the

competent authority, would only be subjected to secret

verification. Clause (9.1) of Chapter 9 contemplates that

                            84
when   a   complaint      is     received,   inter   alia,     after

verification and which may after verification indicates

serious misconduct on the part of the public servant but

is not adequate to justify registration of a regular case,

under the provisions of Section 154 of the Cr.PC, a

preliminary inquiry may be registered after obtaining

approval of the competent authority. Clause (9.1) also, no

doubt, deals with cases entrusted by this Court and the High

Courts.    The   Manual        further   contemplates   that     the

preliminary inquiry will result either in registration of

regular cases or departmental action inter alia.


81. The Constitution Bench in Lalita Kumari(supra), had
before it, the CBI Crime Manual. It also considered the

decision of this Court in P. Sirajuddin (supra) which

declared the necessity for preliminary inquiry in offences

relating to corruption. Therefore, the petitioners may not

be justified in approaching this Court seeking the relief

of registration of an FIR and investigation on the same as

such. This is for the reason that one of the exceptions where


                                  85
immediate registration of FIR may not be resorted to, would

be a case pointing fingers at a public figure and raising

the allegation of corruption. This Court also has permitted

preliminary   inquiry   when   there   is   delay,   laches   in

initiating criminal prosecution, for example, over three

months. A preliminary inquiry, it is to be noticed in

paragraph 120.7, is to be completed within seven days.


82. The petitioners have not sought the relief of a
preliminary inquiry being conducted. Even assuming that a

smaller relief than one sought could be granted, there is

yet another seemingly insuperable obstacle.


83. In the year 2018, the Prevention of Corruption
(Amendment) Act, 2018 (hereinafter referred to as ‘2018

Act’ for short) was brought into force on 26.07.2018.

Thereunder, Section 17A, a new Section was inserted, which

reads as follows:


             “17A. (1) No police officer shall
         conduct   any  enquiry   or   inquiry  or
         investigation into any offence alleged to


                               86
         have been committed by a public servant under
         this Act, where the alleged offence is
         relatable to any recommendation made or
         decision taken by such public servant in
         discharge of his official functions or
         duties, without the previous approval— (a )
         in the case of a person who is or was employed,
         at the time when the offence was alleged to
         have been committed, in connection with the
         affairs of the Union, of that Government; (b)
         in the case of a person who is or was employed,
         at the time when the offence was alleged to
         have been committed, in connection with the
         affairs of a State, of that Government; (c)
         in the case of any other person, of the
         authority competent to remove him from his
         office, at the time when the offence was
         alleged to have been committed: Provided that
         no such approval shall be necessary for cases
         involving arrest of a person on the spot on
         the charge of accepting or attempting to
         accept any undue advantage for himself or for
         any other person: Provided further that the
         concerned    authority    shall    convey   its
         decision under this section within a period
         of three months, which may, for reasons to be
         recorded in writing by such authority, be
         extended by a further period of one month.‟‟.

                                  (Emphasis supplied)



84. In terms of Section 17A, no Police Officer is permitted
to conduct any enquiry or inquiry or conduct investigation

into any offence done by a public servant where the offence



                             87
alleged is relatable to any recommendation made or decision

taken by the public servant in discharge of his public

functions without previous approval, inter alia, of the

authority competent to remove the public servant from his

Office at the time when the offence was alleged to have been

committed. In respect of the public servant, who is involved

in this case, it is clause (c), which is applicable. Unless,

therefore, there is previous approval, there could be

neither inquiry or enquiry or investigation. It is in this

context apposite to notice that the complaint, which has

been filed by the petitioners in Writ Petition (Criminal)

No. 298 of 2018, moved before the first respondent-CBI, is

done after Section 17A was inserted. The complaint is dated

04.10.2018. Paragraph 5 sets out the relief which is sought

in the complaint which is to register an FIR under various

provisions. Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the complaint are relevant

in the context of Section 17A, which reads as follows:



             “6. We are also aware that recently,
         Section 17(A) of the act has been brought in
         by way of an amendment to introduce the

                            88
         requirement of prior permission of the
         government for investigation or inquiry
         under the Prevention of Corruption Act.
              7. We are also aware that this will
         place you in the peculiar situation, of
         having to ask the accused himself, for
         permission to investigate a case against him.
         We realise that your hands are tied in this
         matter, but we request you to at least take
         the first step, of seeking permission of the
         government under Section 17(A) of the
         Prevention    of    Corruption     Act    for
         investigating this offence and under which,
         “the concerned authority shall convey its
         decision under this section within a period
         of three months, which may, for reasons to be
         recorded in writing by such authority, be
         extended by a further period of one month”.”



85. Therefore, petitioners have filed the complaint fully
knowing that Section 17A constituted a bar to any inquiry

or enquiry or investigation unless there was previous

approval. In fact, a request is made to at least take the

first step of seeking permission under Section 17A of the

2018 Act. Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 298 of 2018 was filed

on   24.10.2018   and    the        complaint   is   based   on

non-registration of the FIR. There is no challenge to

Section 17A. Under the law, as it stood, both on the date

                               89
of filing the petition and even as of today, Section 17A

continues to be on the Statute Book and it constitutes a

bar to any inquiry or enquiry or investigation. The

petitioners themselves, in the complaint, request to seek

approval in terms of Section 17A but when it comes to the

relief sought in the Writ Petition, there was no relief

claimed in this behalf.


86. Even proceeding on the basis that on petitioners
complaint, an FIR must be registered as it purports

to disclose cognizable offences and the Court must so

direct, will it not be a futile exercise having regard to

Section 17A.   I am, therefore, of the view that though

otherwise the petitioners in Writ Petition (Criminal) No.

298 of 2018 may have made out a case, having regard to the

law actually laid down in Lalita Kumari (supra), and more

importantly, Section 17A of the Prevention of Corruption

Act, in a Review Petition, the petitioners cannot succeed.

However, it is my view that the judgment sought to be

reviewed, would not stand in the way of the first respondent

                            90
in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 298 of 2018 from taking

action on Exhibit P1-complaint in accordance with law and

subject to first respondent obtaining previous approval

under Section 17A of the Prevention of Corruption Act.

87. Subject as hereinbefore stated, in regard to the other
Petitions and Applications, I agree with the proposed Order

of Brother Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul.




                                           .............J.
                                           (K.M. JOSEPH)
New Delhi,
November 14, 2019.


                            91

