
Supreme Court of India
Abdul Sayeed vs State Of M.P on 14 September, 2010Author: . B Chauhan
Bench: P. Sathasivam, B.S. Chauhan
                                                                  REPORTABLE

             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1243 OF 2007

Abdul Sayeed                                     ... Appellant
                                  Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh                         ...Respondent

                              WITH

             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1399 OF 2008

Rafique                                          ... Appellant
                                  Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh                          ...Respondent

                                 AND

          CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1363-1365 OF 2010

Rais @ Toun & Ors.                                ...Appellants
                                    Vs.

State of Madhya Pradesh                         ....Respondent


                          JUDGMENT

Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN, J.


1.    All the aforesaid appeals have been filed against the common

judgment and order dated 12.1.2006, of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh

at Jabalpur in Criminal Appeal Nos.1191 of 1998; 1210 of 1998; and 281 of
2001 by which the appellants have been convicted under Sections 302/34 of

the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter called IPC) for committing the

murders of Chand Khan and Shabir Khan, while setting aside their

conviction under Sections 147 and 148 IPC awarded by the Trial Court.



2.    Facts and circumstances giving rise to these appeals are that on

16.8.1994 at about 7.50 p.m., F.I.R. No.1/1994 under Sections 302, 147,

148, 149 and 307 IPC was lodged at Police Station Mandai Chowk

Sarangpur, Madhya Pradesh, according to which 17 accused including 5

appellants armed with deadly weapons came from the mosque way; stopped

Chand Khan and started beating him with weapons with an intention to kill

him. After hearing the hue and cry made by Chand Khan, his wife Zaira

Banu, sons Shabir (deceased), Anees (PW.1), and Ashfaq (PW.2), and

brother Usman Ali (PW.4) came running to the place of occurrence and

after seeing the incident, they were so scared that they could not muster the

courage to intervene immediately. After some time Zaira Banu, Shabir and

Ashfaq tried to rescue Chand Khan. Shabir was also assaulted, he was

seriously injured and died on the spot. Ashfaq (PW.2), and his mother Zaira

Banu also got injuries on their persons at the hands of the accused.




                                                                          2
3.    The Investigating Officer sent the dead bodies for post-mortems

which were conducted by Dr. R.P. Sharma (PW.3). In his opinion, the cause

of death of both Chand Khan and Shabir was excessive hemorrhage resulting

in injuries to brain and lungs. Ashfaq (PW.2) was also examined medically.

After completing the investigation, out of the seventeen accused, fourteen

were put to trial for offences under Sections 148, 302 and 323, in the

alternative 302/149, 324/149 and 323/149 IPC. One Nanhe Khan @ Abdul

Wahid died before commencement of trial. One accused namely, Rais S/o

Mumtaz is still absconding. While Iqbal @ Bhura, appellant, had also

absconded, but afterwards he surrendered and was tried separately. The

appellants and the other accused denied the charges and pleaded that they

were falsely implicated and claimed trial. The prosecution examined 12

witnesses including Anees (PW.1), Ashfaq (PW.2) and Usman Ali (PW.4),

as eye-witnesses.   The other relevant witnesses were Dr. R.P. Sharma

(PW.3) who conducted the post-mortems on the bodies of the deceased,

Ramesh Kumar Dubey (PW.7) and Rajmal Sharma (PW.8) who had

investigated the case. The appellants examined 4 witnesses in defence.



4.    After conclusion of the trial, the Special Additional Sessions Judge,

Shajapur, convicted Abdul Sayeed (A.11), Mumtaz Khan (A.9), Rafiq (A.6)



                                                                         3
and Rais (A.5) under Section 148 IPC and awarded a sentence of 3 years'

imprisonment to each; Mumtaz (A.9) was sentenced to 2 years'

imprisonment under Section 147; Mumtaz (A.9) and Abdul Sayeed (A.11)

were sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.2000/-

under Section 302 IPC for committing murder of Chand Khan; Rais @ Toun

(A.5) and Rafiq (A.6) were sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment for life and

fine of Rs.1000/- under Section 302 IPC for committing murder of Shabir;

Sayeed (A.7) was convicted under Section 324 IPC and given 2 years

Rigorous Imprisonment for causing injuries to Ashfaq (PW.2); Hanif Khan

(A.1), was convicted under Sections 304 Part-II, 323 and 147 IPC for

causing injuries to Shabir. Iqbal alias Bhura, appellant also got convicted in

separate Sessions Trial No.190/94 vide judgment and order dated 11.1.2001,

under Sections 148 and 302 IPC and was awarded Rigorous Imprisonment

of 3 years and life imprisonment respectively along with certain fines.



5.    All the said convicts filed Criminal Appeal Nos.1191/98; 1210/98;

1233/98; and 281/2001 before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. The

State of Madhya Pradesh also filed Criminal Appeal No.1447/98 against the

acquittal of some of the accused for      offences under Sections 302/149,

324/149 and 323/149 IPC. As all the appeals related to the same incident,



                                                                           4
the High Court disposed of all the appeals by the common judgment and

order dated 12.1.2006 wherein the appellants had been convicted as

mentioned hereinabove, i.e., under Sections 302/34 IPC setting aside their

conviction under Sections 147/148 IPC. The High Court allowed Criminal

Appeal No.1191/98 with regard to the other co-accused, Hanif Khan, Bashir

Khan, Sayeed and Aslam. The appeal filed by the State of Madhya Pradesh

was partly allowed. Hence, these appeals.


6.    All these appeals have arisen from the same incident and have been

filed against the common judgment of the High Court and thus, are being

heard together.


7.    Shri Fakhruddin, learned Senior counsel, Shri Ranbir Singh Yadav

and Ms. Rakhi Ray, learned counsel appearing for the appellants, have

submitted that in case the High Court had set aside the conviction of all the

appellants and other co-accused under Sections 147/148 IPC, question of

convicting them with the aid of Section 34 IPC did not arise, even otherwise

no charge under Section 34 IPC was framed by the Trial Court; nor any

evidence had been led to show that offences had been committed by the

appellants in furtherance of a common intention. Essential ingredients of



                                                                          5
Section 34 IPC, i.e., that a common intention was shared, has not been

established by the prosecution. More so, the weapons allegedly used for

committing the offences by the appellants do not tally with the ocular

evidence of the eye-witnesses. Therefore, injuries caused to the deceased

and other injured persons cannot be attributed to the appellants. Conviction

under Sections 302/34 IPC is unwarranted and thus, the appeals deserve to

be allowed.


8.    On the other hand, Shri C.D. Singh, learned counsel appearing for the

State, has vehemently opposed the appeals contending that not framing the

charge under Section 34 IPC is not fatal to the prosecution and the High

Court has rightly convicted the appellants under Sections 302/34 IPC.

Seventeen persons came to the spot armed with deadly weapons with a

common intention to kill Chand Khan. They surrounded Chand Khan and

started causing injuries to him. In such a fact-situation the eye-witnesses

may not describe exactly what role had been played by an individual

assailant.    If there are small omissions in the depositions of the eye-

witnesses, the same require to be ignored. The injured witnesses have to be

relied upon and even in case there is some conflict between the ocular




                                                                         6
evidence and medical evidence, the ocular evidence has to be preferred.

Therefore, the appeals lack merit and are liable to be dismissed.



9.    We have considered the rival submissions made by the learned

counsel for the parties and perused the record.


10.   As mentioned hereinabove, 17 persons had allegedly participated in

the crime. As per the prosecution, on the date of occurrence, i.e., 16.8.1994

at about 11 A.M., one Kamla Bai, daughter of Dev Karan, neighbour of

informant Anees (PW.1) was molested by Munim Khan and Mumtaz Khan

(accused/appellant) in the fields of Faqir. Smt. Gora Bai, mother of Kamla

Bai, complained to Chand Khan with regard to the said incident. Chand

Khan (since deceased), went to advise the uncle of Munim Khan and Pappu

alias Chote Khan in this regard and scolded them. He also gave one slap to

one of the accused. The appellants and other co-accused did not like the

conduct of Chand Khan and in the evening the appellants and the co-accused

committed the offence mentioned hereinabove. In fact, this had been the

motive for commission of the offence.


                                                                          7
11.        Out of the seventeen accused, ten stood acquitted by the courts below.

One of them is still absconding. One had died prior to the commencement

of the trial. Only five accused/appellants have been convicted by the High

Court. Therefore, we are concerned only with the cases of these appellants.

Making reference to any of the other co-accused at this stage would not

serve any purpose.


12.        As per the Autopsy Report (Ex.P/7-A), prepared by Dr. R.P. Sharma

(PW.3) in respect of Chand Khan, the following external injuries were

noticed:-

      1.      Incised wound on head at occipital region, 1.5 cm x 1 x bone

              deep with fracture.

      2.      Incised wound on right parietal region 2.5 cm x = x bone

              deep fracture of right parietal bone, clotted blood on cerebral

              membrane.

      3.      Incised wound on left leg 10 cm x 2 cm upto bony region of

              Tibia.

      4.      Stab wound on left side of chest between 3rd and 4th rib deep

              upto lung 1.5 cm x = cm x deep upto left lung puncture.

                                                                                8
      5.      Incised wound on left arm of posterior surface 5 cm x 2 cm

              x = cm.

      6.      Lacerated wound over the left eye 1 cm x = cm x < cm.


           In the opinion of the doctor grievous injures to vital organs i.e. head

      and lungs caused excessive haemorrhage which resulted in death.



13.        Dr. R.P. Sharma (PW.3) also performed Autopsy on the body of

Shabir Khan and gave Post-Mortem Report Ex.P/8-A. In this report he duly

noted the external injuries as under:-

      1. Incised wound on head at right frontal level to right ear

           underneath frontal bone fracture.

      2. Incised wound over the left parietal region 4, =" x bone deep .

      3. One lacerated wound over the occipital region =" x <" x <".

      4. Stab injury on the right side chest 1" x <" x <".

      5. Stab injury on the right side chest 1" x =" x deep upto lung.

      6. Incised wound on left shoulder 2, =" x =" x =".

      7. Incised wound on right arm =" x =" x =".

      8. Incised wound on right arm 1" x <" x <".

                                                                               9
      The Autopsy Surgeon opined that on account of grievous injury to

vital parts i.e. head and chest caused excessive haemorrhage which resulted

in coma and death. Cause of death was Syncope.


14.   Dr. M.K. Vashistha (PW.5) the Medical Specialist at Biaora,

examined Ashfaq (PW.2) and prepared the report (Ex.P.10), according to

which, he had sustained four injuries as under:

      1.    Incised wound 1 x 1/6 x 1/6 cm right side of the neck.

      2.    One bruise red 3 x 1 cm on the left arm.

      3.    Patient had complained of pain in the left leg but there

            was no external injury.

      4.    Abrasion on hip size = x = cm. The injuries were simple.

15.   So far as Abdul Sayeed (A.11) is concerned, as per the prosecution he

had a knife of 8" and assaulted Chand Khan. It is evident from the evidence

of Anees (PW.1), Ashfaq (PW.2) and Usman Ali (PW.4) that Chand Khan

received cut injuries and stab wounds as found by Dr. R.P. Sharma (PW.3).

As per the medical report, his left lung was found punctured due to a stab

wound. The knife used in the crime was recovered by the Investigating

Officer at the instance of the said appellant. He has also caused injury to

Ashfaq (PW.2), an eye-witness. In view of the above, the trial Court as well

                                                                         10
as the High Court reached the conclusion that he was one of the accused

persons responsible for the death of Chand Khan.


16.   So far as Rais alias Toun (A.5) is concerned, as per the evidence of

Anees (PW.1), Ashfaq (PW.2) and Usman Ali (PW.4) when Shabir (since

deceased), came to save his father Chand Khan, Rais Khan (A.5) attacked

Shabir with sword. Dr. R.P. Sharma (PW.3) who examined Shabir deposed

that the injuries suffered by Shabir were the result of the use of the weapon

assigned to Rais alias Toun as well as other co-accused. Rais alias Toun had

the sword which resulted these wounds. The trial Court as well as the High

Court have found Rais responsible for killing Shabir.



17.   So far as Rafiq (A.6) is concerned, as per the evidence of Anees

(PW.1), Ashfaq (PW.2) and Usman Ali (PW.4), Rafiq used a Gupti for

committing the crime. Injuries caused with the Gupti were found by Dr.

R.P. Sharma (PW.3) on the body of Shabir. The Gupti used by Rafiq was

18" in length and 1-1/2" in thickness and it was sharp like a knife. The trial

Court as well as the High Court recorded the specific finding that the wound

found on the body of Shabir was by plying Gupti and this was done by

appellant Rafiq on Shabir (deceased).


                                                                           11
18.   So far as Mumtaz Khan (A.9) is concerned, as per the evidence of all

the three eye-witnesses, he was holding a Farsi and had beaten Chand Khan.

There was a cut wound on the head of Chand Khan due to which the bone of

the occipital region cracked and Dr. R.P. Sharma (PW.3) deposed that he

had found the skull wound which resulted in cracking of the skull. The trial

Court as well as the High Court, after appreciating the entire evidence on

record came to the conclusion that Mumtaz Khan took an active part in

beating Chand Khan, due to which he died spontaneously.



19.   So far as Iqbal alias Bhura is concerned, as per the evidence of Anees

(PW.1), Ashfaq (PW.2) and Usman Ali (PW.4), he had a sword and

assaulted Shabir and the injury caused by him has been duly supported by

the medical evidence. The trial Court convicted him vide judgment and

order dated 11.1.2001 in a separate trial. The trial Court and the High Court

found him guilty for committing murder of Shabir.


20.   Ashfaq (PW.2) has stated that all the accused surrounded his father

and attacked him with their weapons from all sides. He has named Rais

alias Toun, Mumtaz Khan, Abdul Sayeed and Iqbal alias Bhura. It is also



                                                                          12
evident from his deposition that while running away from the place of

occurrence they mocked him and said: "however many of you come, we

will see the end of you." This shows that there was a common intention.

Ashfaq has also explained how he had been injured. Anees (PW.1) has also

deposed regarding the participation of all the five appellants      and has

explained   what weapons they were carrying and how they had caused

injuries to his father and brother. He has deposed that Chand Khan was

killed by Abdul Sayeed and Mumtaz Khan and Shabir by Iqbal alias Bhura,

Rais alias Toun and Rafiq. Usman Ali (PW.4), has named all the appellants

along with the other co-accused who have been acquitted by the Courts

below and has given full details of the incident. He also deposed that while

causing the injuries, the culprits were shouting "kill them kill them". He

denied the suggestion that the appellants had not caused injury to Shabir and

also denied the suggestion that Iqbal was not present there at the time of

incident.   He also denied the suggestion that Mumtaz Khan and Abdul

Sayeed did not cause any injury to Chand Khan with Farsi and knife

respectively.


21.   It has strenuously been argued on behalf of the appellants that the

injuries found on the person of victims could not be caused with the



                                                                          13
weapons alleged to have been with the appellants and the same cannot be in

consonance with the ocular evidence of Anees (PW.1), Ashfaq (PW.2) and

Usman Ali (PW.4). Thus, appellants are entitled for the benefit of doubt as

there is clear cut contradiction between the ocular and medical evidence.



Identification in a Crowd of Assailants:

22.   In cases where there are a large number of assailants, it can be

difficult for a witness to identify each assailant and attribute a specific role

to him. In Masalti v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1965 SC 202, this Court

held as under:-

      "Where a crowd of assailants who are members of an
      unlawful assembly proceeds to commit an offence of
      murder in pursuance of the common object of the
      unlawful assembly, it is often not possible for witnesses
      to describe accurately the part played by each one of
      the assailants. Besides, if a large crowd of persons
      armed with weapons assaults the intended victims, it may
      not be necessary that all of them have to take part in the
      actual assault. In the present case, for instance, several
      weapons were carried by different members of the
      unlawful assembly, but it appears that the guns were
      used and that was enough to kill 5 persons. In such a
      case, it would be unreasonable to contend that because
      the other weapons carried by the members of the
      unlawful assembly were not used, the story in regard to
      the said weapons itself should be rejected. Appreciation
      of evidence in such complex case is no doubt a difficult
      task; but criminal courts have to do their best in dealing
      with such cases and it is their duty to sift the evidence



                                                                             14
      carefully and decide which part of it is true and which
      is not."                          [Emphasis added]



23.   A similar view was taken by this Court in Kallu alias Masih & Ors.

v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2006) 10 SCC 313; and Viji & Anr. v. State

of Karnataka, (2008) 15 SCC 786 observing that in such a case it is not

possible that all the witnesses may specifically refer to the acts of each

assailants.


24.   In Bhag Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab (1997) 7 SCC 712, while

dealing with a similar contention, this Court observed:


      "It is a general handicap attached to all eyewitnesses, if
      they fail to speak with precision their evidence would be
      assailed as vague and evasive, on the contrary if they
      speak to all the events very well and correctly their
      evidence becomes vulnerable to be attacked as tutored.
      Both approaches are dogmatic and fraught with lack of
      pragmatism. The testimony of a witness should be viewed
      from broad angles. It should not be weighed in golden
      scales, but with cogent standards. In a particular case an
      eyewitness may be able to narrate the incident with all
      details without mistake if the occurrence had made an
      imprint on the canvas of his mind in the sequence in
      which it occurred. He may be a person whose capacity
      for absorption and retention of events is stronger than
      another person. It should be remembered that what he
      witnessed was not something that happens usually but a
      very exceptional one so far as he is concerned. If he
      reproduces it in the same sequence as it registered in his

                                                                       15
      mind the testimony cannot be dubbed as artificial on that
      score alone."


25.   In the instant case, a very large number of assailants attacked Chand

Khan and Shabir (deceased), caused injuries with deadly weapons to them.

The incident stood concluded within few minutes. Thus, it is natural that the

exact version of the incident revealing every minute detail, i.e., meticulous

exactitude of individual acts cannot be given by the eye-witnesses.



Injured Witness

26.   The question of the weight to be attached to the evidence of a witness

that was himself injured in the course of the occurrence has been extensively

discussed by this Court. Where a witness to the occurrence has himself been

injured in the incident, the testimony of such a witness is generally

considered to be very reliable, as he is a witness that comes with a built-in

guarantee of his presence at the scene of the crime and is unlikely to spare

his actual assailant(s) in order to falsely implicate someone. "Convincing

evidence is required to discredit an injured witness". (Vide Ramlagan

Singh & Ors. v. State of Bihar, AIR 1972 SC 2593; Malkhan Singh &

Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1975 SC 12; Machhi Singh & Ors. v.

State of Punjab, AIR 1983 SC 957; Appabhai & Anr. v. State of Gujarat,

                                                                          16
AIR 1988 SC 696; Bonkya alias Bharat Shivaji Mane & Ors. v. State of

Maharashtra, (1995) 6 SCC 447; Bhag Singh & Ors. (supra); Mohar &

Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2002) 7 SCC 606; Dinesh Kumar v.

State of Rajasthan, (2008) 8 SCC 270; Vishnu & Ors. v. State of

Rajasthan, (2009) 10 SCC 477; Annareddy Sambasiva Reddy & Ors. v.

State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 2009 SC 2261; Balraje alias Trimbak v.

State of Maharashtra, (2010) 6 SCC 673).


27.   While deciding this issue, a similar view was taken in, Jarnail Singh

v. State of Punjab, (2009) 9 SCC 719, where this Court reiterated the

special evidentiary status accorded to the testimony of an injured accused

and relying on its earlier judgments held as under:-

      "Darshan Singh (PW 4) was an injured witness. He had
      been examined by the doctor. His testimony could not be
      brushed aside lightly. He had given full details of the
      incident as he was present at the time when the
      assailants reached the tubewell. In Shivalingappa
      Kallayanappa v. State of Karnataka, 1994 Supp (3) SCC
      235, this Court has held that the deposition of the injured
      witness should be relied upon unless there are strong
      grounds for rejection of his evidence on the basis of
      major contradictions and discrepancies, for the reason
      that his presence on the scene stands established in case
      it is proved that he suffered the injury during the said
      incident.
 In State of U.P. v. Kishan Chand, (2004) 7 SCC
      629, a similar view has been reiterated observing that

                                                                        17
      the testimony of a stamped witness has its own relevance
      and efficacy. The fact that the witness sustained injuries
      at the time and place of occurrence, lends support to his
      testimony that he was present during the occurrence. In
      case the injured witness is subjected to lengthy cross-
      examination and nothing can be elicited to discard his
      testimony, it should be relied upon (vide Krishan v. State
      of Haryana, (2006) 12 SCC 459). Thus, we are of the
      considered opinion that evidence of Darshan Singh (PW
      4) has rightly been relied upon by the courts below."


28.   The law on the point can be summarised to the effect that the

testimony of the injured witness is accorded a special status in law. This is

as a consequence of the fact that the injury to the witness is an in-built

guarantee of his presence at the scene of the crime and because the witness

will not want to let his actual assailant go unpunished merely to falsely

implicate a third party for the commission of the offence. Thus, the

deposition of the injured witness should be relied upon unless there are

strong grounds for rejection of his evidence on the basis of major

contradictions and discrepancies therein.


29.   Ashfaq (PW.2) had given graphic description of the entire incident.

His presence on the spot cannot be doubted as he was injured in the incident.

His deposition must be given due weightage. His deposition also stood fully

corroborated by the evidence of Anees (PW.1) and Usmal Ali (PW.4). The



                                                                          18
depositions so made cannot be brushed aside merely because there have

been some trivial contradictions or omissions.



Medical Evidence versus Ocular Evidence

30.   In Ram Narain Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 1727, this

Court held that where the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is

totally inconsistent with the medical evidence or the evidence of the

ballistics expert, it amounts to a fundamental defect in the prosecution's case

and unless reasonably explained it is sufficient to discredit the entire case.



31.   In State of Haryana v. Bhagirath & Ors., (1999) 5 SCC 96, it was

held as follows:-

      "The opinion given by a medical witness need not be
      the last word on the subject. Such an opinion shall be
      tested by the court. If the opinion is bereft of logic or
      objectivity, the court is not obliged to go by that opinion.
      After all opinion is what is formed in the mind of a
      person regarding a fact situation. If one doctor forms
      one opinion and another doctor forms a different opinion
      on the same facts it is open to the Judge to adopt the
      view which is more objective or probable. Similarly if
      the opinion given by one doctor is not consistent with
      probability the court has no liability to go by that
      opinion merely because it is said by the doctor. Of
      course, due weight must be given to opinions given by
      persons who are experts in the particular subject."
      [Emphasis added]



                                                                                 19
32.   Drawing on Bhagirath's case (supra.), this Court has held that where

the medical evidence is at variance with ocular evidence, it has to be noted

that it would be erroneous to accord undue primacy to the hypothetical

answers of medical witnesses to exclude the eyewitnesses' account which

had to be tested independently and not treated as the "variable" keeping the

medical evidence as the "constant". Where the eyewitnesses' account is

found credible and trustworthy, a medical opinion pointing to alternative

possibilities can not be accepted as conclusive. The eyewitnesses' account

requires a careful independent assessment and evaluation for its credibility,

which should not be adversely prejudged on the basis of any other evidence,

including medical evidence, as the sole touchstone for the test of such

credibility. The evidence must be tested for its inherent consistency and the

inherent probability of the story; consistency with the account of other

witnesses held to be creditworthy; consistency with the undisputed facts, the

"credit" of the witnesses; their performance in the witness box; their power

of observation etc. Then the probative value of such evidence becomes

eligible to be put into the scales for a cumulative evaluation. (Vide Thaman

Kumar v. State of Union Territory of Chandigarh, (2003) 6 SCC 380;

and Krishnan v. State, (2003) 7 SCC 56).


                                                                          20
33.   In Solanki Chimanbhai Ukabhai v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1983 SC

484, this Court observed,

      "Ordinarily, the value of medical evidence is only
      corroborative. It proves that the injuries could have been
      caused in the manner alleged and nothing more. The use
      which the defence can make of the medical evidence is to
      prove that the injuries could not possibly have been
      caused in the manner alleged and thereby discredit the
      eye-witnesses. Unless, however the medical evidence in
      its turn goes so far that it completely rules out all
      possibilities whatsoever of injuries taking place in the
      manner alleged by eyewitnesses, the testimony of the
      eye-witnesses cannot be thrown out on the ground of
      alleged inconsistency between it and the medical
      evidence." [Emphasis added]


34.   A similar view has been taken in Mani Ram & Ors. v. State of U.P.,

1994 Supp (2) SCC 289; Khambam Raja Reddy & Anr. v. Public

Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., (2006) 11 SCC 239; and State of U.P. v.

Dinesh, (2009) 11 SCC 566.


35.   In State of U.P. v. Hari Chand, (2009) 13 SCC 542, this Court re-

iterated the aforementioned position of law and stated that,

      "In any event unless the oral evidence is totally
      irreconcilable with the medical evidence, it has
      primacy."


                                                                      21
36.   Thus, the position of law in cases where there is a contradiction

between medical evidence and ocular evidence can be crystallised to the

effect that though the ocular testimony of a witness has greater evidentiary

value vis-`-vis medical evidence, when medical evidence makes the ocular

testimony improbable, that becomes a relevant factor in the process of the

evaluation of evidence. However, where the medical evidence goes so far

that it completely rules out all possibility of the ocular evidence being true,

the ocular evidence may be disbelieved.


37.   In the instant case as referred to hereinabove, a very large number of

assailants attacked one person, thus the witnesses cannot be able to state as

how many injuries and in what manner the same had been caused by the

accused. In such a fact-situation, discrepancy in medical evidence and ocular

evidence is bound to occur. However, it cannot tilt the balance in favour of

the appellants.


38.   It has been canvassed on behalf of the appellants that there was no

charge framed under Section 34 IPC by the trial Court and appellants and

other co-accused have been charged under Section 147/148 IPC. All of

them have been acquitted for the said charges. Thus, it was not permissible



                                                                            22
for the High Court to convict the appellants with the aid of Section 34 IPC.

Non-framing of charge is fatal to the prosecution. Thus, the appellants are

entitled for acquittal on this ground alone.



Effect of Failure to frame proper charges

39.   In State of Andhra Pradesh v. Thakkidiram Reddy & Ors., (1998)

6 SCC 554, this Court considered the issue of failure to frame the proper

charges. observing as under:

      "10. Sub-section (1) of Section 464 of the Code of
      Criminal Procedure 1973 (`the Code', for short)
      expressly provides that no finding, sentence or order by
      a court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid
      merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on
      the ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the
      charge including any misjoinder of charges, unless in the
      opinion of the court of appeal, confirmation or revision,
      a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.
      Sub-section (2) of the said section lays down the
      procedure that the court of appeal, confirmation or
      revision has to follow in case it is of the opinion that a
      failure of justice has in fact been occasioned. The other
      section relevant for our purposes is Section 465 of the
      Code; and it lays down that no finding, sentence or order
      passed by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be
      reversed or altered by a court of appeal, confirmation or
      revision on account of any error, omission or
      irregularity in the proceedings, unless in the opinion of
      that court, a failure of justice has in fact been
      occasioned. It further provides, inter alia, that in
      determining whether any error, omission or irregularity
      in any proceeding under this Code has occasioned a
      failure of justice, the Court shall have regard to the fact

                                                                         23
      whether the objection could and should have been raised
      at an earlier stage in the proceedings."



The Court further held that in judging a question of prejudice, as of guilt, the

court must look to the substance of the matter and not to technicalities, and

its main concern should be to see whether the accused had a fair trial,

whether he knew what he was being tried for, whether the main facts sought

to be established against him were explained to him fairly and clearly and

whether he was given a full and fair chance to defend himself. In the said

case this Court ultimately came to the conclusion that despite the defect in

the framing of charges, as no prejudice had been caused to the accused, no

interference was required.


40.   A Constitution Bench of this Court in Willie (William) Slaney v.

State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1956 SC 116, considered the issue of

failure to frame charges properly and the conviction of an accused for the

offences for which he has not been charged and reached the conclusion as

under:-

      "86. ... In such a situation, the absence of a charge
      under one or other of the various heads of criminal
      liability for the offence cannot be said to be fatal by
      itself, and before a conviction for the substantive offence,



                                                                             24
      without a charge, can be set aside, prejudice will have to
      be made out. ....

      87. ... If it is so grave that prejudice will necessarily be
      implied or imported, it may be described as an illegality.
      If the seriousness of the omission is of a lesser degree, it
      will be an irregularity and prejudice by way of failure of
      justice will have to be established."

41.   This Court in Gurpreet Singh v. State of Punjab, (2005) 12 SCC

615, referred to and relied upon its earlier judgments in Willie (William)

Slaney (supra) and Thakkidiram Reddy (supra), and held that unless there

is a failure of justice and thereby the cause of the accused has been

prejudiced, no interference is required if the conviction can be upheld on the

evidence led against the accused. The Court should not interfere unless it is

established that the accused was in any way prejudiced due to the errors and

omissions in framing the charges against him.

      A similar view has been re-iterated by this Court in Ramji Singh v.

State of Bihar, (2001) 9 SCC 528; and Sanichar Sahni v. State of Bihar,

(2009) 7 SCC 198.


42.   There is no bar in law on conviction of the accused with the aid of

Section 34 IPC in place of Section 149 IPC if there is evidence on record to

show that such accused shared a common intention to commit the crime and



                                                                           25
no apparent injustice or prejudice is shown to have been caused by

application of Section 34 IPC in place of Section 149 IPC. The absence of a

charge under one or the other or the various heads of criminal liability for

the offence cannot be said to be by itself prejudicial to the accused, and

before a conviction for the substantive offence without a charge can be set

aside, prejudice will have to be made out. Such a legal position is bound to

be held good in view of the provisions of Sections 215, 216, 218, 221 and

464 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. (Vide: Dalip Singh & Ors. v.

State of Punjab, AIR 1953 SC 364; Malhu Yadav & Ors. v. State of

Bihar, (2002) 5 SCC 724; Dhaneswar Mahakud & Ors. v. State of

Orissa, (2009) 9 SCC 307; and Annareddy Sambasiva Reddy & Ors. v.

State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 2009 SC 2661).


43.   Thus, the law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that unless

the accused is able to establish that the defect(s) in framing the charge(s) has

caused real prejudice to him; that he was not informed as to what was the

real case against him; or that he could not defend himself properly, no

interference is required on mere technicalities.




                                                                             26
44.   If the instant case is examined in the light of the aforesaid settled legal

propositions we do not find any force in the submissions made on behalf of

the appellants.


Section 34 IPC

45.   The aforesaid conclusion takes us to the issue raised by the appellants

as to whether appellants could be convicted with the aid of Section 34 IPC.

 Section 34 IPC carves out an exception from general law that a person

is responsible for his own act, as it provides that a person can also be held

vicariously responsible for the act of others if he has the "common

intention" to commit the offence. The phrase "common intention" implies a

pre-arranged plan and acting in concert pursuant to the plan. Thus, the

common intention must be there prior to the commission of the offence in

point of time. The common intention to bring about a particular result may

also well develop on the spot as between a number of persons, with

reference to the facts of the case and circumstances existing thereto. The

common intention under Section 34 IPC is to be understood in a different

sense from the "same intention" or "similar intention" or "common object".

The persons having similar intention which is not the result of the pre-

arranged plan cannot be held guilty of the criminal act with the aid of



                                                                              27
Section 34 IPC. (See Mohan Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab, AIR 1963

SC 174).


46.   The establishment of an overt act is not a requirement of law to allow

Section 34 to operate inasmuch this Section gets attracted when a criminal

act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all.

What has, therefore, to be established by the prosecution is that all the

concerned persons had shared a common intention. (vide : Krishnan &

Anr. v. State of Kerala, (1996) 10 SCC 508; and Harbans Kaur & Anr. v.

State of Haryana, (2005) 9 SCC 195 ).

      Undoubtedly, the ingredients of Section 34, i.e., that the accused had

acted in furtherance of their common intention is required to be proved

specifically or by inference, in the facts and circumstances of the case.

(Vide: Hamlet alias Sasi & Ors. v. State of Kerala, (2003) 10 SCC 108;

Pichai alias Pichandi & Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu, (2005) 10 SCC 505;

and Bishna alias Bhiswadeb Mahato & Ors. v. State of West Bengal,

(2005) 12 SCC 657).


47.    In Gopi Nath @ Jhallar v. State of U.P., (2001) 6 SCC 620, this

court observed as under:


                                                                          28
      "8.....Even the doing of separate, similar or diverse acts
      by several persons, so long as they are done in
      furtherance of a common intention, render each of such
      persons liable for the result of them all, as if he had done
      them himself, for the whole of the criminal action -- be it
      that it was not overt or was only a covert act or merely
      an omission constituting an illegal omission. The section,
      therefore, has been held to be attracted even where the
      acts committed by the different confederates are different
      when it is established in one way or the other that all of
      them participated and engaged themselves in furtherance
      of the common intention which might be of a pre-
      concerted or pre-arranged plan or one manifested or
      developed at the spur of the moment in the course of the
      commission of the offence. The common intention or the
      intention of the individual concerned in furtherance of
      the common intention could be proved either from direct
      evidence or by inference from the acts or attending
      circumstances of the case and conduct of the parties. The
      ultimate decision, at any rate, would invariably depend
      upon the inferences deducible from the circumstances of
      each case."


48.    In Krishnan and Anr. v. State represented by Inspector of Police,

(2003) 7 SCC 56, this court observed that applicability of Section 34 is

dependent on the facts and circumstances of each case. No hard and fast rule

can be made out regarding applicability or non-applicability of Section 34.




                                                                              29
49.   In Girija Shankar v. State of U.P., (2004) 3 SCC 793, it is observed

that Section 34 has been enacted to elucidate the principle of joint liability of

a criminal act:


      "Section 34 has been enacted on the principle of joint
      liability in the doing of a criminal act. The section is only
      a rule of evidence and does not create a substantive
      offence. The distinctive feature of the section is the
      element of participation in action. The liability of one
      person for an offence committed by another in the course
      of criminal act perpetrated by several persons arises
      under Section 34 if such criminal act is done in
      furtherance of a common intention of the persons who
      join in committing the crime. Direct proof of common
      intention is seldom available and, therefore, such
      intention can only be inferred from the circumstances
      appearing from the proved facts of the case and the
      proved         circumstances."       [Emphasis        added]




       (Emphasis added)


50.   In Virendra Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh, JT 2010 (8) SC

319, this Court observed that:

      "Section 34 IPC does not create any distinct offence, but
      it lays down the principle of constructive liability.
      Section 34 IPC stipulates that the act must have been
      done in furtherance of the common intention. In order to
      incur joint liability for an offence there must be a pre-
      arranged and pre-meditated concert between the
      accused persons for doing the act actually done, though

                                                                              30
        there might not be long interval between the act and the
        pre-meditation and though the plan may be formed
        suddenly. In order that section 34 IPC may apply, it is
        not necessary that the prosecution must prove that the
        act was done by a particular or a specified person. In
        fact, the section is intended to cover a case where a
        number of persons act together and on the facts of the
        case it is not possible for the prosecution to prove as to
        which of the persons who acted together actually
        committed the crime. Little or no distinction exists
        between a charge for an offence under a particular
        section and a charge under that section read with
        Section 34."


51.     Section 34 can be invoked even in those cases where some of the co-

accused may be acquitted provided, it can be proved either by direct

evidence or inference that the accused and the others have committed an

offence in pursuance of the common intention of the group. (vide: Prabhu

Babaji v. State of Bombay, AIR 1956 SC 51).


52.     Section 34 intends to meet a case in which it is not possible to

distinguish between the criminal acts of the individual members of a party,

who act in furtherance of the common intention of all the members of the

party or it is not possible to prove exactly what part was played by each of

them.    In the absence of common intention, the criminal liability of a

member of the group might differ according to the mode of the individual's



                                                                         31
participation in the act. Common intention means that each member of the

group is aware of the act to be committed.


53.   In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the considered opinion

that the High Court has rightly proceeded in the matter while setting aside

the conviction of the appellants under Sections 147/148 IPC and convicting

them with the aid of Section 34 IPC.



Sum up:

54.   In view of the above, it is evident that an FIR had been lodged

promptly within 20 minutes from the time of commission of the offence as

the place of occurrence was in close proximity of Police Chowki and all the

appellants along with other co-accused had been named therein. There had

been an injured witness. The prosecution has explained the motive that the

appellants did not like intervention of Chand Khan taking side of Kamla Bai

who had been molested by persons of the accused party. Several hours after

the lodging of the complaint by Chand Khan in that incident, the appellants

attacked Chand Khan with motive in a pre-planned manner armed with

deadly weapons and caused injuries. Shabir Khan, son of Chand Khan when

came to rescue his father was also done away with. In the incident, Ashfaq



                                                                         32
(PW.2) also got injured. The courts below after appreciating the evidence on

record rightly came to the conclusion that the five appellants had been

responsible for the said offences. The testimony of these witnesses had been

subjected to searching cross-examination, but nothing has been brought on

record to discredit the statement of either of the eye-witnesses.



55.   In view of the above, we are of the view that the instant case does not

present special features warranting review of the impugned judgment. Thus,

there is no cogent reason to interfere with the impugned judgment and order

dated 12.1.2006 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. The appeals

lack merit and are accordingly dismissed.


                                              ...................................J.
                                              (P. SATHASIVAM)



                                              ................................J.
                                              (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)

New Delhi,
September 14, 2010




                                                                                   33
34

