
Supreme Court of India
Girdhari vs State(Govt.Nct Of Delhi) on 14 July, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                             1





                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1423  OF 2010




         GIRDHARI                                 .....          APPELLANT

                                          VERSUS

         STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                     .....          RESPONDENT





                                        O R D E R

       1.       Six   persons   in   all   were   sent   up   for   trial   on   two 

       counts   of   murder   relating   to   the   abduction   and   murders   of 

       Kalu   Ram     Bhagat   and   Bodhan.     The   trial   court   in   its 

       judgment   discharged   Ram   Karan   who   is   stated   to   have   hired 

       the   other   accused   to   commit   the   murders     and   acquitted 

       Ramesh, Birju and Dharam Pal on the ground that they had not 

       been   identified   by   any   of   the   witnesses.   Girdhari   and   Man 

       Singh were, however, convicted and sentenced to undergo life 

       imprisonment on two counts as also under Section 364 of the 

       Indian   Penal   Code,   all   the   sentences   to   run   concurrently. 

       The   matter   was   thereafter   taken   by   way   of   two   separate 

       appeals   before   the   High   Court   and   the   High   Court   by   the 

       impugned   judgment   dated   4th  February,   2009,   allowed   the 

       appeal   of   Man   Singh   and   acquitted   him   whereas     Girdhari 

       appellant   was   acquitted   of   the   murder   of   Bodhan,   but   his 


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                           2





       conviction for the murder of Kalu Ram Bhagat   was affirmed. 

       The present appeal has been filed by Girdhari alone.  




       2.       The facts of the case are as under:

       2.1      On the 26th February,  1989, police station Nand Nagri, 

       Delhi, received information that a dead body was lying near 

       the brick kiln in village Simhauli. S.I. Tara Dutt - P.W. 1 

       accompanied   by   Constable   Naresh   went   to   the   spot   and 

       recovered the blood stained  dead body of a man who  looked 

       to be between 60 and 65 years of age.   He prepared a ruqa 

       Exhibit 1/A and on its basis a First Information Report for 

       murder was recorded at the police station.  A search of the 

       pocket of the jacket worn by the deceased revealed his name 

       and   address   as   Kalu   Ram   Bhagat,     resident   of   Trilokpuri. 

       ASI Tara Dutt, accordingly, contacted the family members of 

       Kalu   Ram   Bahgat   who   identified   the   dead   body   as   that   of 

       their relative.   The dead body was sent for its post mortem 

       and   it   was   found   to   have   three   incised   wounds,   four 

       lacerated     wounds,   and   one   superficial   cut   near   the   left 

       ear.     The   very   next   day   i.e.   on   27th  February,   1989 

       information was received in Police Station Khekra, District 

       Meerut, U.P.  that a dead body was lying on the banks of the 

       river   Yamuna   near   village   Sudanpur.     The   body   was, 

       accordingly, recovered and was also sent for a post mortem 

       which revealed one incised wound on the neck which had led 


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                            3





       to the death of the deceased.   Two slips of paper Exhibits 

       31/L   and   31/M   containing   two   addresses   and   a   phone   number 

       were   also   recovered   from   the   clothes   of   the   deceased. 

       Despite   this   information,   however,   the   police   made   no 

       attempt to contact any person at the two addresses recorded 

       in the slips.  In the meanwhile, the relatives of one Bodhan 

       had   lodged   a   missing   person   report   with   police   station 

       Trilokpuri,     Delhi,   which   was   recorded   as   a   daily   diary 

       entry on that date.  On the 1st of March, 1989 a police party 

       from   police   station   Khekra   finally   contacted   the   persons 

       whose names had been recorded in Exhibits P 31/L and 31/M on 

       which   P.W.4   Mehar   Chand   and   P.W.   26   Ranjit,   the   son   and 

       brother   respectively   of   Bodhan,   went   to   Police   Station 

       Khekra   and   identified   the   body   as   that   of   Bodhan   from   the 

       photographs that were available in the police station.   As 

       the two incidents appeared to be of common origin the matter 

       was officially investigated by the police of police Station 

       Trilokpuri.     It   transpired   during   the   course   of   the 

       investigation that Kalu Ram Bhagat, who practised witchcraft 

       to   cure   sick   persons,   had   been   requested   by   Ram   Karan   to 

       cure his children Naresh and Karan aged 11 and 8 years but 

       the two children had nevertheless died a short while later. 

       It also appeared that during this period Kalu Ram Bhagat had 

       attempted   to   rape   Ram   Karan's   wife   as   well   and   these   two 

       developments   had   apparently   annoyed   him   whereafter   he 


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                              4





       decided   to   do   away   with   Kalu   Ram   Bhagat   and   hatched   a 

       conspiracy   with   Dharam   Pal,   Ramesh,   Man   Singh   appellant 

       Girdhari and Birju, all hired assassins, who agreed to kill 

       Kalu   Ram   Bhagat   for   payment   of  `2   lakhs.     All   the   accused 

       were thereafter arrested and on a disclosure statement made 

       by   Girdhari,   appellant,   Exhibit   P.14/N   the   daranti,   the 

       alleged murder weapon, was recovered from a sugarcane field.

         

       2.2      On the completion of the investigation, however,   Ram 

       Karan   the   prime   mover   was   discharged   as   there   was   no 

       evidence   against   him   but   the   other   accused   Dharam   Pal, 

       Ramesh,   Man   Singh,   Birju   and   Girdhari   were   charged   for 

       offences   punishable   under   Section   364/34   and   302/34   for 

       having abducted and killed  Kalu Ram Bhagat and Bodhan.  The 

       matter thereafter came to trial court and in appeal to the 

       High   Court   with   results   that   have   already   been   set   out 

       above.  


       3.       We   see   that   as   of   today   the   only   person   who   remains 

       convicted on one count of murder is the appellant Girdhari 

       as   he   too   stands   acquitted   for   the   murder   of   Bodhan.     The 

       courts   have   found   that   the   entire   prosecution   story   rested 

       on circumstantial evidence which was primarily the last seen 

       evidence of  P.Ws. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 26, the  first four being 

       close relatives of Kalu Ram Bhagat and P.W. 26 being a close 


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                             5





       neighbour.     In   addition   to   this   evidence   the   only   other 

       evidence   against   the   appellant   is   the   recovery   of   the 

       daranti   at   his   instance   which   has   been   proved   by   the 

       investigating officer, P.W. 14. 


       4.       It has, accordingly, been argued by Mr. Gurmukh Singh, 

       the   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant,   that   but   for   these 

       two uncertain bits of evidence there was no other evidence 

       against   the   appellant.     He   has   also   taken   us   through   the 

       testimony   of   these   witnesses   to   point   out   that   their 

       evidence   was   also   ambivalent   and   uncertain   as   to   the 

       appellant's   identification.     It   has,   however   been   pointed 

       out Mr. P.K. Dey, by the learned counsel for the State that 

       the appellant had been identified by P.W. 3, P.W. 4 and P.W. 

       26   as   being   the   person   with   whom   the   deceased   had   gone   on 

       the day in question and had never been seen alive thereafter 

       and   if   this   evidence   was   taken   along   with   the   recovery   of 

       the   daranti   the   chain   of   circumstances   against   him   which 

       stood proved beyond doubt.


       5.       We have considered the arguments and have gone through 

       the evidence placed on record.  


       6.       We first come to the evidence of P.W. 2 i.e. Niranjan 

       Singh,   son   of   the   deceased   Kalu   Ram   Bhagat.     He   stated   in 


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                                 6





       his deposition that his father had initially been picked up 

       by  Birju and  Man Singh  in a  van which  was being  driven by 

       Ramesh and did not state that Girdhari  was one of those who 

       had picked him up.   The Public Prosecutor was, thereafter, 

       permitted   to   put   a   leading   question   to   the   witness   and   at 

       that stage he stated as under:

                           "   I   had   earlier   told   that   Man   Singh   and 
                Birju had come, but infact Man Singh & Girdhari 
                had come, however, Birju had also come."

       7.     We are indeed surprised that a leading question could 

       be   permitted   to   be   put   to   an   accused   and   that   too   in   the 

       examination in chief.   It is significant that this witness 

       was   not   declared   hostile.     Likewise,   we   have   gone   through 

       the evidence of P.W. 5 Ram Avatar, another son of deceased, 

       Kalu Ram who could not identify Girdhari even in court and 

       pointed out towards Man Singh as being Girdhari.   Reliance 

       has   however,   been   placed   by   the   State   Counsel   on   the 

       statements   of   P.Ws.   3,   4   and   26   to   prove   the   appellants' 

       identity.  We have gone through these statements as well and 

       find   that   they   do   not   in   any   manner   help   the   prosecution. 

       P.W.   3   Sushil   Kumar,   is   the   son   of   Niranjan   Singh   and, 

       therefore, the grand son of Kalu Ram Bhagat.   He identified 

       Man Singh and Girdhari correctly in Court and this was not 

       challenged in cross examination.   We have also gone through 

       the evidence of P.W. 4 Mehar Chand, son of Bodhan Singh, the 

       second   deceased   and   he   did   not   identify   the   appellant   in 


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                             7





       court.     Likewise,   P.W.   26   -     Ranjit   Singh   a   neighbour   of 

       Kalu   Ram   Bhagat,   deposed   in   his   examination   in   chief   that 

       the appellant was one of the persons who had taken Kalu Ram 

       away   on   the   25th  of   February,   1989,   but   in   his   cross 

       examination   he   admitted   that   he   had   not   made   such   a 

       statement to the police under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C.. 




       8.       We therefore, find that out of the five witnesses of 

       last   seen   only   P.W.   4   has   to   some   extent   identified   the 

       appellant as being one of the culprits.  This identification 

       was made for the first time in court during the recording of 

       the   evidence.     This   statement,   therefore,   has   very   little 

       evidentiary   value.   We   are,   therefore,   of   the   opinion   that 

       this   evidence   does   not   by   itself   inspire   confidence.   The 

       only other evidence against the appellant is the recovery of 

       the   daranti.     The   appellant   was   arrested   on   the   14th  of 

       March, 1989 and was taken for the recovery of the weapon on 

       the very same day.   Curiously, however, we see the recovery 

       memo   Exhibit   14/O   dated   14th  of   March,   1989   has   not   been 

       witnessed   by   any   one   and   bears   the   signatures   of   only   the 

       police officer.     We are, therefore of the opinion that no 

       credence   can   be   attached   to   such   a   recovery   as   well   more 

       particularly, as the other evidence is extremely sketchy and 

       uncertain.     We   need   to   reiterate   that   Ram   Karan   the   main 

       accused   who   had   hired   the   other   five   to   do   away   with   Kalu 


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                           8





       Ram Bhagat was discharged by the trial court due to lack of 

       evidence whereas four of the other accused had earlier been 

       acquitted   on   virtually   the   same   evidence.     We   are   of   the 

       opinion that the appellant Girdhari`s case cannot, be in any 

       manner,   be   distinguished   from   that   of   the   other   accused. 

       We, accordingly, allow this appeal and order his acquittal.





                                                ........................J
                                                [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                                ........................J
       NEW DELHI                                [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]
       JULY 14, 2011.


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                            9





ITEM NO.110[PART-I]           COURT NO.7             SECTION II

            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 1423 OF 2010

GIRDHARI                                          Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

STATE(GOVT.NCT OF DELHI)                          Respondent(s)
(With appln(s) for suspension of sentence)

Date: 14/07/2011  This Appeal was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE HARJIT SINGH BEDI
        HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GYAN SUDHA MISRA

For Appellant(s)            Mr. Gurmukh Singh, Adv.
                    Mr. Abhijat P. Medh, Adv.

For Respondent(s)            Mr. P.K. Dey, Adv.
                             Mr. Mukesh Verma, Adv.
                     Mrs Anil Katiyar, Adv.

           UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R 


                      We have heard the learned counsel for the 

             parties.

                      Vide our separate reasoned order, we have 

             allowed this appeal and ordered the acquittal of 

             the appellant.

                  It is stated that the appellant Girdhari is 

             in custody.   He shall be released forth with if 

             not wanted in connection with any other case. 

                      The   reasoned   order   shall   be   separately 

             placed on record.  


               [KALYANI GUPTA]                           [VINOD KULVI]
                 COURT MASTER                            COURT MASTER


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                       10





                  [SIGNED BRIEF ORDER IS PLACED ON THE FILE.]


Crl.A. No. 1423 of 2010

                                             11





                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1423  OF 2010



         GIRDHARI                                   .....        APPELLANT

                                          VERSUS

         STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                       .....        RESPONDENT




                                        O R D E R

                We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

       parties.

                Vide our separate reasoned order, we have allowed 

       the appeal and ordered the acquittal of the appellant 

       herein.

                It   is   stated   that   the   appellant   Girdhari   is   in 

       custody.  He shall be released forth with if not wanted 

       in connection with any other case. 

                The reasoned order shall be separately placed on 

       record.  


                                                   ........................J
                                                   [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                   ........................J
                                                   [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]
       NEW DELHI
       JULY 14, 2011.



