
Supreme Court of India
Amar Singh Jatav & Anr vs State Of M.P on 26 September, 2012Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1007  OF 2008

AMAR SINGH JATAV & ANR.                           ...APPELLANTS

                 VERSUS

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                           ...RESPONDENT


                                  O R D E R

      1.         Accused No.5 (Amarg Singh Jatav) and Accused No.6 (Himanshu
      Mishra) are the appellants  before  us  in  this  appeal  against  the
      judgment and order passed by the High Court of  Judicature  of  Madhya
      Pradesh  at  Jabalpur  in  Criminal  Appeal  No.1358  of  1995,  dated
      03.10.2005. By the impugned judgment and order,  the  High  Court  has
      reversed the judgment and order  passed  by  the  Additional  Sessions
      Judge, Betul in Sessions Trial No.111 of 1993, dated 25.01.1994.

      2.         Accused Nos. 5 and 6 are police  constables.   They,  along
      with two others, had arrested one Gunda @  Bhuta,  as  a  suspect,  in
      pursuance of the report filed by one Girdhari  for  an  offence  under
      Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC” for  short).   While
      investigating the said report, they had taken Gunda @ Bhuta  from  the
      Betul police station to Gajpur village  for  the  purpose  of  further
      investigation of the said report.  It is the case  of  the  appellants
      that when Gunda @ Bhuta was taken  for  the  purpose  of  recovery  of
      murder weapon in the field of Girdhari,  Girdhari  assaulted  Gunda  @
      Bhuta with lathi and kurfi  and  thereby  caused  nearly  13  grievous
      injuries. As a result of the injuries, according  to  the  appellants,
      Gunda @ Bhuta died while he was being carried away in  the  jeep  from
      Gajpur village to Betul police station.

      3.         The Prosecution has examined nearly 12 witnesses in support
      of their case.  The Trial Judge, after appreciating the  evidence  and
      the materials on record, has disbelieved the case of  the  Prosecution
      and accordingly  has  acquitted  the  appellants  for  offences  under
      Section 302 of the IPC.

      4.         Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order,  the  State
      of Madhya Pradesh had appealed before the High Court. The  High  Court
      once again perused and appreciated the evidence and the  materials  on
      record. Thereafter the High Court, in our opinion, rightly thought  it
      fit to reverse the finding  of  the  Trial  Court  and  convicted  the
      appellants for offences under Section 304 Part-II of the I.P.C.

      5.         We have heard in extenso Shri.B.K.Satija,  learned  counsel
      for the appellants and  Smt. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned counsel  for
      the respondent-State.  We have also carefully  perused  the  judgments
      and orders of the Trial Court as also of the High Court. We have  also
      considered the evidence that was recorded by the Trial Court.  In  our
      opinion, the High Court was justified in all respects to  reverse  the
      finding of acquittal of the appellants.  Since  we  do  not  find  any
      legal infirmity in the judgment and order passed by the High Court, we
      do not intend to interfere with the said  judgment.  Accordingly,  the
      appeal requires to be dismissed and it is dismissed.

      6.         We are informed that the appellants are on bail pursuant to
      the orders passed by this Court on 07.07.2008.  Now,  we  direct  that
      the bail bonds of the accused persons be  cancelled  and  the  accused
      persons be taken into custody forthwith to  serve  out  the  remaining
      period of the sentence awarded by the High Court.

                 Ordered accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)








                                                   .......................J.
                                                   (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)


      NEW DELHI;
      SEPTEMBER 26, 2012

