
Supreme Court of India
Ram Pal @ Bunda vs State Of Haryana on 11 April, 2013Author: …….……….…………………………...J.
Bench: B.S. Chauhan, Fakkir Mohamed Kalifulla
           

                                                                  Reportable



                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.120 OF 2012

RAM PAL @ BUNDA                            …Appellant
                                   VERSUS


STATE OF HARYANA                   …Respondent


                                  O R D E R

     1. The sole appellant  is  the  accused  who  was  convicted  for  the
        offences under Sections 302 and 376, Indian Penal Code  (IPC).   He
        was sentenced to undergo rigorous  imprisonment  for  life  and  10
        years rigorous imprisonment for committing rape and murder  of  one
        Devi  (real  name  disguised).  According  to  the  prosecution,  a
        telephonic intimation was received in the police station  regarding
        the dead body of Devi resident of Mangalore within the jurisdiction
        of Shahzadpur police station, Ambala, lying in the  fields  of  one
        Prithi Pal.  On reaching the spot PW-14, SHO recorded the statement
        of PW-10 Sumitra Devi the mother of the deceased.   It  was  learnt
        through her that she had two daughters,  that  the  elder  one  was
        married while the younger one who went to the fields  on  18.2.2005
        at 6.30 p.m. to ease herself did not  return  and  their  intensive
        search was in vain.  In her statement she mentioned the name of the
        appellant who was stated to have been found at the place of  search
        and on being asked, he pleaded ignorance about the victim.  It  was
        her further statement that only on the  next  day  morning  in  day
        light they were able to trace the body of the victim whose neck was
        wrapped with a blue shawl owned  by  her.   The  complainant  PW-10
        raised suspicion about the involvement  of  the  appellant  in  the
        commission of the offence in view of his past  misbehavior  towards
        her elder daughter on which occasion he was reprimanded before  the
        local Panchayat and was forced to tender an apology.  As it  was  a
        case of circumstantial evidence, the trial Court after scrutinizing
        the evidence of prosecution witnesses and after taking into account
        the stand of the appellant in his 313 Cr.P.C. statement  noted  the
        circumstances in paragraph 17 of the judgment.
     2. The circumstances noted were as under:
       1) Medical evidence

       2) presence of accused at the scene of crime immediately  after  the
       occurrence

       3) conduct of the accused in  running  away  from  the  village  and
       remaining absconding for two days after the occurrence and

       4) motive for the offence.

     3. While examining the above circumstances, on the motive  aspect  the
        trial Court found that PW-11 Natho Devi, the elder daughter of  PW-
        10 in her evidence deposed that in the year  2002  when  she  along
        with her cousin was returning from the fields,  the  appellant  met
        them on the way along with his cousin Sham Lal  and  that  both  of
        them teased deceased PW-11 and her cousin and  the  bundle  of  the
        grass carried by them fell down.  It was also her statement that by
        providence they could save themselves from  the  onslaught  of  the
        appellant and his cousin on that occasion.  She reported  the  same
        to her parents. Pursuant to her complaint, a Panchayat was convened
        in her village and in the Panchayat, the appellant and  his  cousin
        begged pardon and that the appellant thereafter used  to  tell  her
        that one day or  other  he  would  take  a  revenge  for  the  said
        incident.  It was also in her evidence that she belonged to  labour
        class and the appellant was nurturing a long standing grievance and
        grudge in his mind against the family of the complainant as he felt
        that he was humiliated in the Panchayat. The said version of  PW-11
        was also corroborated by PW-10, the mother of the victim and  Natho
        Devi, PW-11. In the 313 statement except making  a  simple  denial,
        the appellant did not come forward with any explanation insofar  as
        the motive aspect was concerned.

     4. As far as the presence of the appellant at the scene of  occurrence
        was concerned PW-10 in her evidence categorically explained  as  to
        how while searching for her daughter she found the appellant in the
        fields and that on being questioned about the  whereabouts  of  her
        daughter the appellant without responding to  her  query  ran  away
        from the place of  occurrence.   Though  at  the  instance  of  the
        appellant it was suggested that there were  certain  variations  as
        compared to her statement to the police as regards the presence  of
        the appellant, the trial Court found that such  variation  did  not
        materially affect the evidence of PW-10 as regards the presence  of
        the appellant in the place of occurrence at the relevant  point  of
        time and his running away from  the  scene  of  occurrence  without
        responding to the queries of the complainant PW-10.

     5. As far as the absence of the appellant from  the  village  for  two
        days after the occurrence  enough  evidence  was  let  in.    PW-12
        father of the deceased who  categorically  stated  that  while  the
        occurrence took place on  18.2.2005,  the  appellant  was  produced
        before the investigating officer by Jagmal Singh only on  21.2.2005
        when he was arrested.  It came to light that  after  18.2.2005  the
        appellant could be traced in the village only on 21.2.2005 when  he
        was arrested.   Though  PW-13  Jagmal  Singh  who  stated  to  have
        produced the appellant, turned hostile, having regard to the record
        of proceedings which was not contradicted in the  manner  known  to
        law, the above factum about the absence of  the  appellant  in  the
        village for more than two days was quite apparent and there was  no
        reason to dis-believe the said factum.

     6. When the medical evidence was analyzed, the trial Court  has  found
        that according to PW-1 Dr. Ramesh and Dr. Sushil Kumar Singal,  the
        cause of death was asphyxia due to strangulation  which  was  ante-
        mortem and was sufficient to cause death.  Multiple aberrations and
        contusion of varying sizes on the face, chin  and  few  superficial
        aberrations on the back were  noted.   Exhibit  PD  and  PD/1,  the
        report of the forensic science laboratory revealed blood on  Shawl,
        Salwar and underwear of the deceased.  Human semen was detected  on
        the vaginal swab of the deceased. On examination  of  the  accused,
        after his arrest, by PW-2 Dr. Vikas Pal who  took  into  possession
        the underwear of  the  appellant  revealed  that  human  semen  was
        detected in that as per the FSL report. The medical  evidence  also
        revealed that the victim was subjected to sexual intercourse before
        her death.

     7. Thus all the above circumstances  only  supported  the  prosecution
        version and there was no missing link in any of  the  circumstances
        found proved against the appellant.

     8. The appellant did not  choose  to  let  in  any  evidence  for  his
        defence.  In the 313 questioning what all the  appellant  said  was
        that due to inimical relations with the family of the  complainant,
        he was falsely implicated.  The trial Court has rightly noted  that
        apart from what was alleged by PWs-10  and  11  no  other  inimical
        aspect with the family of the  complainant  was  brought  forth  as
        against the appellant. In the said circumstances, the stand of  the
        appellant also fully supported the version of PWs-10 and 11. It  is
        not the case of the appellant that there was no previous contact in
        any manner whatsoever as between the appellant and  the  family  of
        the complainant.  Further considering the version of PWs-10 and  11
        and the stand of the appellant that there was inimical relationship
        with the family of the complainant, it can only be  concluded  that
        such inimical relationship would only  relate  to  the  appellant’s
        misbehaviour in the past with PW-11 and as stated  by  her  in  her
        evidence the appellant who was forced to express his  apologies  in
        the presence of elders in Panchayat, developed a grudge in his mind
        to settle score with the family of the complainant. Therefore,  the
        motive aspect demonstrated by the prosecution and accepted  by  the
        trial Court was also fully justified.

     9. Having regard to our above conclusion, we are  convinced  that  the
        conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant by the trial Court
        which was also confirmed by the High Court was perfectly  justified
        and we do not find any good grounds to  interfere  with  the  same.
        The appeal fails and the same is dismissed.

                                                      …….……….…………………………...J.
                                 [Dr. B.S. Chauhan]




                                                       ……….…….………………………………J.
                                          [Fakkir Mohamed Ibrahim Kalifulla]



New Delhi;
April 11, 2013

