
Supreme Court of India
Rekha vs State Of T.Nadu Tr.Sec.To Govt.& ... on 5 April, 2011Author: ........................J.
Bench: Markandey Katju, Surinder Singh Nijjar, Gyan Sudha Misra
                                                            REPORTABLE
                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 755 OF 2011

REKHA                                         Appellant (s)

                             VERSUS

STATE OF T.NADU TR.SEC.TO GOVT. & ANR         Respondent(s)

                                WITH 
                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 756 of 2011
                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 757 of 2011
                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 759 of 2011
                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 760 of 2011
                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 762 of 2011
                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 763 of 2011
                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 764 of 2011



                          J U D G M E N T

MARKANDEY KATJU,  J.  



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 755 OF 2011

     Heard learned counsel for the parties.

     This   Appeal   has   come   up   in   a   reference   made   by   a 

two Judge Bench of this Court by order dated 15.03.2011.

     The   detenu   in   this   Appeal   Ramakrishnan   (whose   wife 

Rekha   has   filed   this   Appeal)   has   been   detained   by   a 

detention order dated 08.04.2010 passed under the Tamil Nadu 

Prevention   of   Dangerous   Activities   of   Bootleggers,   Drug-

offenders, Forest Offenders,   Goondas,   Immoral   Traffic 

                             :1:


Offenders,   Sand       Offenders,   and   Slum   Grabbers   and   Video 

Pirates   Act,   1982,   on   the   allegation   that   he   was   selling 

expired drugs after tampering with the labels and printing 

fresh labels showing them as non-expired drugs.  The habeas 

corpus petition filed by the wife of the detenu before the 

Madras High Court challenging the said detention order has 

been   dismissed   by   the   impugned   order   dated   23.12.2010. 

Hence, this Appeal.

      Several grounds have been raised before us, but, in our 

opinion,   this   Appeal   is   liable   to   succeed   on   one   ground 

itself, and hence we are not going into the other grounds.

      The detention order reads as under :-

      "No. 199/2010                        Dated 08.04.2010

                    DETENTION ORDER

            Whereas  I,   T.  Rajendran,   IPS.,  Commissioner 
      of Police, Chennai Police, is satisfied that  the 
      person   known   as   Tr.   Ramakrishnan,   male   aged   35, 
      S/O   Devaraj,   No.   82-B,   South   Mada   Veethi, 
      Villivakkam,   Chennai-49   is   a   Drug   Offender   as 
      contemplated under Section 2(e) of the Tamil Nadu 
      Act 14 of 1982 and that with a view to preventing 
      him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the 
      maintenance   of   public   order,   it   is   necessary   to 
      make the following order.

            Now   therefore   in   exercise   of   the   powers 
      conferred  on  me  by  sub-section  (1)  of  Section  3 
      of   the     Tamil   Nadu   Prevention   of   Dangerous 
      Activities of Bootleggers, Drug-offenders, Forest 
      Offenders,   Goondas,   Immoral   Traffic   Offenders, 
      Sand   Offenders,   and   Slum   Grabbers   and   Video 
      Pirates   Act,   1982   (Tamil   Nadu   Act   14   of   1982) 
      read with orders issued by the Government in G.O. 
      (D)   No.   6,   Home,   Prohibition   and   Excise   (XVI) 
      Department   dated   18th  January,   2010   under   sub-
      section (2)  of  Section 3  of  the  said  Act, I
      hereby  direct  that  the said Drug Offender Tr.
                                    :2:


     Ramakrishnan,   S/o   Devaraj,   be   detained   and   kept 
     in   custody   at   the   Central   Prison,   Puzhal, 
     Chennai.

           Given under my hand and seal of this office 
     the 8th day of April, 2010."

    The   relevant   part   of   the   grounds   on   which   the   said 

detention order has been made is as follows :-



     "Thiru.   Elango,   M.   Pharm,   male   aged   43,   S/O 
     Ramasamy   is   working   as   a   Drug   Inspector,   Drug 
     Control   Department,   Perambur   Range,   Zone-II, 
     D.M.S.   Complex,   Teynampet,   Chennai-18.     On 
     15.03.2010,   Thiru.   Elango   appeared   before   the 
     Inspector   of   Police,   Crimes   P-6   Kodungaiyur 
     Police   Station   and   lodged   a   complaint   against 
     Thiruvalargal,   Prabhakar   @   Ravi,   2)   Venkatesan, 
     3) Sanjay Kumar, 4) Sekar, 5) Baskar, 6) Pradeep 
     Kumar Chordia and 7) Meenakshi Sundaram.

           In his complaint, he has stated that expired 
     drugs collected from the medical shops of Chennai 
     city and Suburban used to be dumped at dump yard 
     of   Corporation   ground   at   Ezhil   Nagar, 
     Kodungaiyur,   Chennai.     On   15.3.2010,   Thiru, 
     Elango received a secret information that expired 
     drugs   dumped   at   the   dump   yard   at   Corporation 
     ground,   Ezhil   Nagar,   Kodungaiyur,   Chennai,   were 
     taken by Thiru. Prabhakar @ Ravi residing at the 
     first   floor   of   No.   A-6/541,   151st         Street, 
     Muthamizh   Nagar,   Kodungaiyur,   Chennai   and   by 
     keeping the same with his associates tampered the 
     same   tampering   the   original   labels   and   printing 
     fresh labels to make it appear as though they are 
     not   expired   drugs   and   redistribute   the   same   for 
     sale to the general public."

                             :3:
In para 4 of the grounds of detention, it is stated :-



      "4.   I   am   aware   that   Thiru.   Ramakrishnan,   is   in 
      remand   in   P.6,   Kodungaiyur   Police   Station   Crime 
      No.   132/2010   and  he   has   not   moved   any   bail 
      application   so   far.     The   sponsoring   authority 
      has   stated   that   the   relatives   of   Thiru. 
      Ramakrishnan   are   taking   action   to   take   him   on 
      bail   in   the   above   case   by   filing   bail 
      applications   before   the   Higher   courts  since   in 
      similar   cases   bails   were   granted   by   the   Courts 
      after   a   lapse   of   time.   Hence,   there   is   real 
      possibility   of   his   coming   out   on   bail   in   the 
      above   case   by   filing   a   bail   application   before 
      the higher courts.   If he comes out on bail he 
      will   indulge   in   further   activities,   which   will 
      be   prejudicial   to   the   maintenance   of   public 
      health   and   order.     Further   the   recourse   to 
      normal   criminal   law   would   not   have   the   desired 
      effect   of   effectively   preventing   him   from 
      indulging   in   such   activities,   which   are 
      prejudicial   to   the   maintenance   of   public   health 
      and order.  On the materials placed before me, I 
      am   fully   satisfied   that   the   said   Thiru. 
      Ramakrishnan   is   also   a   Drug   Offender   and   that 
      there is a compelling necessity to detain him in 
      order   to   prevent   him   from   indulging   in   such 
      further   activities   in   future   which   are 
      prejudicial   to   the   maintenance   of   public   order 
      under   the   provisions   of   Tamil   Nadu   Act   14   of 
      1982."
       A   perusal   of   the   above   statement   in   para   4   of   the 

grounds of detention shows that no details have been given 

about the alleged similar cases in which bail was allegedly 

granted   by   the   concerned   court.   Neither   the   date   of   the 

alleged bail orders has been mentioned therein, nor the bail 

application number, nor whether the bail orders were passed 

in respect of the co-accused on the same case,  nor  whether 

                                    :4: 


the  bail  orders  were passed in respect   of   other   co-

accused   in   cases   on   the   same   footing   as   the   case   of   the 

accused.   All   that   has   been   stated   in   the   grounds   of 

detention   is   that   "in   similar   cases   bails   were   granted   by 

the courts".  In our opinion, in the absence of details this 

statement is mere ipse dixit, and cannot be relied upon. 

      In   our   opinion,   this   itself   is   sufficient   to   vitiate 

the detention order.

      It has been held in  T.V. Sravanan alias S.A.R. Prasana 

Venkatachaariar Chaturvedi  Vs.  State through Secretary and 

Anr.,   (2006) 2 SCC 664;  A. Shanthi (Smt.)   Vs.   Govt. of 

T.N. and Ors., (2006) 9 SCC 711;  Rajesh Gulati   Vs.   Govt. 

of NCT of Delhi and Anr.  (2002) 7 SCC 129, etc. that if no 

bail application was pending and the detenue was already, in 

fact, in jail in a criminal case, the detention order under 

the   preventive   detention   law   is   illegal.     These   decisions 

appear to have followed the Constitution Bench decision in 

Haradhan Saha  Vs.  State of West Bengal,  (1975) 3 SCC 198, 

wherein it has been observed (vide para 34):

      "Where  the  concerned  person  is  actually  in  jail 
      custody at the time when an order of detention is 
      passed   against   him   and   is   not   likely   to   be 
      released   for   a   fair   length   of   time,   it   may   be 
      possible   to   contend   that   there   could   be   no 
      satisfaction   on   the   part   of   the   detaining 
      authority as to the likelihood of such a person 
      indulging   in   activities   which   would   jeopardise 
      the security of the State or public order."  

                                      :5:
            On   the   other   hand,   Mr.   Altaf   Ahmed,   learned 


senior counsel appearing for the State of Tamil Nadu, has 

relied on the judgments of this Court in   A. Geetha   Vs. 

State   of   T.N.   And   Anr.    (2006)   7   SCC   603;   and  Ibrahim 

Nazeer    Vs.    State   of   T.N.   and   Anr.,     (2006)   6   SCC   64, 

wherein it has been  held  that even if no bail application 

of the petitioner is pending  but if in similar cases bail 

has   been   granted,   then   this   is   a   good   ground   for   the 

subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority to pass 

the detention order.
            In   our   opinion,   if   details   are   given   by   the 

respondent   authority   about   the   alleged   bail   orders   in 

similar cases mentioning the date of the orders, the bail 

application   number,   whether   the   bail   order   was   passed   in 

respect   of     co-accused   in   the   same   case,   and   whether   the 

case of the co-accused was on the same footing as the case 

of the petitioner, then, of course, it could be argued that 

there is likelihood of the accused being released on bail, 

because it is the normal practice of most courts that if a 

co-accused   has   been   granted   bail   and   his   case   is   on   the 

same footing as that of the petitioner, then the petitioner 

is   ordinarily   granted   bail.   However,   the   respondent 

authority should have given details about the alleged bail 

order   in   similar   cases,   which   has   not   been   done   in   the 

present case.   A  mere ipse dixit statement in the grounds

                                     :6:




of detention cannot sustain the detention order and has to 


be ignored.

            In   our   opinion,   the   detention   order   in   question 

only   contains  ipse   dixit  regarding   the   alleged   imminent 

possibility of the accused coming out on bail and there was 

no reliable material to this effect.   Hence, the detention 

order in question cannot be sustained.

            Moreover,   even   if   a   bail   application   of   the 

petitioner   relating   to   the   same   case   was   pending   in   a 

criminal   case  the   detention  order   can  still   be  challenged 

on various grounds e.g. that the act in question related to 

law   and   order   and   not   public   order,   that   there   was   no 

relevant material on which the detention order was passed, 

that there was mala fides, that the order was not passed by 

a   competent   authority,   that   the   condition   precedent   for 

exercise   of   the   power   did   not   exist,   that   the   subjective 

satisfaction was irrational, that there was non-application 

of   mind,   that   the   grounds   are   vague,   indefinite, 

irrelevant,   extraneous,   non-existent   or   stale,   that   there 

was   delay   in   passing   the   detention   order   or   delay   in 

executing it or delay in deciding the representation of the 

detenu, that the order was not approved by the government, 

that   there   was   failure   to   refer   the   case   to   the   Advisory 

Board or that the reference was belated, etc.

                                     :7:





            In   our   opinion,   Article   22(3)(b)   of   the 


Constitution   of     India     which     permits     preventive 

detention   is   only   an   exception   to   Article   21   of   the 

Constitution.   An   exception   is   an   exception,   and   cannot 

ordinarily nullify the full force of the main rule, which 

is the right to liberty in Article 21 of the Constitution. 

Fundamental   rights   are   meant   for   protecting   the   civil 

liberties of the people, and not to put them in jail for a 

long   period   without   recourse   to   a   lawyer   and   without   a 

trial.   As observed in R   Vs. Secy. Of State for the Home 

Dept., Ex Parte Stafford,  (1998) 1 WLR 503 (CA) :-

      "The   imposition   of   what   is   in   effect   a 
      substantial term of imprisonment by the exercise 
      of   executive   discretion,   without   trial,   lies 
      uneasily   with   ordinary   concepts   of   the   rule   of 
      law."
 Article   22,   hence,   cannot   be   read     in   isolation   but 

must be read as an exception to Article 21.   An exception 

can apply only in rare and exceptional cases, and it cannot 

override the main rule.

 Article   21   is   the   most   important   of   the 

fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India. 

Liberty of a citizen is a most important right won by our 

forefathers after long, historical, arduous struggles. Our 

Founding Fathers  realised   its       value     because     they 

had  seen                                         :8:

during   the   freedom   struggle   civil   liberties   of   our 

countrymen   being  trampled   upon  by   foreigners,  and   that  is 

why   they   were   determined   that   the   right   to   individual 


liberty would be placed on the highest pedestal along with 

the   right   to   life   as   the   basic   right   of   the   people   of 

India.

             Right to liberty guaranteed by Article 21 implies 

that before a person is imprisoned a trial must ordinarily 

be   held   giving   him   full   opportunity   of   hearing,   and   that 

too through a lawyer, because a layman would not be able to 

properly defend himself except through a lawyer.

             The importance of a lawyer to enable a person to 

properly   defend   himself   has   been   elaborately   explained   by 

this Court in A.S. Mohd. Rafi  Vs.  State of Tamilnadu, AIR 

2011   SC   308,   and   in  Md.   Sukur   Ali      Vs.  State   of   Assam, 

JT 2011 (2) SC 527. As observed by Mr Justice Sutherland of 

the U.S. Supreme Court in  Powell   Vs.   Alabama,   287 U.S. 

45   (1932)   "Even   the   intelligent   and   educated   layman   has 

small   and   sometimes   no   skill   in   the   science   of   law",   and 

hence,   without   a   lawyer   he   may   be   convicted   though   he   is 

innocent.

 Article   22(1)   of   the   Constitution   makes   it   a 

fundamental   right   of   a   person   detained   to   consult   and   be 

defended   by   a   lawyer   of   his   choice.   But   Article   22(3) 

specifically  excludes  the  applicability of clause (1) of

                                     :9:
Article 22 to cases of preventive detention.  Therefore, we 

must   confine   the   power   of   preventive   detention   to   very 

narrow limits, otherwise the great right to liberty won by 


our Founding Fathers, who were also freedom fighters, after 

long, arduous, historical struggles, will become nugatory. 

      In  State   of   of   Maharashtra   &   Ors.    Vs.  Bhaurao 

Punjabrao   Gawande,   (2008)   3   SCC   613   (para   23)   this   Court 

observed :


      "...Personal liberty is a precious right. So did 
      the Founding Fathers believe because, while their 
      first   object   was   to   give   unto   the   people   a 
      Constitution   whereby   a   government   was 
      established,   their   second   object,   equally 
      important,  was to protect the people against the 
      government.     That   is   why,   while   conferring 
      extensive powers on the government like the power 
      to declare an emergency, the power to suspend the 
      enforcement of fundamental rights or the power to 
      issue   ordinances,   they   assured   to   the   people   a 
      Bill of Rights by Part III of the Constitution, 
      protecting   against   executive   and   legislative 
      despotism those human rights which they regarded 
      as   fundamental.   The   imperative   necessity   to 
      protect   these   rights   is   a   lesson   taught   by   all 
      history   and   all   human   experience.   Our 
      Constitution   makers   had   lived   through     bitter 
      years and seen an alien Government trample upon 
      human rights which the country had fought hard to 
      preserve.   They believed like Jefferson that "an 
      elective   despotism   was   not   the   Government   we 
      fought   for".     And,   therefore,   while   arming   the 
      Government   with   large   powers   to   prevent   anarchy 
      from within and conquest from without, they took 
      care to ensure that those powers were not abused 
      to   mutilate   the   liberties   of   the   people.   (vide 
      A.K. Roy   Vs.   Union of India (1982) 1 SCC 271, 
      and   Attorney   General   for   India       Vs.   Amratlal 
      Prajivandas,                (1994)         5         SCC         54." 
      [emphasis supplied]
                                            :10:




      In   the   Constitution   Bench   decision   of   this   Court   in 

M. Nagaraj & Ors. Vs.   Union of India & Ors.  (2006) 8 SCC 

212, (para 20) this Court observed :


      "It is a fallacy to regard fundamental rights as 
      a   gift   from   the   State   to   its   citizens. 
      Individuals   possess   basic   human   rights 
      independently   of   any   Constitution   by   reason   of 
      the basic fact that they are members of the human 
      race."
      In   the   9   Judge   Constitution   Bench   decision   of   this 

Court in   I.R. Coelho (dead) By LRs.   Vs.   State of T.N., 

(2007)   2   SCC   1   (vide   paragraphs   109   and   49),   this   Court 

observed : 




   "It   is   necessary   to   always   bear   in   mind   that 
   fundamental   rights   have   been   considered   to   be   the 
   heart and soul of the Constitution.....Fundamental 
   rights   occupy   a   unique   place   in   the   lives   of 
   civilized   societies   and   have   been   described   in 
   judgments   as   "transcendental",   "inalienable",   and 
   primordial". 


            In our opinion, Article 22(3)(b) cannot be read in 

isolation,   but  must   be  read   along  with   Articles  19   and  21, 

vide   Constitution   Bench   decision   of   this   Court   in  A.K.   Roy 

Vs.  Union of India  (1982) 1 SCC 271 (para 70).



            It   is   all   very   well   to   say   that   preventive 

detention   is   preventive   not   punitive.     The   truth   of   the 

matter, though, is                                     :11:




that in substance a detention order of one year (or any other 

period)   is   a   punishment   of   one   year's   imprisonment.   What 

difference   is   it   to   the   detenu   whether   his   imprisonment   is 

called preventive or punitive?

            Mr.   Altaf   Ahmed,   learned   senior   counsel   for   the 


respondents,   submitted   that   there   are   very   serious 

allegations against the detenu of selling expired drugs after 

removing   the   original   labels   and   printing   fresh   labels   to 

make them appear as though they are not expired drugs.

      In this connection,  criminal cases are already going on 

against   the   detenu   under   various   provisions   of   the   Indian 

Penal Code as well as under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 

and   if   he   is   found   guilty,   he   will   be   convicted   and   given 

appropriate   sentence.     In   our   opinion,   the   ordinary   law   of 

the   land   was   sufficient   to   deal   with   this   situation,   and 

hence, recourse to the preventive detention law was illegal.




            Mr.   Altaf   Ahmed,   learned   senior   counsel,   further 

submitted   that   the   impugned   detention   order   was   passed   on 

08.04.2010,  and the bail application of the detenu was also 

dismissed   on   the   same   date.   Hence,   he   submitted   that   it 

cannot be said that no bail application was pending when the 

detention order in question was passed.

                                     :12:
            In this connection, it may be noted that there is 

nothing   on   the   record   to   indicate   whether   the   detaining 

authority was aware of the fact that the bail application of 

the accused was pending on the date when the detention order 

was passed on 08.04.2010.   On the other hand, in para 4 of 


the   grounds   of   detention   it   is   mentioned   that   "Thiru. 

Ramakrishnan   is  in   remand  in   crime  No.   132/2010  and   he  has 

not moved any bail application so far".  Thus, the detaining 

authority   was   not   even   aware   whether   a   bail   application   of 

the accused was pending when he passed the detention order, 

rather   the   detaining   authority   passed   the   detention   order 

under the impression that no bail application of the accused 

was pending but in similar cases bail had been granted by the 

courts.  We have already stated above that no details of the 

alleged   similar   cases   has   been   given.   Hence,   the   detention 

order in question cannot be sustained.

            It   was   held   in  Union   of   India   Vs.  Paul   Manickam 

and   another,   (2003)   8   SCC   342,   that   if   the   detaining 

authority is aware   of   the   fact   that the   detenu is in 

custody  and  the  detaining  authority  is  reasonably  satisfied 

with cogent material that there is likelihood of his release 

and in view of his antecedent activities he must be detained 

to prevent him from indulging in such prejudicial activities, 

the detention order can validly be made.

                                    :13:
            In   our   opinion,   there   is   a   real   possibility   of 

release   of   a   person   on   bail   who   is   already   in   custody 

provided   he   has   moved   a   bail   application   which   is   pending. 

It follows logically that if no bail application is pending, 

then   there  is   no  likelihood   of  the   person  in   custody  being 

released   on   bail,   and   hence   the   detention   order   will   be 


illegal.   However, there can be an exception   to this rule, 

that   is,   where   a   co-accused   whose   case   stands   on   the   same 

footing had been granted bail. In such cases, the detaining 

authority can reasonably conclude that there is likelihood of 

the   detenu   being   released   on   bail   even   though   no   bail 

application   of   his   is   pending,   since   most   courts   normally 

grant bail on this ground. However, details of such alleged 

similar cases must be given, otherwise the bald statement of 

the authority cannot be believed.  

            Mr.   Altaf   Ahmed,   learned   senior   counsel,   further 

submitted   that  we   are  taking   an  over   technical  view   of  the 

matter,   and   we   should   not   interfere   with   the   preventive 

detention   orders   passed   in   cases   where   serious   crimes   have 

been committed.  We do not agree. 

            Prevention   detention   is,   by   nature,   repugnant   to 

democratic ideas and an anathema to the rule of law. No such 

law   exists   in   the   USA   and   in   England   (except   during   war 

time).   Since, however, Article 22(3)(b) of the Constitution 

                                     :14:

of India permits preventive detention, we   cannot   hold   it 

illegal but we must confine the power of preventive detention 

within very narrow limits, otherwise we will be taking away 

the   great  right   to  liberty   guaranteed  by   Article  21   of  the 

Constitution   of   India   which   was   won   after   long,   arduous, 

historic   struggles.     It   follows,   therefore,   that   if   the 

ordinary law of the land (Indian Penal Code and other penal 

statutes) can deal with a situation, recourse to a preventive 


detention law will be illegal

            Whenever an order under a preventive detention law 

is   challenged   one   of   the   questions   the   court   must   ask   in 

deciding its legality is : Was the ordinary law of the land 

sufficient to deal with the situation ?  If the answer is in 

the affirmative, the detention order will be illegal.  In the 

present   case,   the   charge   against   the   detenu   was   of   selling 

expired   drugs   after   changing   their   labels.   Surely   the 

relevant   provisions   in   the   Indian   Penal   Code   and   the   Drugs 

and   Cosmetics   Act   were   sufficient   to   deal   with   this 

situation.   Hence,   in   our   opinion,   for   this   reason   also   the 

detention order in question was illegal.

            In this connection, it may be noted that it is true 

that the decision of the 2 Judge Bench of this Court in Biram 

Chand   Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr,  (1974) 4 SCC 573, 

was overruled by the Constitution Bench decision in Haradhan 

Saha's case (supra)   (vide  para  34).  However,  we should

                                    :15:




carefully analyse these decisions to correctly understand the 

legal position.

            In  Biram Chand's case (supra) this Court held that 

the authorities cannot take recourse to criminal proceedings 

as   well   as   pass   a   preventive   detention   order   on   the   same 

facts (vide para 15 of the said decision). It is this view 

which   was   reversed   by   the   Constitution   Bench   decision   in 

Haradhan Saha's case (supra).


            This does not mean that the Constitution Bench laid 

down that in all cases the authorities can take recourse to 

both criminal proceedings as well as  a preventive detention 

order  even   though   in   the   view   of   the   Court   the   former   is 

sufficient to deal with the situation.  

            This point which we are emphasizing is of extreme 

importance,   but   seems   to   have   been   overlooked   in   the 

decisions of this Court.

            No doubt it has been held in the Constitution Bench 

decision   in  Haradhan   Saha's   case   (supra)   that   even   if   a 

person   is   liable   to   be   tried   in   a   criminal   court   for 

commission   of   a   criminal   offence,   or   is   actually   being   so 

tried,   that   does   not   debar   the   authorities   from   passing   a 

detention   order   under   a   preventive   detention   law.     This 

observation,   to   be   understood   correctly,   must,   however,   be 

construed  in the background of the constitutional scheme in

                                     :16:




Articles 21 and 22 of the Constitution (which we have already 

explained).    Articles   22(3)(b)   is   only   an   exception   to 

Article 21 and it is not itself a fundamental right.   It is 

Article   21   which   is   central   to   the   whole   chapter   on 

fundamental rights in our Constitution.  The right to liberty 

means   that   before   sending   a   person   to   prison   a   trial   must 

ordinarily   be   held   giving   him   opportunity   of   placing   his 

defence through his lawyer.   It follows that if a person is 

liable   to   be   tried,   or   is   actually   being   tried,   for   a 


criminal offence, but the ordinary criminal law (Indian Penal 

Code or other penal statutes)  will not be able to deal with 

the   situation,     then,   and   only   then,   can   the   preventive 

detention law be taken recourse to.

            Hence,   the   observation   in   para   34   in  Haradhan 

Saha's   case   (supra)   cannot   be   regarded   as   an   unqualified 

statement that in every case where a person is liable to be 

tried, or is actually being tried, for a crime in a criminal 

court a detention order can also be passed under a preventive 

detention law.

            It must be remembered that in cases of preventive 

detention no offence is proved and the justification of such 

detention is suspicion or reasonable probability,  and there 

is   no   conviction   which   can   only   be   warranted   by   legal 

evidence.  Preventive  detention is  often  described  as  a

                                     :17: 




'jurisdiction of suspicion', (Vide  State of Maharashtra  Vs. 

Bhaurao Punjabrao Gawande, (supra) - para 63). The detaining 

authority   passes   the   order   of   detention   on   subjective 

satisfaction.     Since clause (3) of Article 22 specifically 

excludes the applicability of clauses (1) and (2), the detenu 

is   not   entitled   to   a   lawyer   or   the   right   to   be   produced 

before a Magistrate within 24 hours of arrest.




            To   prevent   misuse   of   this   potentially   dangerous 

power     the law of preventive detention has to be strictly 


construed   and   meticulous   compliance   with   the   procedural 

safeguards, however, technical, is, in our opinion, mandatory 

and vital.  


          It has been held that the history of liberty is the 

history   of   procedural   safeguards.   (See   :  Kamleshkumar 

Ishwardas Patel  Vs.  Union of India and others  (1995) 4 SCC 

51, vide para 49).  These procedural safeguards are required 

to be zealously watched and enforced by the court and their 

rigour cannot be allowed to be diluted on the basis of the 

nature of the alleged activities of the detenu.  



          As observed in  Rattan Singh  Vs.   State of Punjab, 

(1981) 4 SCC 1981 :-


                                  :18:
     "May be that the detenu is a smuggler whose tribe 
     (and   how   their   numbers   increase!)   deserves   no 
     sympathy since its activities have paralysed the 
     Indian   economy.   But   the   laws   of   preventive 
     detention afford only a modicum of safeguards to 
     persons   detained   under   them,   and   if   freedom   and 
     liberty are to have any meaning in our democratic 
     set-up,   it   is   essential   that   at   least   those 
     safeguards are not denied to the detenus."

          As   observed   in  Abdul   Latif   Abdul   Wahab   Sheikh 

Vs.  B.K. Jha and another  (1987) 2 SCC 22, vide para 5, :

     "...The   procedural   requirements   are   the   only 
     safeguards available to a detenu since the court 


      is   not   expected   to   go   behind   the   subjective 
      satisfaction   of   the   detaining   authority.     The 
      procedural   requirements   are,   therefore,   to   be 
      strictly   complied   with   if   any   value   is   to   be 
      attached   to   the   liberty   of   the   subject   and   the 
      constitutional   rights   guaranteed   to   him   in   that 
      regard...."
           As observed by Mr. Justice Douglas of the United 

States   Supreme   Court   in        Joint   Anti-Fascist   Refugee 

Committee    Vs.  McGrath,     341   US   123   at   179,  "It   is 

procedure  that  spells much of the difference between rule  

of law and rule of whim or caprice.  Steadfast adherence to  

strict   procedural   safeguards   are   the   main   assurances   that  

there will be equal justice under law."

           Procedural   rights   are   not   based   on   sentimental 

concerns for the detenu.  The procedural safeguards are not

                                    :19:





devised to coddle criminals or provide technical loopholes 

through which dangerous persons escape the consequences of 

their   acts.    They  are   basically  society's   assurances  that 

the authorities will behave properly within rules distilled 

from long centuries of concrete experiences.  
           Personal liberty protected under Article 21 is so 

sacrosanct   and   so   high   in   the   scale   of   constitutional 

values that it is the obligation of the detaining authority 

to   show   that   the   impugned   detention   meticulously   accords 


with the procedure established by law.   The stringency and 

concern   of   judicial   vigilance   that   is   needed   was   aptly 

described   in   the   following   words   in  Thomas   Pacham   Dale's 

case, (1881) 6 QBD 376, :

      "Then comes the question upon the habeas corpus. 
      It is a general rule, which has always been acted 
      upon by the Courts of England, that if any person 
      procures the imprisonment of another he must take 
      care to do so by steps, all of which are entirely 
      regular,   and   that   if   he   fails   to   follow   every 
      step  in  the  process  with  extreme  regularity  the 
      court   will   not   allow   the   imprisonment   to 
      continue."

           For   the   reasons   given   above,   this   Appeal   is 

allowed, the impugned order is set aside and the impugned 

detention order is quashed. However, we make it clear that 

this will not affect the criminal cases pending against the 

alleged accused.  
                                    :20:
           We   further   direct   that   the   concerned   detenu   in 

this Appeal shall be released forthwith if not required in 

any other case.

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 756 of 2011; CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 757 of 
2011; CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 759 of 2011; CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 
760   of   2011;   CRIMINAL   APPEAL   NO.   762   of   2011;   CRIMINAL 
APPEAL NO. 763 of 2011; CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 764 of 2011



           The   Order   passed   in   CRIMINAL   APPEAL   NO.   755   OF 

2011 will also govern these Appeals.

           Accordingly,   for   the   reasons   given   in   the   Order 


     passed   in   CRIMINAL   APPEAL   NO.   755   OF   2011,   these   Appeals 

     are allowed, the impugned common order is set aside and the 

     impugned detention orders are quashed. However, we make it 

     clear that this will not affect the criminal cases pending 

     against the alleged accused persons.  

                 We   further   direct   that   the   concerned   detenus   in 

     these   Appeals  shall   be  released   forthwith  if   not  required 

     in any other case.

                                               ........................J.
                                      (MARKANDEY KATJU)




                                      .........................J.
                                      (SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR)




     NEW DELHI;                       .........................J.
     APRIL 05, 2011                   (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)

                                   :21:



