
Supreme Court of India
K.A.Abbas H.S.A vs Sabu Joseph & Anr on 11 May, 2010Author: H Dattu
Bench: P. Sathasivam, H.L. Dattu
                                                                    REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1052 OF 2010
                 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 334 of 2008)


K.A. Abbas H.S.A.                                         ..........Appellant
                                     Versus

Sabu Joseph & Anr.                                        ........Respondents

                                    WITH

                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1053 OF 2010
                 (Arising out of SLP (Crl) No. 4099 of 2008)

Sabu Joseph                                              ..........Appellant
                                     Versus

K.A. Abbas & Anr.                                         ........Respondents


                                JUDGMENT

H.L. Dattu, J.


              Leave granted in both the special leave petitions.

   2)         These two appeals are directed against the judgment and order

         of the High Court of Kerala in Crl. Rev. Petition No.1387 of 2006

         dated 03.10.2007.


                                                                                1
3)        Since parties are common and the legal issues are identical,

     they are heard together and disposed of by this common order.



4)       The factual matrix in brief is as under:- The facts in criminal

     revision petition No.1387 of 2006 may be noticed for the purpose

     of disposal of the appeals.     The appellant (accused) and the

     respondent (complainant) are employed as High School assistants

     in SSHSS school in Moorkanand. The respondent has filed a

     complaint against the appellant before the learned Magistrate for

     an offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act

     (the `Act' for short). The complainant's case is that the appellant,

     who was due in a sum of Rs.5,00,000/-, issued a cheque dated

     16.06.2003 in respect of that liability, and when the cheque was

     presented for encashment, the same was returned with an

     endorsement of "insufficiency of funds."



5)         The complainant, through his Advocate, had issued notice to

     the appellant demanding the payment and that in spite of the

     service of notice, the appellant failed to pay the amount covered by

     the cheque and thus has committed an offence under Section 138
 2
     of the Act and, accordingly, has approached the learned Magistrate

     for appropriate reliefs.


6)        The learned Magistrate after taking cognizance of the offence

     and after recording the evidence of the parties and after analyzing

     the same, has found the accused guilty of the offence punishable

     under Section 138 of the Act and sentenced to simple

     imprisonment for one year. In addition to that he had directed to

     pay a compensation of Rs. 5 lakhs to the complainant under

     Section 357(3) of the Cr.PC, and in default, to undergo simple

     imprisonment for a further period of two months.



7)          The accused filed appeal before the Sessions Court, Manjeri

     being Criminal Appeal No. 59 of 2004. The Sessions Court while

     entertaining the appeal had directed the petitioner to deposit Rs.

     one lakh within one month being a part of the compensation

     amount. The appellant has complied with that order by depositing

     the amount as directed before the Judicial 1st Class Magistrate,

     Manjeri. Eventually, the Sessions Judge by his order dated




                                                                     3
     21.03.2006 confirmed the judgment of conviction and sentence

     passed by learned Magistrate.


8)             The accused preferred revision petition being Criminal

     Revision Petition No. 1387 of 2006 before the High Court of

     Kerala at Ernakulam. The High Court passed an interim order

     directing the petitioner to deposit an amount of Rs. 1 lakh before

     the Judicial Magistrate and, accordingly, the said amount was also

     deposited. The High Court while disposing of the Revision Petition

     has observed that the courts below had appreciated the facts

     correctly and there is no error, illegality or impropriety in the

     finding recorded by the courts below to set aside the conviction

     and sentence. The High court has further stated that the only

     question which requires to be answered is, whether a proper

     sentence has been imposed on the accused by the courts below.

     The court after taking into consideration the peculiar facts and

     circumstances of the case has modified the sentence imposed on

     the accused to the extent, that, if the petitioner pays the

     compensation amount of Rs. 4 lakhs (keeping in mind that the

     petitioner had deposited an amount of Rs. 1 lakh before the trial

     court towards the compensation amount) within a period of five

                                                                    4
     months, then he needs to undergo imprisonment only till the rising

     of the court and if the petitioner commits default in making the

     payment aforesaid, he shall undergo simple imprisonment for three

     months by way of default sentence.


9)          Being aggrieved, the accused is before this court by way of

     Criminal Appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 334 of 2008. The

     main contention of the accused is that this court in Criminal

     Appeal No. 1013 of 2007 has held, that, while exercising

     jurisdiction under Section 357(3) of the Cr.PC, no direction can be

     issued that in default of payment of compensation, the accused

     shall suffer simple imprisonment. In effect the Supreme Court has

     confirmed the judgment passed in the case of Radhakrishna Nair v.

     Padmanabhan [(2000) 2 KLT 349], wherein the Kerala High Court

     had given a similar finding. The accused also contends, that, there

     is a factual error in the judgment of the High court to the effect that

     the accused had already deposited Rs. 2 lakhs towards paying the

     compensation amount pursuant to interim orders of the Sessions

     Court and the High Court respectively, instead the High Court has

     observed that only Rs. 1 lakh has been deposited.



                                                                         5
10)         The complainant being aggrieved by the sentence imposed on

      the accused has filed SLP (Crl) No. 4099 of 2008. The contention

      of the complainant is that, the sentence imposed is very minimal

      and will defeat the very purpose of Section 138 of N.I Act and if

      for any reason the default sentence is deleted then there is no

      chance of the accused paying the compensation . In this regard, the

      complainant relies on the observation of this court in the case of

      Suganthi Suresh Kumar v. Jagdeeshan, [(2002) 2 SCC 420].



11)            Heard learned counsel for both sides. The learned counsel

      for the accused submits, that, the default sentence imposed by the

      learned Judge of the High Court is against the dicta of this Court in

      the    case   of   ETTAPPADAN         AHAMMED         KUTTY       @

      KUNHAPPU VS. E.P. ABDULLAKEYA @ KUNHI BAPPU

      AND ANOTHER (Criminal Appeal No. 1031 of 2007).                  Per

      contra, the learned counsel for the respondent ably justifies the

      impugned judgment.        The learned counsel also relies on the

      observations made by this Court in the case of Suganthi Suresh

      Kumar Vs. Jagdeeshan, [(2002) 2 SCC 420].


                                                                        6
12)       The main question that requires to be considered and decided

      is, whether in default of payment of compensation ordered under

      Section 357 (3) of the Cr.P.C., a default sentence can be imposed ?



13)        Let us now look at the relevant provisions and the decision of

      this court on which reliance is placed by learned counsel.


14)      Section 357 of Cr.PC reads:-

              "(1) When a court imposes a sentence of fine or a
              sentence (including a sentence of death) of which
              fine forms a part, the court may, when passing
              judgment order the whole or any part of the fine
              recovered to be applied-
              (a) In defraying the expenses properly incurred in
              the prosecution,
              (b) In the payment to any person of compensation
              for any loss or injury caused by the offence, when
              compensation is, in the opinion, of the court,
              recoverable by such person in a Civil Court;
              (c) When, any person is convicted of any offence for
              having caused the death of another person or of
              having abetted the commission of shelf all offence,
              in paying in, compensation to the persons who are,
              under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855)
              entitled to recover damages from the person
              sentenced for the loss resulting to them from such
              death;
              (d) When any person is convicted of any offence
              which includes theft, criminal, misappropriation,
              criminal breach of trust or cheating, or of having
              dishonestly received or retained, or of having

                                                                       7
              voluntarily assisted in disposing of stolen property
              knowing or having reason to believe the same to be
              stolen in compensating any bona fide purchaser of
              such property for the loss of the same if such
              property is restored to the possession of the person
              entitled thereto.
              (2) If the fine is imposed in a case, which is subject
              to appeal, no such payment shall be made before the
              period allowed for presenting the appeal his elapsed,
              or if an, appeal be presented, before the decision of
              the appeal.
              (3) When a court imposes a sentence, of which fine
              does not form a part, the court may, when passing
              judgment order the accused person to pay, by way of
              compensation such amount as may be specified in
              the order to the person who has suffered any loss or
              injury by reason of the act for which the accused
              person his been so sentenced.
              (4) An order under this section may also be made by
              all Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of
              Session when exercising its powers of revision.
              (5) At the time of awarding compensation in any
              subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter, the
              court shall take into account any sum paid or
              recovered as compensation under this section."


15)            Essentially the section empowers the courts, not to just

      impose a fine alone or fine along with the sentence of

      imprisonment, but also when the situation arises, direct the accused

      to pay compensation to the person who has suffered any loss or

      injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been

      sentenced.


                                                                       8
16)       The above view we have taken is supported by the decisions of

      this Court, to which we presently refer.


17)        In the case of Sarwan Singh and ors. v. State of Punjab (AIR

      1978 SC 1525), this court has noticed the object and genesis of the

      section.

         "10. The law which enables the Court to direct
         compensation to be paid to the dependants is found in
         Section 357 of the CrPC (Act 2 of 1974). The
         corresponding provision in the 1898 Code was Section
         545. Section 545 of the CrPC (Act 5 of 1898) was
         amended by Act 18 of 1923 and by Act 26 of 1955. The
         amendment which is relevant for the purpose of our
         discussion is 545(1)(bb) which, for the first time was
         inserted by Act 26 of 1955. By this amendment the court
         is enabled to direct the accused, who caused the death of
         another person, to pay compensation to the persons who
         are, under the Fatal Accidents Act, entitled to recover
         damages from the persons sentenced, for the loss
         resulting to them from such death. In introducing the
         amendment, the Joint Select Committee stated "when
         death has been caused to a person, it is but proper that his
         heirs and dependants should be compensated, in suitable
         cases, for the loss resulting to them from such death, by
         the person who was responsible for it. The Committee
         proceeded to state that though Section 545 of the Code as
         amended in 1923 was intended to cover such cases, the
         intention was not however very clearly brought out and
         therefore in order to focus the attention of the courts on
         this aspect of the question, the Committee have amended
         Section 545 and it has been made clear that a fine may
         form a part of any sentence including a sentence of death
         and it has also been provided that the persons who are
         entitled under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855, to recover

                                                                        9
damages from the person sentenced may be compensated
out of the fine imposed. It also expressed its full
agreement with the suggestion that at the time of
awarding judgment in a case where death has resulted
from homicide, the court should award compensation to
the heirs of the deceased. The Committee felt that this
will result in settling the claim once for all by doing away
with the need for a further claim to a civil Court, and
avoid needless worry and expense to both sides. The
Committee further agreed that in cases where the death is
the result of negligence of the offender, appropriate
compensation should be awarded to the heirs. By the
introduction of Clause (bb) to Section 545(1), the
intention of the legislature was made clear that, in
suitable cases, the heirs and dependents should be
compensated for the loss that resulted to them from the
death, from a person who was responsible for it. The
view was also expressed that the court should award
compensation to the heir of the deceased so that their
claims would be settled finally. This object is sought to
be given effect to by Section 357 of the new Code (Act 2
of 1973). Section 357(3) provides that when a court
imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part,
the Court may, when passing judgment, order the
accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such
amount, as may be specified in the order, to the person
who has suffered any Joss or injury by reason of the act
for which the accused person has been so sentenced. The
object of the section therefore, is to provide
compensation payable to the persons who are entitled to
recover damages from the person sentenced even though
fine does not form part of the sentence. Though Section
545 of 1898 Code enabled the court only to pay
compensation out of the fine that would be imposed
under the law, by Section 357(3) when a Court imposes a
sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court
may direct the accused to pay compensation. In awarding
compensation it is necessary for the court to decide
whether the case is a fit one in which compensation has
to be awarded. If it is found that compensation should be

                                                               1
         paid, then the capacity of the accused to pay a
         compensation has to be determined. In directing
         compensation, the object is to collect the fine and pay it
         to the person who has suffered the loss. The purpose will
         not be served if the accused is not able to pay the fine or
         compensation for, imposing a default sentence for non-
         payment of fine would not achieve the object. If the
         accused is in a position to pay the compensation to the
         injured or his dependents to which they are entitled to,
         there could be no reason for the Court not directing such
         compensation. When a person, who caused injury due to
         negligence or is made vicariously liable is bound to pay
         compensation it is only appropriate to direct payment by
         the accused who is guilty of causing an injury with the
         necessary Mens Rea to pay compensation for the person
         who has suffered injury."


18)        In Balraj v. State of UP (AIR 1995 SC 1935), this court has

      held, that, Section 357(3) Cr. P.C. provides for ordering of

      payment by way of compensation to the victim by the accused. It is

      an important provision and it must also be noted that power to

      award compensation is not ancillary to other sentences but it is in

      addition thereto.


19)       In Hari Kishan v. Sukhbir Singh and ors. (AIR 1988 SC 2127),

      this court has observed that, Sub-section (1) of Section 357

      provides power to award compensation to victims of the offence

      out of the sentence of fine imposed on accused. In this case, we are



                                                                       1
      not concerned with Sub-section (1). We are concerned only with

      Sub-section (3). It is an important provision but Courts have

      seldom invoked it. Perhaps due to ignorance of the object of it. It

      empowers the Court to award compensation to victims while

      passing judgment of conviction. In addition to conviction, the

      Court may order the accused to pay some amount by way of

      compensation to victim who has suffered by the action of accused.

      It may be noted that this power of Courts to award compensation is

      not ancillary to other sentences but it is in addition thereto. This

      power was intended to do something to reassure the victim that he

      or she is not forgotten in the criminal justice system. It is a

      measure of responding appropriately to crime as well of

      reconciling the victim with the offender. It is, to some extent, a

      constructive approach to crimes. It is indeed a step forward in our

      criminal justice system. We, therefore, recommend to all Courts to

      exercise this power liberally so as to meet the ends of justice in a

      better way.


20)         In Dilip S. Dahanukar v. Kotak Mahindra Co. Ltd. and Anr.,

      [(2007) 6 SCC 528], this court differentiated between fine and



                                                                       1
        compensation, and while doing so, has stated that the distinction

        between Sub-Sections (1) and (3) of Section 357 is apparent. Sub-

        section (1) provides for application of an amount of fine while

        imposing a sentence of which fine forms a part; whereas Sub-

        Section (3) calls for a situation where a Court imposes a sentence

        of which fine does not form a part of the sentence.


        The court further observed:-

           "19. Compensation is awarded towards sufferance of any
           loss or injury by reason of an act for which an accused
           person is sentenced. Although it provides for a criminal
           liability, the amount which has been awarded as
           compensation is considered to be recourse of the victim
           in the same manner which may be granted in a civil suit."


      Finally the court summed up:-

           "22. We must, however, observe that there exists a
           distinction between fine and compensation, although, in a
           way it seeks to achieve the same purpose. An amount of
           compensation can be directed to be recovered as a 'fine'
           but the legal fiction raised in relation to recovery of fine
           only, it is in that sense `fine' stands on a higher footing
           than compensation awarded by the Court."

21)         Moving over to the question, whether a default sentence can be

        imposed on default of payment of compensation, this court in the

        case of Hari Singh v. Sukhbir Singh and in Balraj v. State of U.P,



                                                                          1
      has held that it was open to all courts in India to impose a sentence

      on default of payment of compensation under sub-section (3) of

      Section 357. In Hari Singh v. Sukhbir Singh (supra), this court has

      noticed certain factors which requires to be taken into

      consideration while passing an order under the section:-

         "11. The payment by way of compensation must,
         however, be reasonable. What is reasonable, may depend
         upon the facts and circumstances of each case. The
         quantum of compensation may be determined by taking
         into account the nature of crime, the justness of claim by
         the victim and the ability of accused to pay. If there are
         more than one accused they may be asked to pay in equal
         terms unless their capacity to pay varies considerably.
         The payment may also vary depending upon the acts of
         each accused. Reasonable period for payment of
         compensation, if necessary by instalments, may also be
         given. The Court may enforce the order by imposing
         sentence in default."


22)        This position also finds support in the case of R v. Oliver John

      Huish; [1985] 7 Cr. App. R.(S.) 272. The Lord Justice Croom -

      Johnson speaking for the Bench has observed:

         "When compensation orders may possibly be made the
         most careful examination is required. Documents should
         be obtained and evidence either on affidavit or orally
         should be given. The proceedings should, if necessary,
         be adjourned, in order to arrive at the true state of the
         defendant's affairs.

         Very often a compensation order is made and a very light
         sentence of imprisonment is imposed, because the court

                                                                        1
         recognizes that if the defendant is to have an opportunity
         of paying the compensation he must be enabled to earn
         the money with which to do so. The result is therefore an
         extremely light sentence of imprisonment. If the
         compensation order turns out to be virtually worthless,
         the defendant has got off with a very light sentence of
         imprisonment as well as no order of compensation. In
         other words, generally speaking, he has got off with
         everything."


23)      The law laid down in Hari Singh v. Sukhbir Singh (supra) was

      reiterated by this court in the case of Suganthi Suresh Kumar v.

      Jagdeeshan, [(2002) 2 SCC 420]. The court observed:-


         "5. In the said decision this Court reminded all
         concerned that it is well to remember the emphasis laid
         on the need for making liberal use of Section 357(3) of
         the Code. This was observed by reference to a decision
         of this Court in 1989 Cri LJ 116 Hari Singh Vs. Sukhbir
         Singh. In the said decision this Court held as follows:-

         "The quantum of compensation may be determined by
         taking into account the nature of crime, the justness of
         the claim by the victim and the ability of accused to pay.
         If there are more than one accused they may be asked to
         pay in equal terms unless their capacity to pay varies
         considerably. The payment may also vary depending
         upon the acts of each accused. Reasonable period for
         payment of compensation, if necessary by instalments,
         may also be given. The court may enforce the order by
         imposing sentence in default."

                                              (emphasis supplied)

         "10. That apart, Section 431 of the Code has only
         prescribed that any money (other than fine) payable by

                                                                      1
          virtue of an order made under the Code shall be
          recoverable "as if it were a fine". Two modes of recovery
          of the fine have been indicated in Section 421(1) of the
          Code. The proviso to the Sub-section says that if the
          sentence directs that in default of payment of the fine, the
          offender shall be imprisoned, and if such offender has
          undergone the whole of such imprisonment in default, no
          court shall issue such warrant for levy of the amount."


      The court further held:-

          "11. When this Court pronounced in Hari Singh v.
          Sukhbir Singh (supra) that a court may enforce an order
          to pay compensation "by imposing a sentence in default"
          it is open to all courts in India to follow the said course.
          The said legal position would continue to hold good until
          it is overruled by a larger bench of this court. Hence
          learned single judge of High Court of Kerala has
          committed an impropriety by expressing that the said
          legal direction of this Court should not be followed by
          the subordinate courts in Kerala. We express our
          disapproval of the course adopted by the said judge in
          Rajendran v. Jose 2001 (3) KLT 431. It is unfortunate
          that when the Sessions judge has correctly done a course
          in accordance with the discipline the Single judge of the
          High Court has incorrectly reversed it."

24)          In order to set at rest the divergent opinion expressed in

      Kunhappu's case (supra), this Court in the case of Vijayan v.

      Sadanandan K. and Anr., [(2009) 6 SCC 652], after noticing the

      provision of Section 421 and 431 of Cr.PC, which dealt with mode

      of recovery of fine and Section 64 of IPC, which empowered the




                                                                         1
      courts to provide for a sentence of imprisonment on default of

      payment of fine, the Court stated:

         "17. We have carefully considered the submissions made
         on behalf of the respective parties. Since a decision on
         the question raised in this petition is still in a nebulous
         state, there appear to be two views as to whether a default
         sentence on imprisonment can be imposed in cases where
         compensation is awarded to the complainant under
         Section 357(3) Cr.P.C. As pointed out by Mr. Basant in
         Dilip S. Dahanukar's case, the distinction between a fine
         and compensation as understood under Section 357(1)(b)
         and Section 357(3) Cr.P.C. had been explained, but the
         question as to whether a default sentence clause could be
         made in respect of compensation payable under Section
         357(3) Cr.P.C, which is central to the decision in this
         case, had not been considered."


  The court further held:-

         "22. The provisions of Sections 357(3) and 431 Cr.P.C.,
         when read with Section 64 IPC, empower the Court,
         while making an order for payment of compensation, to
         also include a default sentence in case of non-payment of
         the same. The observations made by this Court in Hari
         Singh's case (supra) are as important today as they were
         when they were made and if, as submitted by Dr. Pillay,
         recourse can only be had to Section 421 Cr.P.C. for
         enforcing the same, the very object of Sub-section (3) of
         Section 357 would be frustrated and the relief
         contemplated therein would be rendered somewhat
         illusory."

25)      In Shantilal v. State of M.P., [(2007) 11 SCC 243], it is stated,

      that, the sentence of imprisonment for default in payment of a fine



                                                                       1
      or compensation is different from a normal sentence of

      imprisonment. The court also delved into the factors to be taken

      into consideration while passing an order under Section 357(3) of

      the Cr.PC. This court stated:-

         "The term of imprisonment in default of payment of fine
         is not a sentence. It is a penalty which a person incurs on
         account of non-payment of fine. The sentence is
         something which an offender must undergo unless it is
         set aside or remitted in part or in whole either in appeal
         or in revision or in other appropriate judicial proceedings
         or "otherwise". A term of imprisonment ordered in
         default of payment of fine stands on a different footing.
         A person is required to undergo imprisonment either
         because he is unable to pay the amount of fine or refuses
         to pay such amount. He, therefore, can always avoid to
         undergo imprisonment in default of payment of fine by
         paying such amount. It is, therefore, not only the power,
         but the duty of the court to keep in view the nature of
         offence, circumstances under which it was committed,
         the position of the offender and other relevant
         considerations before ordering the offender to suffer
         imprisonment in default of payment of fine."


26)      In Kuldip Kaur v. Surinder Singh and anr. (AIR 1989 SC 232),

      in the context of Section 125 Cr.PC observed that sentencing a

      person to jail is sometimes a mode of enforcement. In this regard

      the court stated:-

         "6. A distinction has to be drawn between a mode of
         enforcing recovery on the one hand and effecting actual
         recovery of the amount of monthly allowance which has
         fallen in arrears on the other. Sentencing a person to jail

                                                                       1
         is a 'mode of enforcement'. It is not a 'mode of
         satisfaction' of the liability. The liability can be satisfied
         only by making actual payment of the arrears. The whole
         purpose of sending to jail is to oblige a person liable to
         pay the monthly allowance who refuses to comply with
         the order without sufficient cause, to obey the order and
         to make the payment. The purpose of sending him to jail
         is not to wipe out the liability which he has refused to
         discharge. Be it also realised that a person ordered to pay
         monthly allowance can be sent to jail only if he fails to
         pay monthly allowance 'without sufficient cause' to
         comply with the order. It would indeed be strange to hold
         that a person who 'without reasonable cause' refuses to
         comply with the order of the Court to maintain his
         neglected wife or child would be absolved of his liability
         merely because he prefers to go to jail. A sentence of jail
         is no substitute for the recovery of the amount of monthly
         allowance which has fallen in arrears."


27)        From the above line of cases, it becomes very clear, that, a

      sentence of imprisonment can be granted for default in payment of

      compensation awarded under Section 357(3) of Cr.PC. The whole

      purpose of the provision is to accommodate the interests of the

      victims in the criminal justice system. Sometimes the situation

      becomes such that there is no purpose is served by keeping a

      person behind bars. Instead directing the accused to pay an amount

      of compensation to the victim or affected party can ensure delivery

      of total justice. Therefore, this grant of compensation is sometimes

      in lieu of sending a person behind bars or in addition to a very light



                                                                          1
      sentence of imprisonment. Hence on default of payment of this

      compensation, there must be a just recourse. Not imposing a

      sentence of imprisonment would mean allowing the accused to get

      away without paying the compensation and imposing another fine

      would be impractical as it would mean imposing a fine upon

      another fine and therefore would not ensure proper enforcement of

      the order of compensation. While passing an order under Section

      357(3), it is imperative for the courts to look at the ability and the

      capacity of the accused to pay the same amount as has been laid

      down by the cases above, otherwise the very purpose of granting

      an order of compensation would stand defeated.



28)       Section 421 of Cr.PC reads:-

         "421. Warrant for levy of fine.
         (1) When an offender has been sentenced to pay a the
         court passing the sentence make action for the recovery
         of the fine in either or- both of the following ways, that is
         to say, it may -
         (a) Issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by
         attachment and sale of any movable property belonging
         to the offender
         (b) Issue a warrant to the Collector of the district,
         authorizing him to realize the amount as arrears of land
         revenue from the movable or immovable property, or
         both of the defaulters;
         Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default of
         payment of the fine, the offender shall be imprisoned,

                                                                         2
   and if such offender has undergone the whole of such
   imprisonment in default, no court shall issue such
   warrant unless, for special reasons to be recorded in
   writing, it considers it necessary so to do, or unless it has
   made an order for the payment of expenses or
   compensation out of the fine under section 357.
   (2) The State Government may make rules regulating the
   manner in which warrants under clause (a) of sub-section
   (1) are to be executed, and for the summary
   determination of any claims made by any person other
   than the offender in respect of any property attached in
   execution of such warrant.
   (3) Where the court issues a warrant to the Collector
   under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the Collector shall
   realize the amount in accordance with the law relating to
   recovery of arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant
   were a certificate issued under such law:
   Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the
   arrest or detention in prison of the offender."


Section 431 of Cr.PC reads:-

   "431. Money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine.
   Any money (other than a fine) payable by virtue of any
   order made under this Code, and the method of recovery
   of which is not otherwise expressly provided for, shall be
   recoverable as if it were a fine.
    Provided that section 421 shall, in its application to an
   order under section 359, by virtue of this section, be
   construed as if in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section
   421, after the words and figures "under section 357", the
   words and figures "or an order for payment of costs
   under section 359" had been inserted."


                                                                   2
29)           Section 431 clearly provides that an order of compensation

      under Section 357 (3) will be recoverable in the same way as if it

      were a fine. Section 421 further provides the mode of recovery of a

      fine and the section clearly provides that a person can be

      imprisoned for non-payment of fine. Therefore, going by the

      provisions of the code, the intention of the legislature is clearly to

      ensure that mode of recovery of a fine and compensation is on the

      same footing. In light of the aforesaid reasoning, the contention of

      the accused that there can be no sentence of imprisonment for

      default in payment of compensation under Section 357 (3) should

      fail.


30)           A similar position is also prevalent in other countries. In the

      United Kingdom, Section 82 (3) of Magistrates' Courts Act, 1980

      allows for a sentence of imprisonment for default in payment of a

      fine or any financial order. The Section reads:-

          "Where on the occasion of the offender's conviction a
          magistrates' court does not issue a warrant of
          commitment for a default in paying any such sum as
          aforesaid or fix a term of imprisonment under the said
          Section 77(2) which is to be served by him in the event
          of any such default, it shall not thereafter issue a warrant
          of commitment for any such default or for want of
          sufficient distress to satisfy such a sum unless:-

                                                                          2
            (a) he is already serving a sentence of custody for life, or
                a term of imprisonment, detention in a young offender
                institution, or detention under Section 9 of the
                Criminal Justice Act, 1982; or
            (b) the court has since the conviction inquired into his
                means in his presence on at least one occasion."


31)           In Australia, under Section 4 of the Sentencing Act, 1997 the

      definition of "fine" includes a compensation order. Procedure for

      enforcement of fines is provided for in Section 47(7) of the Act and

      provides for a sentence of imprisonment or default in payment of

      fine.


32)           The Learned Counsel for the accused has placed reliance on

      the     decision   of   this   court   in   the   case   of   Ettappadan

      Ahammedakutty v. E.P Abdullakeya (Criminal Appeal no. 1013 of

      2007), which reiterated the position taken by the Kerala High

      Court in a case reported in 2000 (2) KLT 349; wherein it was held

      that no sentence of imprisonment can be passed on default of

      paying compensation awarded under Section 357(3). But in light of

      several decisions reiterating the opposite stand, this case needs to

      be viewed in isolation and cannot be taken to be against the

      established position preferred by the Supreme Court on this issue

      over a period of two decades.

                                                                            2
33)              The complainant in the Civil Appeal arising out of

      S.L.P.(Crl.) No.4099 of 2008 has contended that the sentence

      imposed for default in payment of the compensation amount is

      very minimal and, therefore, the sentence imposed by the High

      Court requires to be enhanced. In our considered view, looking into

      the facts and circumstances of the case and the nature of the

      offence, we find no good reason to interfere with the quantum of

      sentence imposed.


34)         The contention of the accused as regards a factual error made

      by the High Court, wherein the High Court stated that the accused

      had deposited Rs. 1 lakh towards the compensation amount

      requires to be accepted. It is to be noted that the accused has

      already deposited Rs.2 lakhs towards the compensation amount of

      Rs. 5 lakhs, before the Judicial Magistrate in pursuance of orders

      passed by the Sessions Court and the High Court. Therefore, the

      appeal of the accused, i.e. Criminal Appeal arising out of Special

      Leave Petition (Crl.) No.334 of 2008 is allowed to the extent that

      he needs to pay a further amount of Rs. 3 lakhs towards the




                                                                      2
      compensation amount of Rs. 5 lakhs. The remaining part of the

      sentence passed by the High Court requires to be confirmed.



35)        In the result, the conviction and sentence passed against the

      accused in Criminal Appeal arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No.334 of

      2008 are confirmed with the modification, as observed in the

      earlier paragraph.   Criminal Appeal arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.)

      No.334 of 2008 is, accordingly, partly allowed. Since, we are of

      the opinion that modification of the sentence is not warranted in

      the facts and circumstances of the case, Criminal Appeal arising

      out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 4099 of 2008 filed by the

      complainant is dismissed.


                                                       ...........................
                                        ............J.
                                        [ P. SATHASIVAM ]



                                        .......................................J.
                                        [ H.L. DATTU ]

  New Delhi,
  May 11, 2010




                                                                                    2

