
Supreme Court of India
Paul Varghese vs State Of Kerala And Anr on 10 April, 2007Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, S.H. Kapadia
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  527 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Paul Varghese

RESPONDENT:
State of Kerala and Anr

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/04/2007

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT & S.H. KAPADIA

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.    527            OF 2007
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 2047 of 2007)


Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

	Leave granted. 

Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a 
learned Single Judge of the Kerala High Court allowing the 
revision filed by the respondent no.2 in the present appeal 
who was the petitioner before the High Court.  He had 
questioned correctness of the order passed by the Inquiry 
Commissioner and Special Judge, Trichoor, by which the 
prayer for his impleadment as accused in terms of Section 319 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short the 'Code') 
was accepted.  By the said order the Trial Court had held that 
Section 319 of the Code overrides the provisions of Section 19 
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (in short the 'Act') 
and for exercise of power under the former provision, the only 
conditions required to be fulfilled are set out in sub-section (4) 
of Section 319 itself.  The High Court felt that the view was not 
sustainable in view of what has been stated by this Court in 
Dilawar Singh v. Parvinder Singh alias Iqbal Singh and Anr. 
(2005 (12) SCC 709). Accordingly, the order was set aside.

In support of the appeal, learned counsel submitted that 
the view taken by the High Court is not correct as the effect of 
sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 19 of the Act has been lost 
sight of.  There was no material to show that absence of 
sanction in any way occasioned failure of justice. It was also 
submitted that it is a case where no sanction was necessary 
because the alleged act did not form part of any official duty.  
There is no appearance on behalf of respondent no.2 in spite 
of service of notice.

As has been rightly held by the High Court in view of 
what has been stated in Dilawar Singh's case (supra), the Trial 
Court was not justified in holding that Section 319 of the Code 
has to get preference/primacy over Section 19 of the Act, and 
that matter stands concluded. But the other stand of Mr. Colin 
Gonsalves, learned counsel, deserves consideration.

It appears that by order dated 22.3.1999 the Trial Court 
had impleaded two persons as accused nos. 2 and 3. We are 
concerned with accused no.2 i.e. respondent no.2.  It appears 
from the order of the High Court that accused no.3 has 
expired and so there is no need for considering his case.  
While impleading the persons as accused nos. A2 and A3, the 
Trial Court had directed the Additional Legal Advisor to obtain 
sanction from the competent authority to prosecute them.  
When the matter was taken up on 12.4.1999, the Vigilance 
Legal Advisor took the stand that no sanction was necessary. 
The investigating officer had submitted a report recommending 
prosecution of accused nos. 2 and 3, but the sanctioning 
authority decided to sanction for prosecuting only A1, and 
names of A2 and A3 were deleted. During trial, material came 
to light showing alleged involvement of two other persons i.e. 
A2 and A3.  In view of that situation, Section 319 of the Code 
was resorted to. The broader question as to whether sanction 
was at all necessary was not gone into. 

At this juncture it would be appropriate to take note of 
what has been stated by this Court in Central Bureau of 
Investigation v. V.K. Sehgal and Anr. (1999 (8) SCC 501). At 
para 10 it was stated, inter alia, as follows:

"A Court of appeal or revision is debarred from 
reversing a finding (or even an order of 
conviction and sentence) on account of any 
error or irregularity in the sanction for the 
prosecution, unless failure of justice had been 
occasioned on account of such error or 
irregularity. For determining whether want of 
valid sanction had in fact occasioned failure of 
justice the aforesaid Sub-section (2) enjoins on 
the Court a duty to consider whether the 
accused had raised any objection on that score 
at the trial stage. Even if he had raised any 
such objection at the early stage it is hardly 
sufficient to conclude that there was failure of 
justice. It has to be determined on the facts of 
each case. But an accused who did not raise it 
at the trial stage cannot possibly sustain such 
a plea made for the first time in the appellate 
Court. In Kalpnath Rai v. State (through CBI) 
(1997 (8) SCC 732), this Court has observed in 
paragraph 29 thus:
"29. Sub-section (2) of Section 465 
of the Code is not a carte blanche 
for rendering all trials vitiated on 
the ground of the irregularity of 
sanction if objection thereto was 
raised at the first instance itself. The 
sub-section only says that 'the 
Court shall have regard to the fact' 
that objection has been raised at the 
earlier stage in the proceedings. It is 
only one of the considerations to be 
weighed but it does not mean that if 
objection was raised at the earlier 
stage, for that very reason the 
irregularity in the sanction would 
spoil the prosecution and transmute 
the proceedings into a void trial." 

In State by Police Inspector v. T. Venkatesh Murthy (2004 
(7) SCC 763), it was observed as follows:

"14. In the instant case neither the Trial Court 
nor the High Court appear to have kept in view 
the requirements of sub-section (3) relating to 
question regarding "failure of justice".  Merely 
because there is any omission, error or 
irregularity in the matter of according sanction 
that does not affect the validity of the 
proceeding unless the court records the 
satisfaction that such error, omission or 
irregularity has resulted in failure of justice. 
The same logic also applies to the appellate or 
revisional court.  The requirement of sub-
section (4) about raising the issue, at the 
earliest stage has not been also considered.  
Unfortunately the High Court by a practically 
non-reasoned order, confirmed the order 
passed by the learned trial judge.  The orders 
are, therefore, indefensible.  We set aside the 
said orders.  It would be appropriate to require 
the trial Court to record findings in terms of 
clause (b) of sub-section (3) and sub-section (4) 
of Section 19."

The effect of sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 19 of the 
Act is of considerable significance as noted in  Parkash Singh 
Badal and Anr. v. State of Punjab and Ors. (2007 (1) SCC 1). 
In Sub-Section (3) the stress is on "failure of justice" and that 
too "in the opinion of the Court". In sub-section (4), the stress 
is on raising the plea at the appropriate time. Significantly, the 
"failure of justice" is relatable to error, omission or irregularity 
in the sanction. Therefore, mere error, omission or irregularity 
in sanction is considered fatal unless it has resulted in failure 
of justice or has been occasioned thereby. Section 19(1) is a 
matter of procedure and does not go to root of jurisdiction. 
Sub-section (3)(c) of Section 19 reduces the rigour of 
prohibition. In Section 6(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 
1947 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Old Act') corresponding to 
Section 19(2) of the Act, question relates to doubt about 
authority to grant sanction and not whether sanction is 
necessary.    

Whether sanction is necessary or not has to be 
considered on the factual scenario. The question of sanction 
involves two aspects i.e. one relating to alleged lack of 
jurisdiction and the other relating to prejudice.  

It may be noted that Section 197 of the Code and Section 
19 of the Act operate in conceptually different fields. In cases 
covered under the Act, in respect of public servants the 
sanction is of automatic nature and thus factual aspects are of 
little or no consequence.  Conversely, in a case relatable to 
Section 197 of the Code, the substratum and basic features of 
the case have to be considered to find out whether the alleged 
act has any nexus to the discharge of duties. Position is not so 
in case of Section 19 of the Act. 

	The above aspect was highlighted in Lalu Prasad @ Lalu 
Prasad Yadav v. State of Bihar through CBI (AHD) Patna (2007 
(1) SCC 49).

	Appeal is accordingly disposed of.

