
Supreme Court of India
State Of Rajasthan vs Tara Singh on 29 March, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 262 of 2006                                                                                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                                                                               1





                                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 262 of 2006




                 STATE OF RAJASTHAN                                                                                      ..... APPELLANT



                                                                                        VERSUS

                  
                 TARA SINGH                                                                               .....                           RESPONDENT





                                                                                    O R D E R

             1.               This   appeal   against   acquittal   filed   by   the   State 

             of Rajasthan arises out of the following facts:

             1.1              At   about   5:00p.m.   on   the   2nd  February,   1988   the 

             Station   in   charge   of   police   station   Sangdia   received 

             information   through   an   informer   that   one   Tara   Singh 

             would   be   coming   near   the   Jhandewalan   Sikhan   river, 

             carrying opium.  The necessary entries etc. were made in 

             the   Police   Station   register   and   a   raiding   party   was 

             organised by the Police Officer.   As the raiding party 

             reached   near   Jhandewalan   Sikhan   at   6:00p.m.   a   person 

             carrying a white coloured bag was seen coming from the 


Crl.A. No. 262 of 2006                                                                                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                                                                               2





             opposite   side   and   on   seeing   the   police   party   took   a 

             sudden turn and started running away.  He was chased and 

             apprehended     and   on   enquiry   revealed   his   name   as   Tara 

             Singh, the respondent herein.   An offer of a search in 

             terms   of     Section   50   of   the   Narcotic   Drugs   and 

             Psychotropic   Substances   Act,   1985   (hereinafter   called 

             'the Act'),  was, accordingly, made to him and he stated 

             that   he   would   like   to   be   searched   in   the   presence   of 

             the   Station   incharge   himself.     He   was,   accordingly, 

             searched and the bag that he was carrying was found to 

             contain 8 kg. of opium.  Samples of the opium were taken 

             out   and   sent   to   the   laboratory   for   analysis   and   the 

             balance   was   deposited   in   the   Malkhana.     On   the 

             completion   of   the   investigation,   the   respondent   was 

             charged under Sections 8/15 of the Act and was brought 

             to   trial.     The   trial   court   relying   on   the   evidence   of 

             several witnesses who had constituted the raiding party 

             as also the report of the laboratory, held that the case 

             against the respondent had been proved beyond doubt.  He 

             was,   accordingly,   sentenced   to   10   years   R.I.   and   to   a 

             fine of Rs. 1 lakh.   An appeal was thereafter filed by 

             the   respondent   in   the   High   Court.     The   High   Court 

             allowed   the   appeal   on   two   grounds:   (i)   that   the 

             provisions   of   Section   50   of   the   Act   had   not   been 

             complied with and the offer to the accused that he could 


Crl.A. No. 262 of 2006                                                                                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                                                                               3





             be   searched   in   the   presence   of   a   Gazetted   Officer   or 

             Magistrate had not made to him; and (ii) that there was 

             no evidence to show as to when the sample had been sent 

             to the laboratory, as the   forwarding letter dated 26th 

             February,   1998,   of   the   Superintendent   of   Police 

             (Exhibits P20 and P21) sent along with the samples did 

             not   explain   why   the   samples   had   reached   the   laboratory 

             on  the   9th  March,  1998   and  it   was  not   thus  clear   where 

             the samples had remained between the 26t   February, 1998 

             and   9th  March,   1998.     The   appeal   was,   accordingly, 

             allowed and the respondent was,   acquitted,.   It is in 

             these   circumstances   that   the   present   appeal   has   been 

             preferred by the State.




             2                At the very outset, it must be understood that the 

             provisions   of   Section   50   would   no   longer   be   applicable 

             to a search such as the one made in the present case as 

             the opium had been carried on the head in a gunny bag. 

             A   Bench   of   this   Court   in  State   of   Himachal   Pradesh  v. 

             Pawan   Kumar  (2005)   4   SCC   350   after   examining   the 

             discrepant   views   rendered   in   various   judgments   of   this 

             Court   has   found   that   Section   50   of   the   Act   would   not 

             apply to any search or seizure where the article was not 

             being carried on the person of the accused.  Admittedly, 

             in the present case, the opium was being carried on the 


Crl.A. No. 262 of 2006                                                                                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                                                                               4





             head in a bag.   Mr. Abhishek Gupta, the learned counsel 

             for the appellant-State, therefore, appears to be right 

             when   he   contends     that   the   observations   of   the   High 

             Court that the provisions of Section 50 of the Act would 

             not be applicable was no longer correct in view of the 

             judgment in  Pawan Kumar's case.   We find, however, that 

             the   second   aspect   on   which   the   High   Court   has   opined 

             calls for no interference.  As per the prosecution story 

             the   samples   had   been   removed   from   the   Malkhana   on   the 

             26th  of February, 1998, and should have been received in 

             the laboratory the very next day.   The High Court has, 

             accordingly   observed   that   the   prosectuion   had   not   been 

             able to show as to in whose possession the samples had 

             remained from 26th February, 1998 to 9th March, 1998.  The 

             High Court has also disbelieved the evidence of P.W. 6 

             and P.W.9,   the former being the Malkhana incharge and 

             the   latter   being   the   Constable,   who   had   taken   the 

             samples to the Laboratory to the effect that the samples 

             had been taken out on the 9th  of March, 1998 and not on 

             the 26th  February, 1998.   The Court has also found that 

             in the absence of any reliable evidence with regard to 

             the authenticity of the letter dated 26th  February, 1998 

             it had to be found that the samples had remained in some 

             unknown custody from the 26th February, 1998 to 9th March, 

             1998.   We must emphasise that in a prosecution relating 


Crl.A. No. 262 of 2006                                                                                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                                                                               5





             to the Act the question as to how and where the samples 

             had   been   stored   or   as   to   when   they   had   despatched   or 

             received   in   the   laboratory   is   a   matter   of   great 

             importance   on   account   of   the   huge   penalty   involved   in 

             these   matters.     The   High   Court   was,   therefore,   in   our 

             view,   fully   justified   in   holding   that   the   sanctity   of 

             the samples had been compromised which cast a doubt on 

             the   prosecution   story.     We,   accordingly,   feel   that   the 

             judgment   of   the   High   Court   on   the   second   aspect   calls 

             for   no   interference.     The   appeal   is,   accordingly, 

             dismissed.   The respondent is on bail.   His bail bonds 

             stand discharged.


                                                                                  ..............................J
                                                                                  [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                                                  ..............................J
                                                                                  [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

             NEW DELHI
             MARCH 29, 2011.



