
Supreme Court of India
Mostt. Simrikhia vs Smt. Dolley Mukherjee @ Smt. ... on 2 March, 1990Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 1605, 1990 SCR  (1) 788
Author: M Fathima Beevi
Bench: Fathima Beevi, M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
MOSTT. SIMRIKHIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SMT. DOLLEY MUKHERJEE @ SMT. CHHABIMUKHERJEE & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT02/03/1990

BENCH:
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)
BENCH:
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)
AHMADI, A.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR 1605		  1990 SCR  (1) 788
 1990 SCC  (2) 437	  JT 1990 (3)	 79
 1990 SCALE  (1)455


ACT:
    Code  of  Criminal Procedure,  1973:  Sections  362	 and
482Inherent  power  of	High Court--To be  invoked  only  to
prevent	 abuse	of process of Court and to  secure  ends  of
justice----Not	to override express provisions	barring	 re-
view.



HEADNOTE:
    A  case  was instituted on a private  complaint  by	 the
appellant for offences under Sections 323 and 452 IPC before
the  Judicial  Magistrate First Class, who  transferred	 the
case  to  Second Class Magistrate for  enquiry.	 The  Second
Class  Magistrate issued process to the	 respondents,  which
was challenged under Section 482 Cr.P.C., on the ground that
the  First  Class Magistrate transferred  the  case  without
taking	cognizance and that the subsequent proceedings	were
illegal.  The High Court dismissed the petition.  Again	 the
respondents  approached	 the High Court	 under	Section	 482
Cr.P.C. alleging that the case had not been taken cognizance
of,  before  it was transferred. This time  the	 High  Court
accepted the plea and quashed the proceedings.
    This  appeal,  by  special leave,  challenges  the	High
Court's	 order	on the grounds that the	 second	 application
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. ought not to have been entertained
as  it	amounted to review of the earlier order and  it	 was
contrary to the spirit of section 362 Cr.P.C.
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1 The inherent power under Section 482  Cr.P.C.
is intended to prevent the abuse of the process of the Court
and  to secure ends of justice. Such power cannot  be  exer-
cised  to do something which is expressly barred  under	 the
Code. If any consideration of the facts by way of review  is
not  permissible under the Code and is expressly barred,  it
is  not	 for  the Court to exercise its	 inherent  power  to
reconsider the matter and record a conflicting decision.  If
there  had been change in the circumstances of the case,  it
would be in order for the High Court to exercise its  inher-
ent power in the prevailing circumstances and pass appropri-
ate orders to secure the ends of justice or to
789
prevent	 the abuse of the process of the Court. Where  there
is  no such changed circumstance and the decision has to  be
arrived	 at  on	 the facts that existed as on  the  date  of
earlier	 order, the exercise of the power to reconsider	 the
same  materials	 to  arrive at different  conclusion  is  in
effect	a  review, which is expressly barred  under  section
362. [790F-H; 791A]
    1.2	 Ira matter is covered by an express letter of	law,
the  court cannot give a go-by to the  statutory  provisions
and  instead evolve a new provision in the garb of  inherent
jurisdiction.  The inherent jurisdiction of the	 High  Court
cannot	be invoked to override bar of review  under  Section
362 Cr.P.C. [791E-H]
Sooraj Devi v. Pyare Lal, [1981] 1 SCC 500, relied on.
    Superintendent & Rememberancer of Legal Affairs v. Mohan
Singh, [1975] 3 SCC 706, referred to.
    2. In the instant case, there had been a definite  find-
ing that the complaint was taken cognizance of by the Magis-
trate  before he transferred the proceedings  under  section
192(2)	Cr.P.C. for enquiry under section 202  Cr.P.C.	This
finding	 has been arrived at after perusal of the record  of
the proceedings before the Magistrate and on a consideration
of the report of the concerned Magistrate. A reappraisal  of
the facts on record to determine whether such cognizance had
been  taken  in a subsequent proceeding is  not,  therefore,
warranted.  It was not open to the parties to reagitate	 the
question by a fresh application nor was the court  empowered
under section 482 to reconsider the matter. [791 B-C]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 128
of 1990.
    From the Judgment and Order dated 19.8.1989 of the Patna
High Court in Criminal Miscellaneous No. 2314 of 1989.
    A.D.  Sikri, Ranjan Mukherjee and D. Goburdhan  for	 the
Appellant.
R.K. Garg and A. Sharan for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
FATHIMA BEEVI, J. Special leave granted.
790
    The legality of the order of the High Court dated  19.8.
1989 passed on an application made under section 482 Cr.P.C.
is  challenged	in this appeal. In a case  instituted  on  a
private	 complaint by the appellant for offences under	sec-
tions  452  and 323 I.P.C., the	 Judicial  Magistrate  First
Class,	Patna,	in exercise of power  under  section  192(2)
Cr.P.C.	 transferred the case for enquiry under section	 202
of the Code. The Court of the Second Class Magistrate, after
examining witnesses, by order dated 22.3. 1985 issued  proc-
ess to the two accused, the respondents herein. The order of
the  Magistrate	 issuing process was challenged by  the	 re-
spondents under section 482 before the High Court. The	main
ground urged before the High Court was that the First  Class
Magistrate  had transferred the case without  taking  cogni-
zance  of the offence and the subsequent  proceedings  were,
therefore,  illegal.  The  High Court, by  its	order  dated
20.8.88, dismissed the petition. It was found that there was
no  such illegality. The respondents again made	 Crl.  Misc.
Petition  2314/89 under section 482 Cr.P.C. before the	High
Court alleging, inter alia, that the record of the  proceed-
ings on close scrutiny would indicate that the case had	 not
been  taken cognizance of before the transfer.	The  learned
Single	Judge  accepted	 the case  of  the  respondents	 and
quashed the proceedings by the impugned order.
    The	 learned counsel for the appellant contended  before
us that the second application under section 482 Cr.P.C. was
not entertainable, the exercise of power under section	482,
on a second application by the same party on the same ground
virtually amounts to the review of the earlier order and  is
contrary to the spirit of section 362 of the Cr.P.C. and the
High  Court  was,  therefore, clearly  in  error  in  having
quashed	 the  proceedings by adopting that course.  We	find
considerable force in the contention of the learned counsel.
The inherent power under section 482 is intended to  prevent
the abuse of the process of the Court and to secure ends  of
justice.  Such	power cannot be exercised  to  do  something
which is expressly barred under the Code. If any  considera-
tion of the facts by way of review is not permissible  under
the Code and is expressly barred, it is not for the Court to
exercise  its  inherent power to reconsider the	 matter	 and
record	a conflicting decision. If there had been change  in
the circumstances of the case, it would be in order for	 the
High Court to exercise its inherent powers in the prevailing
circumstances and pass appropriate orders to secure the ends
of  justice  or to prevent the abuse of the process  of	 the
Court. Where there is no such changed circumstances and	 the
decision  has to be arrived at on the facts that existed  as
on the date of the earlier order, the exercise of the  power
to reconsider the
791
same  materials	 to  arrive at different  conclusion  is  in
effect	a  review, which is expressly barred  under  section
362.
    In	the present case, there had been a definite  finding
that the complaint was taken cognizance of by the Magistrate
before	he transferred the proceedings under section  192(2)
for enquiry under section 202 Cr.P.C. This finding has	been
arrived	 at after perusal of the record of  the	 proceedings
before	the Magistrate and on a consideration of the  report
of  the concerned Magistrate. A reappraisal of the facts  on
record	to determine whether such cognizance had been  taken
of in a subsequent proceeding is not, therefore,  warranted.
The  only ground on which relief was claimed is the  alleged
irregularity in the transfer of the proceedings. It was	 not
open  to  the parties to reagitate the question by  a  fresh
application nor was the court empowered under section 482 to
reconsider the matter.
 Section 362 of the Code expressly provides that no court
when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing  of
a  case, shall alter or review the same except to correct  a
clerical or arithmetical error save as otherwise provided by
the  Code. Section 482 enables the High Court to  make	such
order as may be necessary to give effect to any order  under
the Code or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court  or
otherwise  to secure the ends of justice. The inherent	pow-
ers, however, as much are controlled by principle and prece-
dent  as are its express powers by statute. If a  matter  is
covered by an express letter of law, the court cannot give a
go-by  to the statutory provisions and instead evolve a	 new
provision in the garb of inherent jurisdiction.
    In	Superintendent	& Remembrancer of Legal	 Affairs  v.
Mohan Singh, [1975] 3 SCC 706, this Court held that  section
561A preserves the inherent power of the High Court to	make
such orders as it deemed fit to prevent abuse of the process
of  the Court or to secure the ends of justice and the	High
Court  must  therefore exercise its inherent  powers  having
regard	to the situation prevailing at the particular  point
of  time  when	its inherent jurisdiction is  sought  to  be
invoked. In that case the facts and circumstances  obtaining
at  the	 time  of the subsequent  application  were  clearly
different  from	 what they were at the time of	the  earlier
application.  The question as to the scope and ambit of	 the
inherent power of the High Court vis-a-vis an earlier  order
made by it was, therefore, not concluded by this decision.
    The	 inherent jurisdiction of the High Court  cannot  be
invoked	 to override bar of review under section 362. It  is
clearly stated in Sooraj
792
Devi v. Pyare Lal, [1981] 1 SCC 500 that the inherent  power
of  the	 court cannot be exercised for doing that  which  is
specifically  prohibited by the Code. The law  is  therefore
clear that the inherent power cannot be exercised for  doing
that which cannot be done on account of the bar under  other
provisions of the Code. The court is not empowered to review
its  own decision under the purported exercise	of  inherent
power.	We find that the impugned order in this case  is  in
effect one reviewing the earlier order on a  reconsideration
of  the same materials. The High Court has grievously  erred
in  doing so. Even on merits, we do not find any  compelling
reasons to quash the proceedings at that stage.
We  allow  the appeal and set aside the order  of  the	High
Court.
G.N.						      Appeal
allowed.
793




