
Supreme Court of India
Taza Sarbaaz vs State Of Jammu & Kashmir on 5 October, 2010Author: .......................J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           WP(Crl.) No. 206 OF 2006

                                             1





                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF  INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION                  

                                  WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO. 206 OF 2006





        TAZA SARBAZ                                    ..  PETITIONER(S)

                                   vs.

        THE STATE OF JAMMU & KASHMIR                   ..  RESPONDENT(S)





                                                       O R D E R

     1.     We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.




         2.         We are told by the learned counsel for the State of 

         Jammu and Kashmir that the petitioner has indeed undergone 

         more  than   ten  years   of  the   sentence  under   Section  25(1A) 

         of the Arms Act, 1959, for which he had been prosecuted. 

         In other words, as of today, the petitioner has served out 

         the   maximum   sentence   that   could   be   awarded   to   him.     We 

         also   see   from   the   detention   orders   passed   from   time   to 

         time including the last one dated 25th January, 2010, which 

         states that the petitioner had been detained for a period 

         of  24   months  or   till  arrangements   for  his   deportation  to 

         his  native   country  are   made,  whichever   was  earlier.     The 

         learned State counsel very fairly states that no attempts 


WP(Crl.) No. 206 OF 2006

                                              2





         had   been   made   so   far   to   deport   the   petitioner   to   his 

         native   country   i.e.   Afghanistan.     We   have   gone   through 

         several detention orders in which identical directions has 

         been made but admittedly no steps have been taken to carry 

         out  the   directives.  Our   attention  has   also  been   drawn  to 

         the   opinion   of   the   Advisory   Board   dated   18th  February, 

         2000,   by   the   learned   Amicus   Curiae   when   the   Board   had 

         reluctantly   approved   the   detention   of   the   petitioner   for 

         another  period   of  24   months  but   it  had   been  specifically 

         directed   that   the   continued   detention   of   the   petitioner 

         was  unbecoming   as  no   efforts  had   been  made   for  deporting 

         him.   We   also   notice   that   all   the   orders   of   the   Advisory 

         Board     have   not   been   placed   on   record   and   we   are   thus 

         unable   to   see   whether   such   directions   had   been   made   in 

         them   as   well.     Unfortunately,   even   the   order   of   18th 

         February,   2000,   has   not   been   honoured   by   the   respondents 

         and   the   only   justification   given   now   by   the   learned 

         counsel is that as the prosecution under the Arms Act was 

         pending against the petitioner, he could not be deported. 

         We find this argument to be untenable at this stage and is 

         redundant as well because the maximum sentence that could 

         be imposed on the petitioner has already been undergone by 

         him.


         3.         We, accordingly, direct that the petitioner shall be 


WP(Crl.) No. 206 OF 2006

                                                 3





         deported to Afghanistan, his home country within a period 

         of   three   months   from   today   in   accordance   with   the 

         directions   which   have   been   given   by   this   Court   in   a 

         similar matter i.e. Bhim Singh v. Union of India & Ors. in 

         Writ   Petition   No.   310   of   2005   decided   on   20th  September, 

         2007.


         4.         We   also   make   it   clear   that   if   this   order   is   not 

         complied   with   we   will   consider   burdening   the   respondents 

         with   very   heavy   compensation   for   the   continued   detention 

         of   the   petitioner   and   pass   other   orders   as   well. 

         Compliance   report   be   submitted   within   four   months   from 

         today.


         5.         The   petition   is,   accordingly,   disposed   of   as 

         infructuous.

           6.         Fee of Amicus is fixed at Rs. 7,000/-.



                                                .......................J.
                                                   (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)
                           



                                                                       
                                                 .......................J.
                                         (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)
        New Delhi,
     October 05, 2010.



