
Supreme Court of India
D T Virupakshappa vs C Subash on 27 April, 2015Author: Kurian
Bench: Anil R. Dave, Kurian Joseph
            

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CRIMINAL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION


                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 722  OF 2015
               (Arising from S.L.P. (Criminal) No. 6684/2013)

D. T. Virupakshappa                                … Appellant (s)


                                   Versus

C. Subash                                          … Respondent (s)


                               J U D G M E N T

KURIAN, J.:

Leave granted.

  Appellant  is  the  accused  in  a  private   complaint   filed   by   the
respondent/complainant   before   Civil   Judge   (Jr.Div)   and   JMFC   at
Chikkanayakanahalli,  Karnataka,  on  which  the  learned  Magistrate   took
cognizance, registered the case as C.C. No. 74/2009 and  issued  summons  to
the appellant. The case  was  registered  under                     Sections
323, 324, 326, 341, 120, 114, 506 read with Section 149 of the Indian  Penal
Code (45 of 1860) (hereinafter referred to as ‘IPC’).

The appellant moved the  High  Court  under  Section  482  of  The  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred  to  as  ‘CrPC’),  which  was
declined by the impugned order.

The facts and reasons, as stated in the impugned order, read as follows:

“6.   A perusal of the averments in the complaint, sworn  statement  of  the
complainant and his witnesses go to show that the complainant was picked  up
from his garden land at  about  10.00  a.m.  on  6/6/2006  in  the  morning.
Further averment reveals that this petitioner came  to  the  police  station
later in the evening and detained him till  10.00  p.m.  and  also  directed
that he should not be let-out till  he  reveals  or  confesses  that  he  is
involved in the murder of one Sannamma. These allegations in  the  complaint
are further corroborated in the sworn statement of the complainant which  is
further fortified from the sworn statement of  his  two  witnesses,  namely,
PWs. 2 and 3. The Court at this stage  is  required  to  consider  only  the
sworn  statement  of  the  complainant  and  his  witnesses  to  come  to  a
conclusion whether a prima facie case is made out for registering  the  case
and issuing summons. It is not the stage  for  the  Court  to  consider  the
defence of the accused as the same is well settled  by  the  Apex  Court  as
long as in the year 1976 in the case of Nagawwa Vs.  V.S.  Kojalgi  reported
in (1976) 3 SCC 736. In the present case, the allegation in  the  complaint,
sworn statement of the complainant and his two witnesses  clearly  make  out
the offences alleged against the petitioner and other accused. If  according
to the petitioner, it is a false and fictitious complaint, it is for him  to
bring those materials when the said case is  set  down  for  hearing  before
charge before the learned Magistrate. It is too premature at this  stage  to
consider the case of the petitioner while looking into the material  whether
the prima facie case is made out or not as alleged by the complainant. …”



 The main contention of the appellant is that the learned  Magistrate  could
not have taken cognizance of the alleged offence and issued process  to  the
appellant without sanction from the State Government under  Section  197  of
CrPC, and that on that sole ground, the High Court should have  quashed  the
proceedings.

The question, whether sanction is necessary or not, may arise on  any  stage
of the proceedings, and in a given case,  it  may  arise  at  the  stage  of
inception as held by this Court  in  Om  Prakash  and  others  v.  State  of
Jharkhand  Through  The  Secretary,  Department  of  Home,  Ranchi   1   and
another[1]. To quote:

“41. The upshot of this discussion is that whether sanction is necessary  or
not has to be decided from stage to stage. This question may  arise  at  any
stage of the proceeding. In a given case, it may  arise  at  the  inception.
There may be unassailable and unimpeachable circumstances  on  record  which
may establish at the outset that the police officer or  public  servant  was
acting in performance of his official duty and  is  entitled  to  protection
given under Section 197 of the Code. It is not possible for us to hold  that
in such a case, the court cannot look into any  documents  produced  by  the
accused or the public servant concerned at the inception. The nature of  the
complaint may have to be kept in mind. It must be remembered  that  previous
sanction is a  precondition  for  taking  cognizance  of  the  offence  and,
therefore, there is no requirement that  the  accused  must  wait  till  the
charges are framed to raise this plea. ...”

In the case before us, the allegation is  that  the  appellant  exceeded  in
exercising his power during investigation of a criminal case  and  assaulted
the respondent in order to extract  some  information  with  regard  to  the
death of one Sannamma, and in that connection, the respondent  was  detained
in the police station for some time. Therefore, the alleged conduct  has  an
essential connection with the discharge of the official duty. Under  Section
197 of CrPC, in case, the Government servant accused of  an  offence,  which
is alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting  to  act
in discharge of his official duty, the previous sanction is necessary.
The issue  of  ‘police  excess’  during  investigation  and  requirement  of
sanction for prosecution in that regard, was  also  the  subject  matter  of
State of Orissa Through Kumar Raghvendra Singh and others v. Ganesh  Chandra
Jew[2], wherein, at               paragraph-7, it has been held as follows:

“7. The protection given under Section 197 is to protect responsible  public
servants against the institution of possibly vexatious criminal  proceedings
for offences alleged to have been committed by them while  they  are  acting
or purporting to act as public servants. The policy of  the  legislature  is
to afford adequate protection to public servants to  ensure  that  they  are
not prosecuted for anything done by them in the discharge of their  official
duties without reasonable cause, and if sanction is granted,  to  confer  on
the Government, if they choose to  exercise  it,  complete  control  of  the
prosecution. This protection has certain limits and is available  only  when
the alleged act done by the public servant is reasonably connected with  the
discharge of his official duty and is not  merely  a  cloak  for  doing  the
objectionable act. If in doing his official duty, he acted in excess of  his
duty, but  there  is  a  reasonable  connection  between  the  act  and  the
performance of the official duty,  the  excess  will  not  be  a  sufficient
ground to deprive the public servant of the protection. The question is  not
as to the nature  of  the  offence  such  as  whether  the  alleged  offence
contained an element necessarily dependent upon the offender being a  public
servant, but whether it was committed by a  public  [pic]servant  acting  or
purporting to act as such in the discharge of his official capacity.  Before
Section 197 can be invoked, it must be shown  that  the  official  concerned
was accused of an offence alleged  to  have  been  committed  by  him  while
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties.  It  is
not the duty which requires examination so much  as  the  act,  because  the
official act can be performed both in the discharge of the official duty  as
well as in dereliction of it. The act must fall within the scope  and  range
of the official duties of the public servant concerned. It  is  the  quality
of the act which  is  important  and  the  protection  of  this  section  is
available if the act falls within the scope and range of his official  duty.
…”
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)


In Om Prakash (supra), this Court, after  referring  to  various  decisions,
particularly pertaining to the police excess, summed-up  the  guidelines  at
paragraph-32, which reads as follows:

“32. The true test as to whether a public servant was acting  or  purporting
to act in discharge of his duties would be whether  the  act  complained  of
was directly connected with his official  duties  or  it  was  done  in  the
discharge of his official duties or it was so integrally connected  with  or
attached to his office as to be inseparable from it (K. Satwant Singh).  The
protection given under Section 197 of the Code has  certain  limits  and  is
available  only  when  the  alleged  act  done  by  the  public  servant  is
reasonably connected with the discharge of his  official  duty  and  is  not
merely a cloak for doing the objectionable act. If  in  doing  his  official
duty, he acted in excess of his duty, but there is a  reasonable  connection
between the act and the performance of the official duty,  the  excess  will
not be a sufficient ground to deprive the public servant of  the  protection
(Ganesh Chandra Jew). If the above tests are applied to  the  facts  of  the
present case, the police must get protection given under Section 197 of  the
Code because the acts complained of are  so  integrally  connected  with  or
attached to their office as to be inseparable from it. It  is  not  possible
for us to come to a conclusion that the  protection  granted  under  Section
197 of the Code is used by the police personnel in this case as a cloak  for
killing the deceased in cold blood.”
                                                         (Emphasis supplied)


In our view, the  above  guidelines  squarely  apply  in  the  case  of  the
appellant herein. Going by the factual matrix, it is evident that the  whole
allegation is on police excess in connection with  the  investigation  of  a
criminal case. The said offensive conduct is reasonably connected  with  the
performance of the official duty of the appellant.  Therefore,  the  learned
Magistrate could not have taken cognizance of the case without the  previous
sanction of the State Government. The High Court missed this  crucial  point
in the impugned order.
The appeal is hence allowed. The impugned order by the  High  Court  is  set
aside, so also, the proceedings initiated by the Civil  Judge  (Jr.Div)  and
JMFC at Chikkanayakanahalli,  Karnataka  in               C.C.  No.  74/2009
taking cognizance and issuing process to the appellant.  It  is  made  clear
that our judgment is  only  on  the  issue  of  sanction  and  we  have  not
considered the matter on merits and that this judgment shall  not  stand  in
the way of respondent approaching the State Government  for  sanction  under
Section 197 of CrPC. In case such sanction  is  obtained  and  the  same  is
produced before the learned Magistrate, the Magistrate may  proceed  further
in the case in accordance with the law.

                                                            ....…….…..…………J.
                  (ANIL R. DAVE)



                                                               ...……………………J.
                 (KURIAN JOSEPH)
New Delhi;
April 27, 2015.

ITEM NO.1A              COURT NO.4               SECTION IIB
               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Criminal Appeal  No(s).722 of 2015 @ SLP(Crl.) No. 6684/2013

D T VIRUPAKSHAPPA                                  Appellant(s)

                                VERSUS
C SUBASH                                           Respondent(s)
[HEARD BY HON'BLE ANIL R.DAVE AND HON'BLE KURIAN JOSEPH, JJ.]

Date    :    27/04/2015    This     appeal     was     called     on     for
judgment today.

For Appellant(s) Mr. B. Subrahmanya Prasad,Adv.

For Respondent(s)

            Hon'ble Mr. Justice Kurian Joseph  pronounced  the  judgment  of
the Bench comprising Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anil R. Dave and His Lordship.

            For the reasons recorded in the Reportable  judgment,  which  is
placed on the file, the appeal is allowed.  The impugned order by  the  High
Court is set aside, so also, the proceedings initiated by  the  Civil  Judge
(Jr. Div) and JMFC at Chikkanayakanahalli, Karnataka  in  C.C.  No.  74/2009
taking cognizance and issuing process to the appellant.  It  is  made  clear
that our judgment is  only  on  the  issue  of  sanction  and  we  have  not
considered the matter on merits and that this judgment shall  not  stand  in
the way of respondent approaching the State Government  for  sanction  under
Section 197 of Cr.P.C. In case such sanction is obtained  and  the  same  is
produced before the learned Magistrate, the Magistrate may  proceed  further
in the case in accordance with the law.

(Parveen Kr. Chawla)                    (Renuka Sadana)
    Court Master                               Court Master
-----------------------
[1]    (2012) 12 SCC 72
[2]    (2004) 8 SCC 40

-----------------------
                                                                  REPORTABLE


-----------------------
9



