
Supreme Court of India
Balaji Gunthu Dhule vs State Of Maharashtra on 19 September, 2012Author: ........................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                                             REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPRENE COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.784 OF 2008


BALAJI GUNTHU DHULE                          ...APPELLANT

                       VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                       ...RESPONDENT

                                  O R D E R

1). This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and  order
passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay,  Bench  at  Aurangabad  in
Criminal Appeal No.108 of 2004 dated 19.10.2005.

2). The appellant, before us  is  convicted  under  Section  302  read  with
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (“IPC” for  short)  and  sentenced
to imprisonment for life, by the Trial Court, on the allegation that he  has
caused the death of one Ranga Rao in a quarrel which  ensued  between  Ranga
Rao and one Smt. Shantabai (other accused who  expired  during  the  trial).
The Prosecution, in support of its case,  had  examined  several  witnesses,
including six eye—witnesses— P.Ws. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10.  The  Trial  Court,
taking into consideration the evidence of P.Ws. 4,  5,  7,  8  and  10,  has
convicted and sentenced the appellant and two others, as mentioned  earlier.
Aggrieved by the said judgment and order passed  by  the  Trial  Court,  the
appellant and two others were before the  High  Court  in  an  appeal  filed
under Section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973 (“the Code”  for
short).

3). The High Court, after re-appreciation of the  evidence  on  record,  has
acquitted the two other accused, but has convicted the  appellant  only  for
an offence under Section  302  of  the  I.P.C.  It  is  the  correctness  or
otherwise of the said order which is called in  question  by  the  appellant
before us.

4). We have heard learned counsel for the parties to the lis.

5). Learned counsel appearing for the appellant has  taken  us  through  the
judgment and order passed by the High Court. We gather  on  perusal  of  the
judgment that the High Court after detailed consideration  of  the  evidence
of P.Ws. 4, 5, 7 and 8 has rejected the same for  the  reasons  assigned  in
the judgment.  However, it has  confirmed  the  order  of  the  Trial  Court
primarily based on the evidence of PW-10, that too by drawing a  distinction
based on the analysis of the question: “whether P.W.10 was  present  at  the
time of the incident or at least after the incident.”  The High Court  comes
to the conclusion and records that since P.W.10 had taken  the  deceased  to
the hospital, he could have been present at least after the incident.

6). To come to a conclusion that P.W.10 was  present  at  the  time  of  the
incident, strangely, in our opinion, the High  Court  has  relied  upon  the
statement made by the accused-appellant under Section 313 of  the  Code.  In
our opinion, first and foremost, as the law stands today, the  statement  of
the accused recorded under Section 313 of the Code  cannot  be  put  against
the accused person. The courts may rely on a portion  of  the  statement  of
the accused and find him guilty  in  consideration  of  the  other  evidence
against him led by the prosecution.  The statement made under  this  Section
should not be considered in  isolation  but  in  conjunction  with  evidence
adduced by the prosecution.
7). This Court in Manu Sao v.  State  of  Bihar,  (2010)  12  SCC  310,  has
examined the vital features of Section 313 of the Code  and  the  principles
of law as enunciated by judgments, analysing the guiding factors for  proper
application and consequences that shall flow from  the  said  provision  and
has observed :

   “14. The statement of the accused can be used to test  the  veracity  of
   the exculpatory nature of the admission, if any, made by the accused. It
   can be taken into consideration in any enquiry or trial but still it  is
   not strictly evidence in the case.  The  provisions  of  Section  313(4)
   explicitly provides that the answers given by the accused may  be  taken
   into consideration in such enquiry or trial and put in evidence  against
   the accused in any other enquiry or trial  for  any  other  offence  for
   which such answers may tend to show he has committed.  In  other  words,
   the use is permissible as per the provisions of the Code but has its own
   limitations. The courts may rely on a portion of the  statement  of  the
   accused and find him guilty  in  consideration  of  the  other  evidence
   against him led by the prosecution, however, such statements made  under
   this section should not be considered in isolation  but  in  conjunction
   with evidence adduced by the prosecution.

   15.   Another  important  caution  that  courts  have  declared  in  the
   pronouncements is that conviction of the accused cannot be based  merely
   on the statement made under Section 313 of the  Code  as  it  cannot  be
   regarded as a substantive piece  of  evidence.  In  Vijendrajit  Ayodhya
   Prasad Goel v. State of Bombay (AIR) 1953 SC  247,  the  Court  held  as
   under: (AIR p. 248, para 3)

        “3. ... As the appellant admitted that he  was  in  charge  of  the
        godown, further evidence was not led on the point.  The  Magistrate
        was in this situation fully justified in referring to the statement
        of the accused under Section 342 as supporting the prosecution case
        concerning the possession of the godown. The  contention  that  the
        Magistrate made use  of  the  inculpatory  part  of  the  accused’s
        statement and excluded the exculpatory part does  not  seem  to  be
        correct. The statement under Section 342 did  not  consist  of  two
        portions, part  inculpatory  and  part  exculpatory.  It  concerned
        itself with two facts. The accused admitted that he was  in  charge
        of the godown, he denied that the rectified  spirit  was  found  in
        that godown. He alleged that the rectified spirit was found outside
        it. This part of his statement was proved untrue by the prosecution
        evidence  and  had  no  intimate  connection  with  the   statement
        concerning the possession of the godown.”


   16.  On similar lines reference can be made to a quite  recent  judgment
   of this Court in Ajay Singh v. State of Maharashtra, (2007) 12 SCC  341,
   where the Court held as under: (SCC p. 347, paras 11-13)

         “11. So far as the prosecution case that kerosene was found on the
         accused’s dress is concerned, it is to be noted that  no  question
         in this regard was put to the accused while he was examined  under
         Section 313 of the Code.

         12.  The purpose of Section 313 of the Code  is  set  out  in  its
         opening  words  -  `for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the   accused
         personally to explain any circumstances appearing in the  evidence
         against him’. In Hate Singh Bhagat Singh v. State of Madhya Bharat
         it has been laid down by Bose, J. (AIR p. 469, para  8)  that  the
         statements of the accused persons recorded under  Section  313  of
         the Code ‘are among the most important matters to be considered at
         the trial’.  It was pointed out that: (AIR p. 470, para 8)


           ‘8. ... The statements of the accused recorded by the committing
           Magistrate and the Sessions Judge are intended in India to  take
           the place of what in England and in America he would be free  to
           state in his own way in the witness box [and that they] have  to
           be received in evidence and treated  as  evidence  and  be  duly
           considered at the trial.’“


         This position  remains  unaltered  even  after  the  insertion  of
         Section 315 in the Code and any statement under Section 313 has to
         be considered in the same way as if Section 315 is not there.

         13. The object of examination under this section is  to  give  the
         accused an opportunity to explain the case made against him.  This
         statement can be taken into consideration in judging his innocence
         or guilt. Where there is an onus on the accused to  discharge,  it
         depends on the  facts  and  circumstances  of  the  case  if  such
         statement discharges the onus.”




   17. The statement made by the accused is capable of being  used  in  the
   trial though to a limited extent. But the law also places an  obligation
   upon the court to take into consideration the stand of  the  accused  in
   his statement and consider the same objectively  and  in  its  entirety.
   This principle of law has been stated by this Court in Hate Singh Bhagat
   Singh v. State of Madhya Bharat. (AIR) 1953 SC 468.”



8). Herein, the appellant in his statement under Section  313  of  the  Code
admits that there was a quarrel between  Shantabai  (deceased  accused)  and
P.W.1O and while rushing to the spot of quarrel the  deceased  involuntarily
fell on a cement concrete platform - Otta and  thereby  suffered  the  fatal
injury. The prosecution story was that a quarrel between  the  deceased  and
Shantabai in fact took place, however, the fatal  injury  was  caused  by  a
deliberate blow by the appellant on the deceased. In our opinion,  there  is
absolute contradiction in  the  statement  made  by  the  appellant  in  his
statement under Section 313 of the Code and that statement  could  not  have
been put against the accused in concluding that P.W.1O was  present  at  the
place of incident at or immediately after the occurrence  of  the  incident.
Therefore, the said witness, in our opinion, cannot be  considered  as  eye-
witness to the incident as such.

9). The High Court has  also  relied  upon  the  postmortem  report  of  the
Doctor. In our opinion, since the entire evidence of the  eye—witnesses  has
not been accepted by the High Court, it could not have  merely  relied  upon
the postmortem report to convict the appellant for an offence under  Section
302 of the I.P.C. Further, in our view, the postmortem report should  be  in
corroboration with the evidence of eye—witnesses and cannot be  an  evidence
sufficient to reach the conclusion for convicting the appellant. In view  of
the above, we have no other alternative but to allow  this  appeal  and  set
aside the judgment and  order  passed  by  the  High  Court  convicting  the
appellant for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the I.P.C.

10. In the  result,  the  appeal  is  allowed  with  a  direction  that  the
appellant-accused be released forthwith, if he is not required in any  other
offence/case.

      Ordered accordingly.

                                                  ........................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)



                                                  ........................J.
                                                   (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)
NEW DELHI,
SEPTEMBER 19, 2012.
-----------------------
10
