
Supreme Court of India
Raghubir Singh vs State Of Haryana on 12 February, 1974Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR  677, 1974 SCR  (3) 356
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
RAGHUBIR SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/02/1974

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1974 AIR  677		  1974 SCR  (3) 356
 1975 SCC  (3)	37
 CITATOR INFO :
 MV	    1982 SC1325	 (69)


ACT:
Murder--Death	penalty	  when	can  be	 reduced   to	life
imprisonment.



HEADNOTE:
The appellant developed illicit intimacy with the  deceased.
When the deceased feigned pregnancy and pressed him to marry
her,  he  gave her a deadly poison mixed in  milk.   On	 the
death of the deceased he wrapped the dead body in a  blanket
and left it in a railway compartment.  He was convicted	 and
sentenced to death.
On appeal to this Court on the question of sentence
HELD  :	 While	murder in its aggravated  form	and  in	 the
absence	  of  extenuating  factors  connected  with   crime,
criminal  or legal process, still is condignly visited	with
death	penalty,   a  compassionate  alternative   of	life
imprisonment in all other circumstances is gaining  judicial
ground. [357 G-H]
In the instant case a few ameliorative features fall to
be  noticed since judicial temper has more  components	than
indignation   against  murder.	The  appellant	is  in	 his
twenties,  not	 irrelevant in considering  death  sentence.
He  was	 a married man.	 He was promiscuous  with  women,  a
salacious  sin	for which the deceased was  a  contributory.
The  latter's  pressure to get him to marry  her  must	have
planted the seed of murderous thought in him.  He  bargained
for  romance,  encouraged by the-victim	 but  her  pretended
pregnancy upset the appellant.	Some planning and  treachery
have aggravated the crime.  Yet another circumstance is that
the man was sentenced to death nearly two years ago and	 the
specter	 of  death  penalty must have  tormented  his  soul.
Taken  separately,  none  of these matters  may	 suffice  to
commute but the conspectus of factors, personal and  social,
tilt the scales in favour of life term.	 L357 El



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL, APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No. 124
of 1973.
Appeal	by special leave from the judgment and	order  dated
the 30th November, 1972 of the Punjab and Haryana High Court
in  Criminal Appeal No. 632 of 1972 and Murder Ref.  No.  27
of 1972.
Nuruddin Ahmed and S. K. Mehta, for the appellant.
Gautam Goswami and R. N. Sachthey, for the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA IYER, J. A young woman was vomitted into death by  a
young  man by giving her a cup of milk mixed with  a  lethal
dose  of stricnine.  He, along with two others, bundled	 the
cadaver	 into  a  Delhibound train  but	 the  coach  cleaner
discovered  it,	 the police unearthed the crime,  the  court
convicted  the	culprits awarding capital  sentence  to	 the
killer and lighter punishments to the two accessories  after
the  fact,  under  S. 201, I.P.C.  Special  leave  has	been
granted to the only appellant on the sole ground of sentence
and so our scrutiny is confined to the circumstances of	 the
crime	and  criminal  and  the	 penological  propriety	  of
inflicting the higher or lesser punishment.
357
Twenty	six-years-old  Raghubir Singh--the  appellant-was  a
lesser	official  in the Malaria Eradication  Department  in
Gorior,	 a village in Rajasthan.  He became friends  with  a
veterinary   official,	Sri  Sharma,  P.W.  13,	 and  by   a
concatenation  of innocent circumstances the appellant	came
into  carnal  comity with Kailashwati, the  2nd	 accused,  a
midwife	 in  a	local hospital.	 Later,	 the  appellant	 was
transferred  to a village Mandhapia in the  Family  Planning
Department  where he came across Sushma Thomas, a  nurse  in
the same department.	 Prurient   Raghubir  picked  up   a
liaison with this malayalee belle  older  to  him  by	five
years and-going by the medical evidence, not a	  virgin.
She  seems  to have feigned pregnancy probably	to  force  a
matrimony  for	which Raghubir was  reluctant.	 After	many
twists	and turns of events, on June 6, 1971, the  appellant
secured half a grain of stricnine hydrochloride from Sharma,
the  friend, on the pretext that it was needed	for  killing
stray dogs.  This Sharma's naivete in supplying poison looks
suspicious  and	 it  is for Government	to  look  into,	 re-
membering that he was more than a dispensing chemist in this
case.  Anyway, the amorous pair spent the night of the	10th
June  at the quarters of the 2nd accused, and the  appellant
brought-milk for the deceased who consumed the cup of death.
After  agonising hours of vomitting struggle,  she  breathed
her  last,  was	 wrapped in a blanket and  given  a  railway
burial.
The  criminal  act was treacherous murder and  deserved	 the
sterner	 sentence.  But a few ameliorative features fall  to
be  noticed since judicial temper has more  components	than
indignation against murder.  The convict is in his twenties,
not irrelevant in considering death sentence.  He is said to
be  a  married	man.   He  was	promiscuous  With  women,  a
salacious  sin	for which the deceased was  a  contributory.
The  latter's  pressure to get him to marry  her  must	have
planted the seed of murderous thought in him.  He  bargained
for  romance,  encouraged by the victim but  the  pregnancy-
though pretended-in a society which views unmarried  mothers
as  vicious upset the appellant.  These have no	 bearing  on
guilt at all but attenuate the lethal touch of the sentence.
Some planning and treachery have aggravated the crime, which
also must not be overlooked.  Yet another circumstance.	 The
man  was sentenced to death as early as 23rd May, 1972,	 and
for  twenty  months the specter of death penalty  must	have
tormented  his	soul.  Taken separately, none of  these	 may
suffice	 to commute but the conspectus of factors,  personal
and  social, tilt the scales in favour of a life  term.	  We
have  in  another case discussed at some length	 how  modern
penology  leans less towards death penalty and the winds  of
criminological	change blow over Indian	 statutory  thought.
While  murder in its aggravated form and in the	 absence  of
extenuating factors connected with crime, criminal or  legal
process,  still is condignly visited with death	 penalty,  a
compassionate alternative of life imprisonment in all  other
circumstances is gaining judicial ground.. Taking an overall
view  of forensic clemency we modify the death sentence	 and
direct the appellant to suffer imprisonment for life.
P.B.R.			       Appeal  allowed in part.
358




