
Supreme Court of India
Sonvir @ Somvir vs The State Of Delhi on 2 July, 2018Author: ........................J.
Bench: A Bhushan
                                                                                       1


                                                                             REPORTABLE



                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 958 OF 2017


           SONVIR @ SOMVIR                                          ... APPELLANT

                                              VERSUS

           THE STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                                ... RESPONDENT




                                           J U D G M E N T

           ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.


                         I have gone through the elaborate judgment prepared

           by Sister Justice Indu Malhotra.

           2.            The   appellant   has   been    convicted    under    Sections

           302, 392 read with Section 34 of the IPC by Addl.

           Sessions Judge-02:South East Saket Court, New Delhi.

           The           appeal    against     the     conviction    has     also   been

           dismissed by the Delhi High Court by judgment dated
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.07.02
16:49:12 IST
Reason:
           10.12.2014.             Detailed      facts   of   the     case    including
                                                                    2


prosecution case and the evidence on record have been

elaborately noted by Sister Justice Indu Malhotra in

her judgment. Hence, I feel no necessity to repeat the

same. After elaborate consideration of entire evidence

on record Sister Justice Indu Malhotra has come to the

conclusion that appeal should be allowed and appellant

be acquitted.

3.     I fully agree with the above view of the Sister

Justice Indu Malhotra. However, an important question

of law pertaining to interpretation of Sections 4 and 5

of   the   Identification     of    Prisoners    Act,    1920   being

involved in the present appeal, I proceed to consider

the same and give my reasons.


4.     Now, I proceed to examine the provisions of the

Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920.


5.     The statement of objects and reasons provides a

fair    idea   of   the   purpose   and   object   for    which   the

Identification      of    Prisoners    Act,     1920    (hereinafter
                                                       3


referred to as ‘1920 Act’) was enacted. The statement

of objects and reasons reads:

      “The object of this Bill is to provide legal
      authority for the taking of measurements,
      finger    impressions,     foot-prints     and
      photographs of persons convicted of, or
      arrested   in   connection    with,    certain
      offences. The value of the scientific use of
      finger impressions and photographs as agents
      in   the   detection   of   crime   and    the
      identification of criminals is well known,
      and modern development in England and other
      European countries renders it unnecessary to
      enlarge upon the need for the proposed
      legislation.

      The existing system by which the police in
      India takes finger impressions, photographs,
      etc., of criminals and suspected criminals
      is void of legal sanction, except as regards
      registered members of criminal tribes, in
      whose case provision exists for the taking
      of finger impressions in section 9 of the
      Criminal Tribes Act, 1911 (III of 1911). The
      need for legalizing the practice has long
      been recognised, but it was not thought
      expedient to take the matter up so long as
      no practical difficulties arose.   Instances
      have   recently   been   reported   to   the
      Government of India where prisoners have
      refused to allow their finger prints or
      photographs to be taken. With a view to
      prevent such refusals in future it is
      considered necessary without further delay
      to place the taking of measurements, etc.,
      which is a normal incident of police work in
                                                                          4


         India as elsewhere, on a regular footing. No
         measurement, etc., of any person will be
         taken compulsorily unless that person has
         been arrested.”



6.   The above objects and reasons notice that under the

existing    system       the   Police    in   India      takes     finger

impressions,       photographs      etc.      of      criminals         and

suspected criminals, which is void of legal sanction.

Thus, the above mischief was sought to be remedied by

the 1920 Act.      In last part of the statement of objects

and reasons the purpose has been clearly mentioned i.e.

“with a view to prevent such refusals in future it is

considered necessary without further delay to place the

taking     of    measurements,     etc.,      which      is   a    normal

incident of Police work in India as elsewhere, on a

regular footing”.

7.   Now,   we    come    to   Section   3,   4    and   5    which     are

relevant for the present purpose. Section 3 provides

for taking of measurements of convicted persons which

is as follows:

         “3.   Taking  of   measurements etc.,                     of
         convicted persons.– Every person who                     has
         been–
                                                      5


      (a) convicted of any offence punishable with
      rigorous imprisonment for a term of one year
      or upwards, or of any offence which would
      render him liable to enhanced punishment on
      a subsequent conviction; or

      (b) ordered to give security for his good
      behaviour under section 118 of the Code of
      Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)shall,
      if so required, allow his measurements and
      photograph to be taken by a police officer
      in the prescribed manner.”

    Section 4 deals with taking of measurements of non-

convicted persons which is to the following effect:

      “4. Taking of measurements, etc., of non-
      convicted persons.– Any person who has been
      arrested in connection with an offence
      punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a
      term of one year or upwards shall, if so
      required by a police officer, allow his
      measurements to be taken in the prescribed
      manner.”


    Section 5 deals with the power of Magistrate to

order a person to be measured or photographed which is

as follows:

      “5. Power of Magistrate to order a person to
      be   measured   or   photographed.–   If   a
      Magistrate   is  satisfied  that,   for  the
      purposes of any investigation or proceeding
      under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
                                                                    6


        it is expedient to direct any person to
        allow his measurements or photograph to be
        taken, he may make an order to that effect,
        and in that case the person to whom the
        order relates shall be produced or shall
        attend at the time and place specified in
        the order and shall allow his measurements
        or photograph to be taken, as the case may
        be, by a police officer:

          Provided that no order shall be made
        directing any person to be photographed
        except by a Magistrate of the First Class:

          Provided further, that no order shall be
        made under this section unless the person
        has at some time been arrested in connection
        with such investigation or proceeding.”



8.   The scheme of the Act indicates that Section 3,

Section 4 and Section 5 are separate and independent

provisions    pertaining     to    taking     of    measurements.

Measurement   has   been    defined   under   Section      2(a)   to

include finger impression and footprint impression. In

the present case, it is the Police Officer, who have

taken   fingerprints   of    the   appellant       after   he     was

arrested which is referable to Section 4 of the Act.



9.   The High Court in paras 22 and 23 of the judgment

has dealt with the chance print. In para 22, High Court
                                                                     7


has observed that the specimen chance print of Sonvir

alias   Somvir    was   not   taken   in    the   presence      of   a

Magistrate. In para 23 of the judgment reasons have

been    given    for    discarding    the    evidence      of   palm

impression of appellant.          Following three reasons are

decipherable from the judgment:

        i.    The Full Bench judgment of the Delhi
        High Court in Sapan Haldar & Another vs.
        State 191 (2012) DLT 225 lays down that only
        when   by   way   of   rules  or   executive
        instruction the manner is prescribed to take
        the measurements then alone an IO under
        Section 4 of the 1920 Act can obtain the
        measurements.

        ii.   It would be eminently desirable as per
        the decision in Mohd. Aman and Anr. vs.
        State of Rajasthan (1997) 10 SCC 44 to
        follow the procedure ordained under Section
        5 of 1920 Act.

        iii. No rules having been framed in Delhi
        and procedure as prescribed under Section 5
        of the 1920 Act having not been followed we
        would discard the evidence of the palm
        impression of Sonvir alias Somvir.

10. Now, we proceed to examine the above reasons.



11. The Full Bench Judgment of the Delhi High Court in

Sapan   Haldar    and   Another    (supra)    has   been    heavily
                                                                           8


relied by the High Court. The above full Bench was

constituted on the subject of admissibility of samples,

hand    writing      or    signatures        obtained    from     a   person

accused       of     having       committed        an   offence       during

investigation of a crime by the IO.


12.     In    para    1    of    the    judgment    while    noticing   the

subject matter of reference, the Full Bench has also

noticed      an    earlier      Full    Bench     judgment   in   Bhupinder

Singh vs. State, decided on 30.09.2011.


13. Before we proceed further, it is necessary to note

the Full Bench judgment of the Delhi High Court. In

Bhupinder Singh vs. State,(Crl.A.No.1005/2008, decided

on    30.09.2011)      para      1     of   the   judgment   notices     the

question which has been referred for adjudication by a

larger bench.             Para 1 of the judgment of               Bhupinder

Singh (supra) is as follows:

        “1.   Expressing doubt with regard to the
        correctness of the decisions in Harpal Singh
        v. State (Criminal Appeal No. 362/2008
        decided on 25th May, 2010) and Satyawan v.
        State (Criminal Appeal No. 34/2001 decided on
        9th July, 2009) wherein the two Division
        Benches had ignored the part of the report of
                                                                     9


        the handwriting expert on the ground that the
        investigating officer had taken specimen
        handwriting in violation of the provisions of
        the   Identification    of   Prisoners   Act,
        1920( for brevity ‘the 1920 Act’), the
        Division Bench that was hearing the Criminal
        Appeals No. 1005/2008[Bhupender Singh v. The
        State (Govt. Of NCT of Delhi)] and No.
        408/2007 [Drojan Singh v. The State (Govt. Of
        NCT of Delhi)], referred the following
        question to be adjudicated by a larger Bench:

          “Whether the sample finger prints given by
        the   accused   during  investigation   under
        Section 4 of the Identification of Prisoners
        Act, 1920 without prior permission of the
        Magistrate under Section 5 of the Act will be
        admissible or not?”

        Under these circumstances,        the      matter    has
        been placed before us.”



14. Full Bench in Bhupinder Singh’s case after noticing

Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the 1920 Act and referring to

the judgments of this Court in Shankaria vs. State of

Rajasthan, (1978) 3 SCC 435; Mohd. Aman and Another vs.

State   of   Rajasthan,   (1997)   10   SCC   44    and     State   of

Madhya Pradesh vs. Devendra (2009) 14 SCC 80 as well as

State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Ram Babu Misra, (1980) 2 SCC

343, approved the view of learned Single Judge in Sunil
                                                      10


Kumar @ Sonu vs. State of NCT of Delhi(Crl.A.No.446 of

2005) case. In para 22 of the judgment Full Bench held:

      “22. Thus understood, in our considered
      opinion, the view expressed in the decisions
      in Harpal Singh (supra) and Satyawan (supra)
      is not the correct view. Therefore, the
      decisions    rendered   therein are   hereby
      overruled. The view expressed in the case of
      Sunil Kumar (supra) by the learned Single
      Judge   lays    down  the   law in   correct
      perspective.”



15. Sunil Kumar’s case which was approved by the Full

Bench has been noticed in para 10, which is to the

following effect:

      “10. It is worth noting that a Single Judge
      of this Court in Sunil Kumar @ Sonu Vs State
      of NCT of Delhi, Crl.A. No. 446 of 2005
      decided on 25.3.2010, without taking note of
      the Division Bench decisions, has held thus:

            “26. It is true that the specimen
          finger    print   impressions    of   the
          appellants were taken by the IO
          directly     and    not    through    the
          Magistrate as provided in Section 5
          of Identification of Prisoners Act.
          But, that, to my mind was not
          necessary     because    Section   4   of
          Identification        Prisoners       Act
          specifically provides that any person
          who has been arrested in connection
          with   an    offence    punishable   with
                                              11


rigorous imprisonment for a term of
one year or upwards shall, if so
required by a police officer, allow
his measurement to be taken in the
prescribed manner. In view of the
independent powers conferred upon a
police officer under Section 4 of the
Act, it was not obligatory for him to
approach the Magistrate under Section
5   of   the    Act.     He   would    have
approached the Magistrate, had the
appellants refused to give Specimen
Finger Print Impressions to him.
Therefore, no illegality attaches to
the specimen finger print impressions
taken by the Investigating Officer.
The court needs to appreciate that
the very nature and characteristic of
material    such    as     finger    prints
renders     it      intrinsically       and
inherently impossible for anyone to
fabricate    them.    If    there   is   an
attempt to fabricate finger prints,
that can certainly be exposed by the
accused by offering to allow his
finger prints to be taken so that the
same could be compared through the
process    of     the     court.     Crl.A.
No.1005/2008 Page 7 of 15 None of the
appellants has come forward to the
court with a request to take his
finger print impressions in the court
and get them compared with the chance
finger prints lifted by PW-1 from Car
No. DL 2C A 4116 on 21st December,
2000.””
                                                                     12
16. It is thus clear that issue which was considered by

Full Bench of the Delhi High Court in Bhupinder Singh

case is the same issue which is involved in the present

case.     But the High Court in the impugned judgment

without    discussing       and     following    the     Full    Bench

judgment of Bhupinder Singh’s case has relied on Sapan

Haldar (supra).


17. Now    reverting       to   Sapan   Haldar   case    as     noticed

above, the issue was with regard to admissibility of

sample handwriting or signatures obtained from a person

accused of having committed an offence.              The Full Bench

in Sapan Haldar case noticed para 18 of the Bhupinder

Singh case and in that reference proceeded to examine

provisions of Sections 4 and 5 of the 1920 Act.



18. In    para   22   of    Sapan   Haldar   case,      reliance    was

placed on judgment of this Court in Mahmood vs. State

of U.P. AIR 1976 SC 69: (1976) 1 SCC 542:

          “22. What happens if there is no manner
          prescribed for an investigating officer to
          take the measurements of a person accused
          of having committed an offence? In the
          decision reported as AIR 1976 SC 69 Mahmood
                                                                13


           vs State of Uttar Pradesh, specimen finger
           print     impressions    taken    by    the
           investigating officer under Section 4 of
           The Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920,
           in the absence of a manner prescribed for
           taking the finger print impressions, was
           held to be a case of evidence not being
           admissible with respect to the finger
           prints obtained and the opinion of the
           expert thereon. The Supreme Court held that
           in   said   situation  Section  5   of  The
           Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920 ought
           to have been followed.”


19. Para    Nos.   26,   28   and   32   of   the   judgment   are

relevant which are extracted as below:

      “26. In the decision reported Thavaraj
      Pandian & Ors. vs. State, the Division Bench
      of the Madras High Court noted that no Rules
      were framed in the State of Tamil Nadu with
      respect   to   the   manner   in   which  an
      investigating   officer  could   obtain  the
      finger prints of a person accused of an
      offence as contemplated by Section 4 of The
      Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920 but
      noted that there were executive instructions
      with respect to the manner in which finger
      print impressions could be taken by the
      investigating officer and therefore opined
      that in said circumstance evidence relating
      to finger print impressions obtained by the
      investigating officer would be admissible in
      evidence; but on facts noted that the said
      instructions were not followed and therefore
      held the evidence to be inadmissible.
                                                14
28. There is yet another argument which
needs to be considered with respect to
Section 4 of The Identification of Prisoners
Act, 1920. The Section empowers a police
officer to take measurements of a person who
has been arrested in connection with an
offence      punishable    with      rigorous
imprisonment for a term of one year or
upwards. Ex-facie, the Section would have no
application where the person is suspected of
having   committed   an  offence   which   is
punishable with death or imprisonment for
life, as was held by a Division Bench of the
Bombay High Court in the decision reported
as ILR 1983 Bom. 1508 Nizammuddin Usman vs.
State of Maharashtra.

32. Though not falling for consideration in
this reference, with respect to finger
prints,     which     are     included    in
'measurements',    the    weight    of   the
authorities is that if by way of Rules or
Executive   instructions   the    manner  is
prescribed to take the measurements, alone
then can an Investigating Officer, under
Section   4  obtain   the  measurements  but
strictly as per manner prescribed; but it
would be eminently desirable, as per the
decision in Mohd. Aman's case (supra) to
follow the procedure ordained under Section
5 of The Identification of Prisoners Act,
1920. Relevant would it be to further note
that in relation to offences punishable with
death or imprisonment for life, Section 4 of
The Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920
would not be applicable because the said
provision specifies a prerequisite : that
the person concerned is accused of having
                                                                 15


       committed an offence which is punishable
       with   a   sentence   to  undergo  rigorous
       imprisonment for a term of one year or
       upwards i.e. the sentence must relate to
       imprisonment for a term and would thus
       exclude such offences where either capital
       punishment or imprisonment for life is the
       sentence contemplated.”



20. It is relevant to note that in para 32 Full Bench

in Sapan Haldar has itself noticed that issue regarding

fingerprint does not fall for the consideration in the

reference. However, the Full Bench proceeded to discuss

the law on fingerprints when the issue did not directly

fall for consideration in the reference.               We fail to

see the necessity to lay down any law with regard to

Sections 4 and 5 in Sapan Haldar’s case when reference

was with regard to admissibility of sample handwriting

obtained from a person accused of having committed an

offence during investigation of crime.


21.   We,   however,   in   spite   of   the   above   proceed   to

examine the observations made by Full Bench in Sapan

Haldar (supra) in context of Section 4. Judgment of

this Court in Mahmood vs. State of U.P. (supra) was
                                                                         16


relied. Full Bench in Sapan Haldar read the judgment of

this Court in Mahmood vs. State of U.P. as laying down

that “in the absence of a manner prescribed for taking

the fingerprints impressions was held to be a case of

evidence     not     being        admissible        with     respect     to

fingerprints       obtained       and     the      opinion    of     expert

thereon”. The perusal of the judgment of this Court in

Mahmood case (supra) indicates that there was complaint

by   the   accused    that    his       fingerprints       were    forcibly

taken by the Police on some round object which has been

noticed in para 10 of the judgment. This Court noticed

that specimen finger prints of the appellant were not

taken before or under the order of Magistrate which was

held   suspicious      feature          on   the     conduct       of   the

investigation. It was further held that even if it is

assumed that only a gandasa bore fingerprints of the

appellant    then    also    it    would     not    be   inexorably     and

unmistakenly lead to the conclusion that the appellant

and none-else was the murderer.                 Following was held in

para Nos. 16, 18 and 19:

       “16. Furthermore, the specimen fingerprints
       of the appellant were not taken before or
       under  the   order  of   a   Magistrate  in
                                                              17


      accordance    with   Section    5   of    the
      Identification of Prisoners Act. This is
      another suspicious feature of the conduct of
      investigation. It has not been explained why
      this Magistrate was kept out of the picture.

      18. Secondly, even if it is assumed that the
      handle of this gandasa bore the fingerprints
      of the appellant, then also it would not
      inexorably and unmistakably lead to the
      conclusion that the appellant, and none else
      was the murderer of Dwarka, unless it was
      firmly proved further that the fatal injury
      to the deceased was caused with this weapon.
      Definite proof of this link was lacking in
      this case. The missing link could be best
      supplied by showing that there was blood on
      this gandasa, and that blood was of human
      origin. But this was not done.

      19.   Lastly,   it   may  be   observed  that
      Inspector Daryao Singh, PW 15, has not given
      any reasons in support of his opinion. Nor
      has it been shown that he has acquired
      special skill, knowledge and experience in
      the     science    of    identification    of
      fingerprints. It would be highly unsafe to
      convict one on a capital charge without any
      independent corroboration, solely on the
      bald and dogmatic opinion of such a person,
      even if such opinion is assumed to be
      admissible under Section 45 Evidence Act.”


22. In the above background this Court held that the

solitary   piece   of   circumstantial   evidence    on    which

prosecution   have   staked   their   claim   is   too    shaky,

suspicious and fragile to furnish a sound foundation

for conviction, as held in para 20:
                                                                     18
        “20. In the light of the above discussion,
        we are of the view that the solitary piece
        of circumstantial evidence on which the
        prosecution have staked their case, is too
        shaky, suspicious and fragile to furnish a
        sound foundation for conviction.”


23. The above judgment cannot be read as a precedent

laying down that in the absence of a manner prescribed

for taking of fingers impressions, the evidence is not

admissible. We are of the view that observations made

by Full Bench in Sapan Haldar case in para 22 are not

supportable from the judgment of this Court in Mahmood

vs. State of U.P.


24. Now, we come to para 26 of the judgment of Sapan

Haldar case where Delhi High Court notices the Madras

High    Court    judgment    in    Thavaraj    Pandian   &   Ors   vs.

State, 2003 Cri. L.J.2642 where Madras High court has

held that no rule has been framed in the State of Tamil

Nadu with respect to manner in which an IO can obtain

the fingerprints of a person accused of an offence, but

noted     that   there    were     executive    instructions       with

respect    to    manner     in    which   fingerprints   impression

could be taken. The Madras High Court has not relied on
                                                                          19


the     fingerprints        impressions          having    noted       that

executive instructions for taking of fingerprints were

not followed. Thus, judgment of the Madras High Court

was on its own facts.


25. Now, we come to another reason. In para 28 of the

judgment      of   Sapan   Haldar    (supra),      Full    Bench     of   the

Delhi High Court has held that Section 4 of the 1920 Act

is not applicable where a person is suspected of having

committed an offence which is punishable with death or

imprisonment of life. Section 4 of the Act provides with

regard to a person who has been arrested in connection

with an offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment

for a term of one year or upwards. What Delhi High Court

seems to suggest is that Section 4 is not applicable

when   a     person   is   suspected      of    committing      an   offence

which is punishable with death or imprisonment of life.



26. The purpose and object of empowering Police Officer

to    take    fingerprints      in   an   offence       punishable     with

rigorous imprisonment for a term of one year or upwards

is;    for    offences     of   trivial        nature   where    rigorous
                                                                               20


imprisonment is less than one year Police officer is

not empowered to take fingerprints. The use of words

“rigorous      imprisonment      for    a     term    of       one    year    or

upwards”    does      not   negate      the        punishment         of    life

imprisonment or death.


27. The object of the Section was not to empower the

Police Officer to take fingerprints in trivial offences

where   imprisonment        is   less       than    one    year       but    the

provision cannot be read to mean that Police Officer

does not have such power if imprisonment is for life or

capital punishment.          The reading of Section 4 in the

manner suggested by Full Bench will negate the very

purpose of empowerment of Police Officer to take the

fingerprints.


28. Now, we come to para 32 of the judgment where Delhi

High Court has held that the weight of the authorities

is that if by way of Rules or executive instructions,

the   manner    is    prescribed       to    take    the   measurements,

alone   then    can    an   IO   under       Section       4    obtain       the

measurements,        but    strictly,         as     per        the        manner
                                                             21


prescribed. In para 32 of the Sapan Halder (supra), the

judgment   of   the   Mohd.   Aman’s   case   has   also   been

referred to:

      “32. Though not falling for consideration in
      this reference, with respect to finger
      prints,     which     are     included    in
      „measurements‟,    the    weight    of   the
      authorities is that if by way of Rules or
      Executive   instructions   the    manner  is
      prescribed to take the measurements, alone
      then can an Investigating Officer, under
      Section   4  obtain   the  measurements  but
      strictly as per manner prescribed; but it
      would be eminently desirable, as per the
      decision in Mohd. Aman‟s case (supra) to
      follow the procedure ordained under Section
      5 of The Identification of Prisoners Act,
      1920.”

29. It is necessary to refer to the judgment of Mohd.

Aman (supra) relied by the Delhi High Court. In the

Mohd. Aman case, the fingerprints were taken on several

occasions, in para 7 the facts have been noticed which

are to the following effect:

      “7.    As    noticed   earlier    the   only
      incriminating circumstance on the basis of
      which the High Court upheld the conviction
      of Mohd. Aman is that his fingerprints were
      found on a brass jug in the house of the
      deceased. From the evidence adduced in proof
      of the above circumstance it appears that
      the brass jug, together with other articles,
      was seized, packeted and sealed on 14-4-1983
      and forwarded to the Fingerprint Bureau
      after five days — on 19-4-1983 to be precise
                                                       22


      — through Constable Mohd. Sadique (PW 4)
      along   with   a   letter  written   by   the
      investigating officer (copy of which was
      marked as Ext. P-59). On the following day,
      that is, 20-4-1983 the Bureau sent the
      articles back after taking photographs of
      the chance prints found on the jug and three
      other articles (out of the sixteen sent)
      with a corresponding letter (Ext. P-60).
      After Mohd. Aman was arrested on 20-4-1983
      his specimen fingerprints were taken by H.C.
      Ramji Ram (PW 24) and forwarded to the
      Bureau on 24-5-1983. As the prints were not
      clear, the same were returned by the Bureau
      asking    for    better   prints.    Specimen
      fingerprints were thereafter again taken on
      20-6-1983 and sent to the Bureau. These
      prints were also sent back and for the third
      time prints of Mohd. Aman were taken and
      sent to the Bureau on 30-6-1983. Thereafter
      the Bureau gave its report (Ext. 115) with
      the opinion that the chance fingerprints
      found on the brass jug were similar to and
      identical with his specimen fingerprints.”


30. This Court observed that the prosecution has failed

to establish that the seized articles were not or could

not be tempered with before it reached the Bureau for

examination. Further following was stated in para 8:


      “8....Apart from the above missing link and
      the suspicious circumstances surrounding the
      same, there is another circumstance which
      also casts a serious mistrust as to
      genuineness of the evidence. Even though the
      specimen fingerprints of Mohd. Aman had to
      be taken on a number of occasions at the
      behest of the Bureau, they were never taken
      before or under the order of a Magistrate in
                                                                              23


           accordance    with    Section    5    of    the
           Identification of Prisoners Act. It is true
           that under Section 4 thereof police is
           competent to take fingerprints of the
           accused but to dispel any suspicion as to
           its   bona   fides   or   to   eliminate    the
           possibility of fabrication of evidence it
           was eminently desirable that they were taken
           before    or   under    the    order     of   a
           Magistrate.....“
                                       (underlined by us)


31.    The    above     observation         although      clearly    mentions

that under Section 4 Police officer is competent to

take fingerprints of the accused but to dispel as to

its    bona      fide     or    to    eliminate     the    fabrication       of

evidence      it    was    eminently        desirable      that    they    were

taken before or under the order of magistrate.



32. The observation cannot be read to mean that this

Court held that under Section 4 Police Officer are not

entitled to take fingerprints until the order is taken

from the Magistrate.                  The observations were made that

it    is   desirable       to       take   the   fingerprints       before   or

under      the     order       of    the   Magistrate      to     dispel     any

suspicion. Especially, the suspicions which were caused

in the above case which is clear from the facts noticed

in para Nos. 7 and 8.                  Observations of this Court in
                                                                             24


Mohd. Aman’s case was in the facts of that case and

cannot      be    read     to   mean      that    Police    Officer      cannot

obtain      fingerprints        without        obtaining    an    order    from

Magistrate under Section 5.


33.    In   this       context,      it   is     useful    to   note   another

judgment         of    this     Court     in     Prakash    vs.    State    of

Karnataka, (2014) 12 SCC 133 where two-Judge Bench of

this   Court          relying   on   Mohd.       Aman   (supra)    has    given

following observations in para 28:

         “28. Assuming Prakash’s fingerprint was in
         fact obtained by D’Souza, it was clearly not
         given voluntarily, but perhaps unwittingly
         and in what seems to be a deceitful manner.
         To   avoid  any   suspicion   regarding  the
         genuineness of the fingerprint so taken or
         resort to any subterfuge, the appropriate
         course of action for the investigating
         officer was to approach the Magistrate for
         necessary orders in accordance with Section
         5 of the Identification of Prisoners Act,
         1920. In Mohd. Aman v. State of Rajasthan
         this Court referred to the possibility of
         the police fabricating evidence and to avoid
         an allegation of such a nature, it would be
         eminently desirable that fingerprints were
         taken under the orders of a Magistrate. We
         may add that this would equally apply to the
         creating evidence against a suspect. This is
         what this Court had to say: (SCC p. 49, para
         8)
                                                              25


           “8.   …  Even  though   the  specimen
           fingerprints of Mohd. Aman had to be
           taken on a number of occasions at the
           behest of the Bureau, they were never
           taken before or under the order of a
           Magistrate in accordance with Section
           5 of the Identification of Prisoners
           Act. It is true that under Section 4
           thereof police is competent to take
           fingerprints of the accused but to
           dispel any suspicion as to its bona
           fides or to eliminate the possibility
           of fabrication of evidence it was
           eminently desirable that they were
           taken before or under the order of a
           Magistrate.””


34. This Court in above case repeated and reiterated

the observations of the Mohd. Aman case, which we have

already discussed above.


35.   It is necessary to refer to a Three Judge Bench

judgment   of   this   Court   in   Shankaria   vs.   State   of

Rajasthan (supra). This Court in the above case had

occasion to notice Section 4 and Section 5 of the 1920

Act where submission was raised before this Court that

specimen of thumb impression of the appellant having

not been obtained before the magistrate they cannot be

relied. The argument was repelled by this court and

following was laid down in paras 83 and 84:
                                                                     26
        “83. Mr Gambhir next contends that in view
        of Section 5 of the Identification of
        Prisoners Act, it was incumbent on the
        police   to   obtain   the  specimen   thumb-
        impressions   of   the  appellant  before   a
        Magistrate, and since this was not done, the
        opinion rendered by the Finger Print Expert,
        Mr.   Tankha,   by   using  those   illegally
        obtained specimen finger-impressions, must
        be ruled out of evidence.

        84.    The   contention    appears   to   be
        misconceived   because  in    the  State  of
        Rajasthan, the Police were competent under
        Section 4 of the Identification of Prisoners
        Act, to take the specimen fingerprints of
        the accused, and this they did, in the
        instant case, before the Superintendent of
        Police, Shri K.P. Srivastava. It was not
        necessary for them to obtain an order from
        the Magistrate for obtaining such specimen
        fingerprints.”


36. The three Judge Bench clearly held that it was not

necessary for the Police officer to obtain an order

from     a    Magistrate     for      obtaining        specimen      of

fingerprints.      Law    laid     down   by   three-Judge        Bench

judgment     is   thus   clearly    applicable    in    the   present

case.


37.     One of the reasons given by Full Bench of Delhi

High Court in Sapan Haldar case was that there being no
                                                         27


rules or executive instructions prescribing a manner of

taking of fingerprints, Police Officer cannot exercise

the power under Section 4. We need to dwell this aspect

little more. The word prescribed has been defined under

Section 2(c) as “prescribed means prescribed by rules

made under this Act”.     Section 8 empowers the State

Government to make rules for the purpose of carrying

into effect the provisions of the Act. Section 8 is as

follows:

      “8. Power   to   make    rules.—(1) The    State
      Government may, 1[by notification in the
      Official   Gazette,]   make    rules   for   the
      purpose   of    carrying    into   effect    the
      provisions   of   this    Act.—(1)   The   State
      Government may, 1[by notification in the
      Official   Gazette,]   make    rules   for   the
      purpose   of    carrying    into   effect    the
      provisions of this Act."

      (2) In particular and without prejudice to
      the generality of the foregoing provision,
      such rules may provide for—

      (a) restrictions    on    the    taking   of
      photographs of persons under section 5;
      (b) the places at which measurements and
      photographs may be taken;
      (c) the nature of the measurements that may
      be taken;
      (d) the method in which any class or classes
      of measurements shall be taken;
      (e) the dress to be worn by a person when
      being photographed under section 3; and
                                                                             28
          (f) the    preservation,     safe custody,
          destruction and disposal of records of
          measurements and photographs.

          [(3) Every rule made under this section
          shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
          made, before State Legislature.]”


38.   Whether      the   power        of    the    Police   Officer       under

Section 4 cannot be exercised till the State make rules

under Section 8? The appellant supporting the judgment

of the Delhi High Court contends that since Section 4

uses the words “allow his measurement to be taken in

the prescribed manner”, unless there is a prescribed

manner by the rules fingerprints cannot be taken. The

power of the State given under Section 8 to frame rules

is an enabling power. The word used under Section 8 is,

the State Government “may”.                 Can it mean that till the

rules are framed by the State, power under Sections 3

and   4   cannot    be       exercised?      The    power    given    to    the

Police Officer to ask a person arrested to give his

measurements       is    a    substantive         power.    This   power    is

hedged by the condition that such measurement has “to

be taken in the prescribed manner” if there is any

prescribed      manner       that     cannot       be   breached     by    such

Police    Officer.           Taking    of    the    measurements      in   the
                                                                             29


prescribed manner is a procedural part of the Section

which   does     not   affect    the     substantive      power    of       the

Police Officer to ask an accused who is under arrest to

give his measurement.


39. In event, it is held that unless the rules are

framed under Section 8 power under Section 4 cannot be

exercised that will not be in consonance with the very

purpose    and    object      for     which     Section     4    has    been

enacted.   The    submission        of   the    appellant       further     is

that when there is no rule framed providing prescribed

manner for taking fingerprints, resort to Section 5 has

to be taken by IO.           Section 5 is a separate power given

to   Magistrate.       The    power      of    the   Magistrate        is    an

additional and separate power to secure ends of justice

for purpose of investigation and proceedings under Code

of Criminal Procedure.           It may be exercised even in a

case where after arrest Police Officer has not taken

fingerprints of an accused. But, it cannot be held that

power under Section 4 can be exercised by the Police

Officer only after obtaining an order under Section 5.
                                                                               30
40.     One more aspect needs to be looked into. Section 3

also provides for taking of measurements of convicted

person.       Section   3   also      uses       the    phrase   “allow       the

measurement and photographed be taken by Police Officer

in    the      prescribed        manner”.        Now,     if     the    phrase

“prescribed manner” has to be read as existence of a

rule providing for a prescribed manner of taking of

evidence, in absence of rule no fingerprints can be

taken under Section 3 also of a convicted person, it is

relevant       to    note   that      Section      5    can    also     not   be

resorted in Section 3. Since Section 5 can only be

resorted       for   the    purposes        of    any    investigation        or

proceeding under the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898.

After     a    conviction        of    an     accused         Section    5     is

inapplicable         then   if     the      interpretation        placed       by

appellant is accepted, even for convicted persons, it

would not be permissible to ask measurement unless the

rules are framed.


41. In this context, we may like to refer the judgment

of Constitution Bench of this court in V.T. Khanzode

and Others vs. Reserve Bank of India and Another (1982)
                                                      31


2 SCC 7. In the above case, this Court had occasion to

consider the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, Section

58 sub section (2).       Section 58 was power of the

Central Board for making regulations.      Section 58(1)

and (2) has been referred in para 13 of the judgment

which is to the following effect:

      “13. Turning to the first question, Section
      58(1) of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
      provides that:
         “The Central Board may, with the
         previous sanction of the Central
         Government,      make      regulations
         consistent with this Act to provide
         for all matters for which provision
         is necessary or convenient for the
         purpose of giving effect to the
         provisions of this Act.”

          Sub-section    (2)    of    Section   58
          provides   that    in   particular   and
          without prejudice to the generality
          of the foregoing provision, such
          regulations may provide for all or
          any of the matters mentioned in the
          various clauses of that sub-section.
          Clause     (j)     refers     to    “the
          constitution and management of staff
          and superannuation funds for the
          officers and servants of the Bank”,
          while   clause   (r)   refers    to  the
          subject:     “generally,      for    the
          efficient conduct of the business of
          the Bank”....”
                                                            32
42. This Court on Section 58(1) had observed that the

power given to Central Board was an enabling power

which is clear from the use of word “may”. Following

was observed in para 18 marked portion:

      “18.....On that argument, it is material to
      note that Section 58(1) is in the nature of
      an   enabling   provision   under  which  the
      Central Board “may” make regulations in
      order to provide for all matters for which
      it is necessary or convenient to make
      provision for the purpose of giving effect
      to the provisions of the Act. This provision
      does not justify the argument that staff
      regulations must be framed under it or not
      at all. The substance of the matter is that
      the Central Board has the power to frame
      regulations relating to the conditions of
      service of the Bank’s staff. If it has that
      power,   it   may   exercise   it  either  in
      accordance with Section 58(1) or by acting
      appropriately in the exercise of its general
      power       of        administration      and
      superintendence.“


43. The Constitution Bench also held that in absence

of regulation under 58(1), the Central Board could

have issued administrative circulars and there was no

prohibition   in   regulating   service   conditions   by

administrative circulars.


44.   The above view of ours find support from the

judgment of this Court reported in (1986) 4 SCC 667,
                                                                       33


Surinder Singh Vs. Central Government & Ors. In the

above case, this Court had occasion to consider the

provisions       of   Displaced      Persons       (Compensation      and

Rehabilitation) Act, 1954.             Section 8 of the Act lays

down that a displaced person shall be paid compensation

as determined under Section 7 “subject to the rules

that may be made under this Act”.                  Section 40 confers

power on the Central Government to frame rules to carry

out the purpose of the Act. Clause (j) of sub-section

(2) of Section 40 provides for framing of rules laying

down    procedure     for   transfer    of    property    out    of   the

compensation pool and the manner of realisation of the

sale proceeds.        The Central Government had not framed

rules regulating the disposal by sale or otherwise of

urban        agricultural     land      forming       part      of    the

compensation pool.


45.     The authority constituted under the Act disposed

of urban agricultural property by auction sale. The

High Court had held that disposal of property forming

part    of    the   compensation     pool    was    “subject”    to   the

rules framed as contemplated by Sections 8 and 40 of
                                                                             34


the Act and since no rules had been framed by the

Central Government with regard to the disposal of the

urban     agricultural          property      forming    part        of     the

compensation pool, the authority constituted under the

Act     had        no    jurisdiction      to       dispose     of        urban

agricultural property by auction-sale.


46. This Court reversing the above opinion of the High

Court held that where a statute confers powers on an

authority      to       do   certain   acts    or   exercise    power       in

respect       of    certain     matters,      subject   to    rules,        the

exercise of power conferred by the statute does not

depend on the existence of rules unless the statute

expressly provides for the same.                 In Para 6, following

has been laid down:-

        6........... In our opinion the view taken
        by the High Court is incorrect. Where a
        statute confers powers on an authority to do
        certain acts or exercise power in respect of
        certain matters, subject to rules, the
        exercise of power conferred by the statute
        does not depend on the existence of rules
        unless the statute expressly provides for
        the same. In other words framing of the
        rules is not condition precedent to the
        exercise   of   the   power  expressly   and
        unconditionally conferred by the statute.
                                                                35
      The expression “subject to the rules” only
      means, in accordance with the rules, if any.
      If rules are framed, the powers so conferred
      on   authority   could   be   exercised   in
      accordance with these rules. But if no rules
      are framed there is no void and the
      authority is not precluded from exercising
      the      power     conferred      by     the
      statute....................”



47. This Court further held that framing of the rules

regulating   the   mode   or   manner   of   disposal   of   urban

agricultural property by sale to a displaced person is

not a condition precedent for the exercise of power by

the authorities concerned under Sections 8, 16 and 20

of the Act. Following was laid down in Paragraph 7:-

      “7. ...........Framing of rules regulating
      the mode or manner of disposal of urban
      agricultural   property   by    sale    to   a
      displaced   person   is  not    a   condition
      precedent for the exercise of power by the
      authorities concerned under Sections 8, 16
      and 20 of the Act. If the legislative
      intent was that until and unless rules
      were   framed   power   conferred    on    the
      authority under Sections 8, 16 and 20
      could not be exercised, that intent could
      have   been   made  clear    by   using    the
      expression “except in accordance with the
      rules framed” a displaced person shall not
      be paid compensation by sale of pool
      property. In the absence of any such
      provision the framing of rules, could not
      be a condition precedent for the exercise
      of power.”
                                                                36
48. What has been laid down above is fully attracted in

the facts of the present case.           Non-framing of any

rules under Section 8 by the State Government does not

prohibit the exercise of powers given under Sections 3

and 4 of the Act.      Exercise of power under Sections 3

and 4 is hedged by conditions as prescribed but in a

case where no rules have been framed, the authorities

as empowered under Sections 3 and 4 are not denuded of

their powers to act under Sections 3 and 4.          In a case,

the interpretation put by the learned counsel for the

appellant that in absence of rules framed under Section

8, no power can be exercised under Sections 3 and 4 is

accepted,   the   provisions   of   Sections   3   and   4   shall

become dead letter, which has never been the intention

of the legislature in enacting the 1920 Act.



49.   It is relevant to note that the Delhi High Court

in para 23 of the impugned judgment has discarded the

chance evidence of palm impression by observing “no

rules having been framed in Delhi and procedure as

prescribed in Section 5 of Identification of Prisoners
                                                           37


and having not been followed, we would thus discard

the evidences of palm impressions”. Whether there were

any   executive   instructions   regarding   taking   of

fingerprints in State of Delhi or not is an issue on

which there is no clear materials.   It is not the case

of the appellant before any Court that fingerprints

were taken in disregard of any executive instructions

applicable in the State of Delhi.


50. Learned counsel for the respondent referring to the

evidence of PW32 where he made a statement regarding

taking of fingerprints of the accused, contended that

there was no cross-examination by the defence on this

aspect. It is useful to extract following portion of

the written submissions of the respondent:

       “In this regard, the deposition of PW 32 at
       pg 173(bottom) is relevant, “During police
       custody remand of accused, I took finger
       print    of    accused   Rajesh@Sultan    and
       sonvir@Somvir.    The same as well as the
       chance print picked up by SI Naresh Kumar
       were   sent   to   the  Fingerprint   Bureau,
       Malviyanagar, for their comparison.        My
       application in this regard is Ex PW32/N.”
       There is no cross examination by the defence
       on this aspect.”
                                                                             38
51. In view of the foregoing discussion we are of the

opinion that view of the Delhi High Court that evidence

of    fingerprints     of    the      accused    has    to    be   discarded

cannot    be   supported         for    the    reasons       given    in    the

impugned judgment of the Delhi High Court.



52.       Even   if,        we     accept      that     fingerprints         of

appellant’s,     chance      print      Mark    Q5     (taken      from    iron

safe)    was   identical         to    the    specimen       of    left    palm

impression of Sonvir, it does not complete the chain of

circumstances unerringly pointing out fingers to the

appellant, that it was the appellant who committed the

murder.    Law   of    conviction            based     on    circumstantial

evidences is well settled. It is sufficient to refer to

the judgment of this Court in Ramesh and Others vs.

State of Rajasthan, (2011) 3 SCC 685 where in para 17

following has been held:

         “17. Before we proceed with the matter, it
         has to be borne in mind that this case
         depends upon circumstantial evidence and, as
         such,   as  per   the    settled  law,   every
         circumstance would have to be proved beyond
         reasonable doubt and further the chain of
         circumstances should be so complete and
         perfect that the only inference of the guilt
         of the accused should emanate therefrom. At
         the   same   time,    there   should   be   no
                                                                 39


        possibility   whatsoever         of    the    defence
        version being true.”


53. Thus, even if, above evidence is not discardable

the entire chain of circumstances is not complete to

unmistakeably point out the guilt to the appellant.


54. In result, the appeal is allowed. The appellant

stands acquitted of the charges under Sections 302, 392

read   with   Section   34   of   the   IPC.   The   appellant   is

directed to be released forthwith, if not required in

any other case.


                                   ........................J.
                                           (ASHOK BHUSHAN)

New Delhi,
July 02, 2018.
                                                                                    40


                                                                  REPORTABLE

                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 958 OF 2017



SONVIR @ SOMVIR                                                   APPELLANT
                                      VERSUS

THE STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                                         RESPONDENT




                                 JUDGMENT



INDU MALHOTRA, J.



 1.     The present Criminal Appeal has been filed by the Appellant-Accused No. 2
        against the judgment and order dated 10 th December 2014 passed by the Delhi
        High Court in Criminal Appeal No.1300 of 2014. The appellant, along with
        Accused Nos. 1 and 3, were convicted for offences punishable under Sections
        302, 392 read with Section 34 of the IPC by the Sessions Court. The High Court
        affirmed the sentence awarded to Accused Nos. 1 and 2. The present appeal has
        been preferred by the Appellant-Accused No. 2. Accused No. 1 has apparently
        not challenged the judgment of the High Court, and is serving the sentence
        awarded.

      1.1 The prosecution case is that on 20 th October 2009, the PCR received

          information at 11:45 a.m. from some secret informer stating that House No. C-
                                                                                  41


    190, Kinner Wali Building, Shaheen Bagh, New Delhi, was locked and there
    was something wrong inside. The police opened the main gate with the help of
    a key maker. On entering the main gate, dried blood was found on the floor,
    and on the right side a Maruti car bearing No. 800 DL-6CA-3414 was found
    parked with all four tyres deflated. On the left-hand side, inside the bathroom,
    the dead body of Meena Kinner, aged 30 years, was found with injury marks
    on the neck and right arm. On the first floor, the dead body of one Vimlesh
    Kinner, aged 45 years, was found on the double bed. The body of Vimlesh had
    injury marks on the neck, chest, arm, toe, index finger etc. Articles were found
    scattered in the house. Both the deceased were persons of the third gender.

1.2 Post-mortem was conducted on the body of Vimlesh by Dr. Sunay M (PW-2)

    who opined that the cause of death was shock due to haemmorhage caused by
    injuries from a sharp weapon. Dr. Susheel Sharma (PW-7) conducted the post-
    mortem on the body of deceased Meena. The injuries were found sufficient to
    cause death in the ordinary course of nature. The injuries were caused by a
    sharp pointed heavy weapon.

1.3 The Investigating Officer (“I.O.”) - Inspector Amrit Raj (PW-32A), got the

    FIR registered on the statement of Khalil Ahmed (Accused No. 3) who
    introduced himself as being in the relationship akin to that of a husband and
    wife with the deceased Vimlesh.

       Sub-Inspector Naresh Kumar Sharma (PW-8), In-charge of the Fingerprint
    Bureau, Crime Branch, Kamla Market visited the spot, and picked up six
    chance prints.

1.4 On 3rd November 2009, at about 8:30 pm on the basis of secret information,

    the police apprehended Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) who was the driver
    of the deceased Vimlesh. Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) allegedly
    disclosed that Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) a taxi-driver,
    Khalil Ahmed (Accused No. 3), and “N” (Juvenile) were also involved in the
    conspiracy with him. As per the prosecution case, Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused
    No. 1) at the time of being apprehended, was allegedly found to be carrying a
                                                                                42


    black bag on his shoulder containing 15 items of golden jewellery, 2 pairs of
    payjeb, 6 silver coins, Rs. 2,00,000/- in cash, one wrist watch of ICICI make,
    and two photographs of the deceased Vimlesh.

1.5 Later the same day at night, Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) led the police to

    Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2), who was staying in a room in
    the house of Teja Chaudhary. At the time of arrest, Sonvir @ Somvir
    (Appellant-Accused No. 2), was allegedly also carrying a black coloured bag
    containing 15 items of golden jewellery, 2 items of silver, 6 silver coins and
    Rs. 50,000/- in cash. Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) led the
    police to his room, and brought out a blood-stained knife, and a blood-stained
    shirt, from a bucket.

1.6 It is further alleged that the police apprehended Khalil Ahmed (Accused No.

    3) at Hari Nagar who was also allegedly carrying a bag with him. On
    searching the bag, some golden jewellery, 2 wrist watches, and Rs. 3,00,000/-
    in cash were allegedly recovered at about 4.35 a.m. on 4th November 2009.

1.7 Khalil Ahmed (Accused No. 3) then led to the arrest of “N” (Juvenile) on 4 th

    November 2009. “N” (Juvenile) was sleeping on the floor with a bag under his
    pillow. On searching the bag, some jewellery items, 1 Nokia 6600 mobile
    phone and Rs. 32,000/- in cash were allegedly recovered.

1.8 On 7th November 2009, Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) and Sonvir @

    Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) led the police to Village Bhind, District
    Morena for the recovery of a Maruti van belonging to Vimlesh. The Maruti
    van with the broken number plate had already been seized by ASI Udai Bhan
    Singh Parmar (PW-23) on 1st November 2009 from Gate No. 2 of the Punj
    Llyod Factory at Noorabad. It was handed over to the I.O. - SI Amrit Raj (PW-
    32A) on 8th November 2009. The Maruti van along with the articles in it were
    seized by the I.O. - SI Amrit Raj (PW-32A). A broken number plate was
    allegedly recovered by the police near Gate No. 2 of the Punj Llyod Factory at
    Noorabad at the instance of Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) and Sonvir @
    Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2).
                                                                                         43



    1.9 On 12th November 2009, Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) led the police to

           the garage of Quarter No.86, Type-II, Jal Vihar and brought out a polythene
           bag after digging the earth. The said polythene bag allegedly contained Rs.
           40,000/- in cash and 2 golden chains.

    1.10      The I.O - SI Amrit Raj (PW-32A), obtained finger impressions of two of
           the accused viz. Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) and Sonvir @ Somvir
           (Accused No. 2) whilst they were in police custody.

    1.11      The finger impressions were taken by the I.O. – SI Amrit Raj (PW-32A),
           without obtaining the permission of the Magistrate as per Section 5 of the
           Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920.

    1.12      There is no eye witness of the incident. The case is based wholly on
           circumstantial evidence.

    1.13      That since “N” was a juvenile, he was proceeded separately by the Juvenile
           Justice Board.

    1.14      The trial proceeded against the three accused viz. Sultan @ Rajesh
           (Accused No. 1), Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2), and Khalil
           Ahmed (Accused No. 3). Khalil Ahmed (Accused No. 3) stated that he was in
           a relationship akin to that of a husband and wife with the deceased Vimlesh.
           Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) was employed as a driver by Vimlesh;
           whilst Sonvir @ Somvir (Accused No. 3) was a taxi driver, whose taxi had
           been engaged by Vimlesh on some occasion, as per Sonvir @ Somvir’s
           statement recorded under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C.

2    The Trial Court vide Judgment and Order dated 3 rd June 2014 convicted all the
     three accused for offences punishable under Sections 302 and 392 r.w. Section 34
     of the IPC.

    2.1 The       Trial     Court   held   that     most   of   the   injuries   were   stab
           wounds/laceration/incised wounds. Apart from this, it was found that the
           articles in the house of the deceased were found scattered, which made it clear
                                                                                         44


         that the victims were killed because of robbery. The Trial Court notes that
         none of the accused claimed the jewellery items/cash allegedly recovered from
         their possession as belonging to the them. The accused submitted that they had
         been falsely implicated in the case.

            The Trial Court records that it is true that no person from the public was
         joined at the time of recovery. The recoveries were allegedly made only in the
         presence of police officers i.e. PW-21, PW-25, PW-31, PW-34 and PW-36.

    2.2 With respect to the present appellant, it is alleged that a blood-stained shirt,

         and one blood-stained “churra” were recovered from a plastic bucket lying
         under a dining table of his room in the house of Teja Chaudhary. As per the
         Scientific Officer, articles seized from the house of the victim, and the shirts of
         the accused, had the same blood group “B”. It is further alleged that out of the
         six chance prints marked Q1-Q6, Q5 was identical with the left palm
         impression of the present appellant.

    2.3 The Trial Court holds that the recovery leads to a presumption that the accused

         along with the other accused had committed the robbery. It is further held that
         it is not established that which of the accused had caused the fatal blow, using
         any dangerous weapon. Similarly, it is not established from the record that the
         accused persons had hatched any conspiracy to kill the victims. Hence, no
         offence punishable under Sections 397 or 120-B IPC is made out.

3   That all the three accused preferred appeals before the High Court. The High Court
    granted benefit of doubt to Khalil Ahmed (Accused No. 3) on the ground that the
    recovery of jewellery and cash cannot be taken to be incriminating as a stand-alone
    evidence. That since Khalil Ahmed (Accused No. 3) has stated that he was in the
    relationship of husband and wife with the deceased Vimlesh, Accused No. 3 could
    have owned and possessed jewellery and cash.

    3.1 The High Court has recorded, in paragraph 16 of the Judgment, that none of

         the jewellery items were subjected to a Test Identification Parade during the
         investigation. Even in the dock, no witness identified that the jewellery
                                                                                          45


              recovered at the instance of the three accused belonged to the deceased.
              Further, in paragraph 18 of the Judgment, the High Court holds that the
              prosecution had not proved that the jewellery recovered from the appellant
              belonged to the deceased. Hence, the recovery of jewellery articles cannot be
              held to be connected with the offence.

         3.2 In paragraph 19 of the Judgment, the High Court has further held that with

              respect to the alleged recovery of a knife from Sonvir @ Somvir, on
              examination by the FSL, no blood grouping could be given. Furthermore, no
              opinion was sought from the post-mortem doctor whether the injuries to the
              deceased were possible by the said weapon of offence. In the absence of any
              witness identifying the weapon of offence used in the commission of crime, or
              the opinion of the post-mortem doctor that the injury was possible by the said
              knife, or the FSL report regarding the blood of the deceased being found, the
              knife could not be said to be connected with the offence, and cannot be used as
              a piece of incriminating evidence against him.

         3.3 The High Court dismissed the appeals filed by Sultan @ Rajesh and Sonvir @

              Somvir and affirmed the judgment of the Trial Court on the ground that the
              prosecution had proved the recovery of blood-stained shirts at their instance,
              which were found to be blood-stained with the “blood group” of the deceased
              i.e. “B” group, unaccounted jewellery and cash, recovery of the Maruti van, a
              piece of broken number plate of the said van.

4        Aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-
         Accused No. 2) has filed the present SLP, which was re-numbered as Criminal
         Appeal No. 958 of 2017.

           Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) has apparently not challenged the judgment of
     the High Court, and is undergoing the sentence awarded.

5        The legal evidence relied by the prosecution against Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-
         Accused No.2) is as follows:

    i.    recovery of unaccounted jewellery and cash;
                                                                                             46
    ii.    recovery of the blood-stained knife;
    iii.   recovery of blood-stained shirt;
    iv.    recovery of abandoned Maruti van and broken number plate;
    v.     report of the Forensic Expert stating that the chance prints lifted from the scene of
           crime, matched the finger impressions obtained from the Appellant whilst he was
           in police custody.

6      The legal evidence adduced by the prosecution is dealt with seriatim, to determine
       whether the prosecution has proved the case for offences punishable under Sections
       302, 392 read with Section 34 of the IPC against the present Appellant beyond
       reasonable doubt.

           6.1 ALLEGED RECOVERY OF UNACCOUNTED JEWELLERY AND CASH

                As per the prosecution case, 15 items of golden jewellery, 2 items of silver, 6
                silver coins and Rs. 50,000/- in cash were allegedly recovered from Sonvir
                @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) at the time of his arrest on 3 rd
                November 2009, which was 16-17 days after the date of the occurrence of
                the offence. The said jewellery and cash belonged to the deceased Vimlesh.
                Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) did not claim that the jewellery
                and cash belonged to him, and failed to give an explanation in his statement
                recorded under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C., as to how he was in possession of
                such a large amount of jewellery and cash.

                Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) in his statement recorded under
                Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. stated that the recovery was planted, and that he
                had been falsely implicated.

                The prosecution alleged that 16-17 days after the date of occurrence of the
                offence, when each of the accused was apprehended, each of them was found
                holding bags of jewellery. This seems improbable and unnatural. In the case
                of Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2), he was apprehended from
                his room in the house of one Teja Chaudhary.
                                                                                 47


     The brother of deceased - Vimlesh, one Mohd. Ayub (PW-4) has denied the
     suggestion of the learned APP that he was shown the jewellery recovered
     from the possession of the accused persons, or that he identified the jewellery
     articles to be belonging to Vimlesh. The jewellery articles were not identified
     to be of the deceased. In these circumstances, the alleged recovery of
     jewellery and cash from Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) could
     not be taken as a piece of incriminating evidence.

 6.2 ALLEGED RECOVERY OF BLOOD-STAINED KNIFE

     As per the prosecution, a blood-stained knife was also recovered from Sonvir
     @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2), at the time of his arrest. As per the
     FSL report (Ex. PW-33/A), while the knife was found to be stained with
     human blood, no blood grouping could be given. The High Court, in
     paragraph 19 of its judgment, found that in the absence of any witness
     identifying the weapon of offence used in the commission of crime, or the
     opinion of the post-mortem doctors that the injury was possible by the said
     knife, or the FSL report regarding the blood of the deceased being found on
     the said knife, the knife cannot be said to be connected with the offence. On
     the basis of the above finding, the High Court concluded that the recovery of
     the knife at the instance of Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2)
     cannot be used as a piece of incriminating evidence against him.

     As a consequence, the weapon of offence allegedly recovered from Sonvir @
     Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) and used in the commission of the crime,
     cannot be taken as a piece of incriminating evidence against him.

6.3 ALLEGED RECOVERY OF BLOOD-STAINED SHIRT

   As per the prosecution, a blood-stained shirt was recovered at the instance of
   Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) from his room in the house of
   Teja Chaudhary, at the time of his arrest. The blood-stained shirt was sent for
   analysis to the FSL. As per the FSL report (Ex. PW-33/A), the shirt allegedly
   recovered from Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) was found to be
                                                                             48


stained with human blood of “B” group, which was the same “blood group” as
that of the deceased.

In paragraph 20, the High Court held the recovery of the blood-stained shirt
from Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) to be incriminating against
him, since the blood samples taken from the bed-sheet at the scene of crime,
were also found to be of the same blood group.

It is relevant to note that as per the FSL report (Ex. PW-33/A), both the blood-
stained shirt allegedly recovered from Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused
No. 2) and the blood samples taken from the bedsheet at the scene of crime
were found to be stained with human blood of “B” group.

The mere matching of the blood-group of the blood samples taken from the
bed-sheet at the scene of crime, and the blood-stained shirt recovered from
Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) cannot lead to the conclusion
that the appellant had been involved in the commission of the crime.

On this issue, reliance can be placed on two decisions of this Court in Prakash
v. State of Karnataka [(2014) 12 SCC 133; paragraphs 41 and 45] and
Debapriya Pal v. State of West Bengal [(2017) 11 SCC 31; paragraph 8]
wherein this Court while deciding cases based on circumstantial evidence had
held that mere matching of the blood group cannot lead to the conclusion of
the culpability of the accused, in the absence of a detailed serological
comparison, since millions of people would have the same blood group.

In the present case, the prosecution has not proved that the room from where
the blood-stained knife and blood-stained shirt were allegedly recovered, was
in the exclusive possession of the appellant. The prosecution case is that the
said room was in the house owned by one Teja Chaudhary. The prosection did
not examine the said Teja Chaudhary to prove that the said room was rented to
Sonvir @ Somvir and/or was in the exclusive custody of the appellant.
                                                                                49


    Therefore, the recovery of the blood-stained shirt from Sonvir @ Somvir
    (Appellant-Accused No. 2) cannot be used as an incriminating piece of
    evidence.

6.4 ALLEGED RECOVERY OF THE MARUTI VAN AND THE BROKEN NUMBER PLATE

    The prosecution alleged that both Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1) and
    Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) disclosed that they had
    abandoned the Maruti van belonging to Vimlesh 20 kilometers from Gwalior.
    They were taken to Morena by the I.O. - SI Amrit Raj (PW-32A), on 8 th
    November 2009. The Maruti van with a broken number plate had, however,
    already been seized by ASI Udai Bhan Singh Parmar (PW-23) as unclaimed on
    1st November 2009.

    Further, both these accused allegedly led the police party near Gate No. 2 of
    the Punj Lloyd Factory at Noorabad from where the Maruti van had already
    been recovered, and got recovered the broken number plate bearing number
    “86”. The recovery of the Maruti Van and the broken number plate was held to
    be a piece of incriminating evidence against Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1)
    and Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) by the Trial Court.

    SI Abhisek Singh (PW-30) had stated in his cross-examination that no public
    person/independent witness was present at the time of the alleged recovery. It
    is important to note that while ASI Udai Bhan Singh Parmar (PW-23) stated
    that the broken number plate was allegedly recovered from the garbage dump,
    SI Abhishek Singh (PW-30) and Inspector Amrit Raj (PW-32A) stated that it
    was allegedly recovered from the bushes. The absence of any independent
    witness of the alleged recoveries, and the discrepancy in the statements of the
    police officers, makes the prosecution case doubtful.

6.5 FORENSIC REPORT REGARDING MATCHING FINGER IMPRESSIONS

    The prosecution relied upon the report tendered by the Senior Finger Print
    Expert of the Fingerprint Bureau, RN Rawat (PW-35), to state that the finger
                                                                          50


impressions obtained from Sonvir @ Somvir matched with the chance prints
obtained from the scene of crime.

The Trial Court and the High Court considered the six chance prints lifted
from the first floor of the house by SI Naresh Kumar Sharma (PW-8), In-
charge of the Finger Prints Bureau, Crime Branch. Chance prints Q1 to Q3
were lifted from the iron box on the first floor, Q4 from the showcase glass,
and Q5 and Q6 from the iron safe. The Senior Finger Prints Expert of the
Fingerprint Bureau, RN Rawat (PW-35), vide his reports (Ex. PW-35/A and
Ex. PW-35/B), opined that the chance print marked Q1 was identical to the
specimen right palm impression of Sultan @ Rajesh (Accused No. 1), while
chance print marked Q5 was identical to the specimen left palm impression of
Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2).

The specimen chance prints of both these accused viz. Rajesh @ Sultan
(Accused No. 1) and Sonvir @ Somvir (Appellant-Accused No. 2) were taken
by the I.O. - SI Amrit Raj (PW-32A), without obtaining any order of a
Magistrate whilst the accused were in police custody.

  This leads to the issue as to whether the report of the Forensic Expert is
admissible in evidence, in light of the provisions of the Identification of
Prisoners Act, 1920 (“the Act”) since no rules have been framed prescribed by
the Government of NCT of Delhi.

This issue is being dealt with in the separate Judgment by Justice Ashok
Bhushan.
                                                                                     51




7   In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the prosecution has failed to make out the
    complete chain of circumstances to establish the guilt of the appellant beyond
    reasonable doubt. As a result, the present appeal is allowed, and the judgment and
    order passed by the High Court dated 10.12.2014 in Criminal Appeal no. 1300 of
    2014 is set aside. The appellant is acquitted of the charges under Sections 302, 392
    read with Section 34 of the I.P.C. 1860.


                                                     ………………...…………...J.
                                                        (INDU MALHOTRA)



NEW DELHI,
JULY 02, 2018

