
Supreme Court of India
Mohammad Bin Beerankutti vs State Of Karnataka on 29 January, 2013Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Ranjan Gogoi
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1935 OF 2011


     MOHAMMAD BIN BEERANKUTTI                   APPELLANT


                                   VERSUS


     STATE OF KARNATAKA                          RESPONDENT




                                  O R D E R

     1.          This appeal is directed against  the  judgment  and  order
     passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in Criminal  appeal
     No. 569/2009  with  Criminal  Referred  Case  No.  03  of  2009  dated
     06.09.2010. By the impugned judgment and order, the High  Court  while
     answering  the  reference  has  confirmed  the  conviction  and  death
     sentence passed by the Sessions Judge, Chikmagalur  in  Sessions  Case
     No. 127 of 2007.

     2.          The facts in extenso need not be noticed by us as the same
     have been comprehensively noted by the courts below. The background of
     the facts goes to explain the genesis of the incident that took  place
     on 18.06.2007, when Vyjananthi (“the deceased” for short) was standing
     alone waiting for the bus near the Kadur check post in order to go  to
     Chikmagalur. On the day of the incident, the appellant-  Mohammad  Bin
     Beerankutti, the driver of the taxi, with an ulterior  motive  to  rob
     the deceased of her gold ornaments and other  belongings  induced  the
     deceased to board the taxi for her journey to Chikmagalur. On the  way
     to Chikmagalur, the appellant with the said  motive  had  deliberately
     stopped the vehicle, and after killing the deceased committed robbery.
     Subsequently, to screen the offence and  cause  disappearance  of  the
     evidence the appellant had thrown the dead body of the deceased in the
     valley of Charmadi Ghat.  The  FIR  was  registered  pursuant  to  the
     missing complaint lodged by PW-2, the daughter of the deceased.

     3.          After completion of the investigation,  the  investigating
     agency had filed a  charge-sheet  for  the  offence  punishable  under
     Sections 376, 392, 302 and 201 of the Indian Penal Code(“the IPC”  for
     short). The appellant denied the charge  framed  under  the  aforesaid
     sections  and  pleaded  not  guilty  and,  therefore,  the  trial  had
     commenced against the accused person.

     4.          The Trial Court after perusing the circumstantial evidence
     on record and after noting the chain of circumstances in  establishing
     the offence against the appellant has come to the conclusion that  the
     chain of circumstances had definite link, commencing from the event of
     the missing of the deceased along with her belongings  after  boarding
     the taxi and, thereafter,  the  recovery  of  the  dead  body  of  the
     deceased and the other recoveries made on the basis of the information
     furnished by  the  appellant.  The  Trial  Court,  therefore,  placing
     reliance  on  the  aforesaid  evidence  convicted  and  sentenced  the
     appellant to death under Section 302 IPC and to  undergo  imprisonment
     for one year for the offence punishable under section 392 of  IPC  and
     further sentence for three years under section 201 of IPC.
     5.          Aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence  passed
     by the Trial Court, the appellant has appealed before the High  Court.
     The High Court  vide its judgment and order has  confirmed  the  death
     sentence so passed by the Trial Court  being  of  the  view  that  the
     heinous crime committed by the appellant falls into  the  category  of
     rarest of rare cases. It  is  the  correctness  or  otherwise  of  the
     judgment and order passed by the  Courts  below  which  is  called  in
     question by the appellant in this appeal.

     6.          This Court, while issuing notice, had confined this appeal
     only to the question of sentence. Therefore, the interference with the
     judgment and order of conviction and sentence  passed  by  the  courts
     below is not called for, except the sentencing part of  it.  The  only
     question that requires our consideration is  whether  the  case  would
     fall with the realm of the rarest of the rare case for the purpose  of
     sustaining the death sentence.

     7.          With the assistance of Ms.  Jyotika  Kalra  and  Mr.  V.N.
     Raghupathy, the learned counsel appearing for  the  parties,  we  have
     carefully perused the reasoning and  the  conclusion  reached  by  the
     Courts below for passing the sentence of  death  penalty  against  the
     appellant.

     8.           The  facts  in  the  present  case  in   the   light   of
     circumstantial evidence on record are that,  the  appellant  with  the
     motive to rob the gold ornaments of the deceased and in the pretext of
     taking her  to  Chikmagalur,  actuated  her  to  board  the  taxi  and
     thereafter robbed her  gold  jewelleries  and  other  valuables  after
     killing her.  Though it cannot be disputed that the  appellant  driven
     by the avarice of monetary benefit committed the offence  but  in  the
     absence of the manner of commission of the crime on record, it  cannot
     be concluded that the aforementioned characteristics of  crime  is  an
     instance of what is called a diabolical murder so as to arouse intense
     and extreme indignation of the community.

     9.          Insofar as the conviction solely based  on  circumstantial
     evidence is concerned, the chain of events leading to  the  commission
     of crime should unerringly point towards the guilt of the accused  but
     if the available evidence on  record  leads  to   uncertainty  in  the
     manner of the commission of  crime  then  it  requires  circumspection
     while deciding the maximum penalty for murder. In  the  instant  case,
     the dead body of the deceased was recovered in a decomposed state  and
     the manner of the commission of crime as to the injuries caused is not
     specifically stated in the post-mortem of the deceased, it  cannot  be
     said that the act committed had an element of brutality and was such a
     dastardly act so as to come to the only conclusion of  death  sentence
     foreclosing the alternative option of life imprisonment. The ambit  of
     the rarest of  the  rare  dictum  as  observed  in  the  case  of  Ram
     Singh v. Sonia and Ors.,  {2007  3  SCC  1};  is  where  the  case  is
     considered to be one of the rarest of the rare case and imposition  of
     death penalty is upheld after the  accused had not only put an end  to
     the life of her step brother and his whole family which included three
     tiny tots of 45 days, 2 - 1/2 years and  4  years  but  also  her  own
     father, mother and sister in a very grotesque manner so as to  deprive
     her father from giving the  property  to  her  step  brother  and  his
     family. The fact that murders were committed in such a ghastly  manner
     while the victims were sleeping, without  any  provocation  whatsoever
     from the victims' side indicated  the  cold-blooded  and  premeditated
     approach of the accused to cause death of the victims.

     10.         Taking a holistic view of the entire case, we are  of  the
     considered opinion that  the  present  case  does  not  fit  into  the
     parameters of the 'rarest of rare  cases'  and  since  the  manner  of
     commission of crime is not available on record, the nature of  offence
     cannot be said to be brutal to the extent that life imprisonment as  a
     punishment  is  futile  and  the  sentencing  aim  of  reformation  is
     unachievable.  Therefore, while  allowing  this  appeal  in  part,  we
     modify the sentence to life imprisonment, which means, upto the end of
     life without any remissions by the State Government.
                 Ordered accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)




                                                   .......................J.
                                                              (RANJAN GOGOI)
     NEW DELHI;
     JANUARY 29, 2013.
-----------------------
6
