
Supreme Court of India
Jasvir Kaur vs State Of Punjab on 26 November, 2012Bench: Aftab Alam, Ranjana Prakash Desai
                                                                             REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1961  OF 2012
                (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 2162 of 2012)




      |JASVIR KAUR                               |.....APPELLANT(S)        |
|                                          |                         |
|VERSUS                                    |                         |
|STATE OF PUNJAB                           |.....RESPONDENT(S)       |


                                  O R D E R

           Leave granted.

           The appellant along with her husband has  been  convicted  under
        Section 420 of the Penal Code and both of  them  are  sentenced  to
        imprisonment for two years  and  a  fine  of  Rs.2,000/-  with  the
        default sentence of 15 days’ imprisonment.
           The special leave petition giving rise to the present appeal was
        filed both by the present appellant  as  petitioner  No.1  and  her
        husband - Ginder Singh  as  petitioner  No.2.   The  special  leave
        petition at the instance of the husband was dismissed and  in  case
        of the appellant,  notice  was  issued  only  on  the  question  of
        sentence. We, accordingly, proceed to consider the appeal  to  that
        limited extent.
           According to the prosecution case Ginder Singh who  was  a  Head
        Constable in the  Punjab  Police  extracted  Rs.70,000/-  from  the
        informant Angrej Singh by making the false promise  that  he  would
        arrange for a job for him in the Police.  The deal  was  struck  at
        Rs.1,40,000/-; half of which, i.e., Rs.70,000/- was to be  paid  in
        advance and the balance half, after the employment was made.  It is
        further the prosecution  case  that  on  September  22,  2002,  the
        informant paid Rs.50,000/- to Ginder Singh at his  quarter  in  the
        presence of his wife.  Ginder Singh took the money  and  handed  it
        over to his wife, the present appellant, who counted it before  the
        informant.  A few days later both the accused came to the house  of
        the  informant  to  collect  the  balance  amount  of  Rs.20,000/-.
        Needless to say that neither any employment  was  provided  to  the
        informant nor was the money refunded to him.
           Both the accused were tried by Judicial Magistrate,  1st  Class,
        Faridkot, who, by his judgment and  order  dated  March  29,  2010,
        passed in Criminal Case No.543 dated 14-10-2005 (arising out of FIR
        No.22 dated June 2, 2004), convicted and sentenced the accused,  as
        noted above.
           Their appeal (Criminal Appeal No.75 of 14.10.2005) was dismissed
        by  the  judgment  and  order  dated  September  30,  2011  by  the
        Additional Sessions Judge, Faridkot and their  revision  [(Criminal
        Revision No.2576 of 2011) (O&M)] was similarly rejected by the High
        Court without any modification in the conviction or  sentence  vide
        judgment dated November 28, 2011.
           Coming now  to  the  issue  of  punishment,  sentencing  of  the
        convicted accused which is at the heart of  the  administration  of
        criminal justice is both a delicate and difficult task. In  Hiralal
        Mallick v. State of Bihar[1] Krishna Iyer, J.  quoted  the  English
        Judge Henry McCardie as saying “Trying a man is easy,  as  easy  as
        falling off a log, compared with deciding what to do with him  when
        he has been found guilty”.  Unfortunately, however, the question of
        sentencing does  not  receive  due  importance  and  the  requisite
        application of mind by the courts.  In our country, there  is  very
        little  legislative,  judicial  or  any  other  kind  of   guidance
        available to meaningfully deal with  the  question  of  sentencing.
        The absence of any guidelines makes the  task  of  the  court  more
        difficult and casts a heavy responsibility on it to  calibrate  the
        due punishment that might be awarded  to  a  convict,  taking  into
        consideration all the relevant facts  and  circumstances.   It  is,
        however, regrettable that the courts hardly give  the  question  of
        sentencing  as  much  attention  and  application  of  mind  as  it
        deserves.  The present is a case in point.  As seen above, both the
        accused, the wife  and  the  husband  have  been  found  guilty  of
        cheating and both of them have  been  given  the  same  punishment,
        i.e., imprisonment for two years and a fine of Rs.2,000/-.  Though,
        both the accused, the wife and the husband are  convicted  for  the
        same offence, it does not necessarily follow that  they  should  be
        punished in the same way. What seems to  have  been  overlooked  is
        their relative role in the commission of the offence.
           From the prosecution case and the evidence of  witnesses  it  is
        evident that the primary role in the commission of the offence  was
        of Ginder Singh, the husband, and the wife (the present  appellant)
        had only a subsidiary role. It also needs to be kept in  mind  that
        she is a woman.  In view of  the  aforesaid  facts,  the  appellant
        deserves a lesser punishment than the other  accused,  her  husband
        who played the main role in the commission of the offence.
           In light of the discussion made above, we are of the view that a
        sentence of one year imprisonment to the appellant would  meet  the
        ends of justice.  We, accordingly, modify and reduce  her  sentence
        of imprisonment from  two  years  to  one  year  leaving  the  fine
        undisturbed.
           The appeal is allowed to the limited extent, as indicated above.

                                       …….,….…………...................J
                                        (Aftab Alam)








                         ……………………..................J
                                                                    (Ranjana
      Prakash Desai)
      New Delhi;
      November 26, 2012.
-----------------------
[1]    (1977)4 SCC 44

-----------------------
4



