
Supreme Court of India
Narcotics Central Bureau vs Sukh Dev Raj Sodhi on 20 May, 2011Author: Ganguly
Bench: Asok Kumar Ganguly, Deepak Verma
                                                                              REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1079 OF 2002



NARCOTICS CENTRAL BUREAU                      ... Appellant

                 VERSUS

SUKH DEV RAJ SODHI                            ... Respondent




                            J U D G M E N T

GANGULY, J.


        Heard   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant.     Despite 

notice, none appears for the respondent.




        This   is   an   appeal   by   the   Narcotics   Central   Bureau 

impugning judgment and order dated 11.01.2002 passed by the 

High Court whereby the High Court, on consideration of the 

facts   and   the   legal   position   of   the   case,   was   pleased   to 

hold   that   the   mandatory   provision   of   Section   50   of   the 

Narcotic   Drugs   and   Psychotropic   Substances   Act,   1985 

(hereinafter   referred   to   as   'NDPS   Act')   has   not   been 

complied with and the violation of the said Act has vitiated 

the   conviction   and   on   that   ground,   the   High   Court   was 

pleased to set aside the conviction and did not examine any 

other fact of the case.  In this appeal also, we do not go 

into other factual aspects.

                                                                     ...2.


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1079 OF 2002
                                    .2.

                  It is not in dispute that pursuant to the High 

Court's order, the respondent is set at liberty.




                  Now,   the   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant 

submits that in the instant case, from the search notice (at 

Annexure   P-1),   it   will   appear   that   the   requirement   of 

Section 50 of the NDPS Act has been complied with.  From the 

said notice, it appears that the accused was informed that 

he has the option of being searched either in the presence 

of   gazetted   officer   or   Magistrate   and   it   appears   that   the 

accused   wanted   to   be   searched   in   the   presence   of   gazetted 

officer.  The learned counsel for the appellant submits that 

by   giving   the   option   to   the   accused,   the   appellant   has 

complied with the requirement under Section 50 of the NDPS 

Act.


                  The   obligation   of   the   authorities   under 

Section   50   of   the   NDPS   Act   has   come   up   for   consideration 

before   this   Court   in   several   cases   and   recently,   the 

Constitution  Bench  of  this  Court  in  the  case  of  Vijaysinh 

Chandubha Jadeja v. State of Gujarat [(2011) 1 SCC 609] has 

settled this controversy.   The Constitution Bench has held 

that   requirement   of   Section   50   of   the   NDPS   Act   is   a 

mandatory requirement and the provision of Section 50 must 

be very strictly construed.

                                                                     ...3.


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1079 OF 2002
                                    .3.

                  From the perusal of the conclusion arrived at 

by   this   Court   in  Vijaysinh   Chandubha   Jadeja's   case,   it 

appears   that   the   requirement   under   Section   50   of   the   NDPS 

Act is not complied with by merely informing the accused of 

his   option   to   be   searched   either   in   the   presence   of   a 

gazetted   officer   or   before   a   Magistrate.     The   requirement 

continues   even   after   that   and   it   is   required   that   the 

accused   person   is   actually   brought   before   the   gazetted 

officer or the Magistrate and in Para 32, the Constitution 

Bench   made   it   clear   that   in   order   to   impart   authenticity, 

transparency and creditworthiness to the entire proceedings, 

an   endeavour   should   be   made   by   the   prosecuting   agency   to 

produce the suspect before the nearest Magistrate.  




                  That   being   the   law   laid   down   by   the 

Constitution   Bench   of   this   Court   on   interpretation   of 

Section   50   of   the   NDPS   Act,   we   do   not   think   that   the 

obligation under Section 50 of the Act has been discharged 

statutorily by the appellant in this case.   We, therefore, 

find   no   reason   to   interfere   with   the   finding   made   by   the 

High court.  The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.



                                                 ................., J.
                                                  [ASOK KUMAR GANGULY]



                                                 ................., J.
                                                          [DEEPAK VERMA]
NEW DELHI;
MAY 20, 2011.



