
Supreme Court of India
Dr. Lakshmansingh Himatsingh ... vs Naresh Kumar Chandrashankar Jha ... on 24 July, 1990Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 1976, 1990 SCR  (3) 511
Author: M Fathima Beevi
Bench: Fathima Beevi, M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
DR. LAKSHMANSINGH HIMATSINGH VAGHELE

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NARESH KUMAR CHANDRASHANKAR JHA AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/07/1990

BENCH:
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)
BENCH:
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)
THOMMEN, T.K. (J)
KULDIP SINGH (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR 1976		  1990 SCR  (3) 511
 1990 SCC  (4) 169	  JT 1990 (3)	241
 1990 SCALE  (2)136


ACT:
    Code  of Criminal Procedure 1973--Section  197--Sanction
to prosecute--When necessary for--'Public  servant'--'Public
analyst'-Sanction to prosecute--Whether necessary.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellant, an employee of the Municipal	 Corporation
Ahmedabad  was	holding the post of Laboratory	Officer	 and
while he was so holding the post, he by a Notification dated
21.12.1966, issued by the State Government, was appointed as
a  Public  Analyst for the local area within  the  municipal
limits of the Corporation. The respondent filed a  complaint
before the Magistrate for offences punishable under Sections
465, 468 and 20 1. I.P.C. alleged to have been committed  by
the  appellant	while exercising his functions as  a  Public
Analyst.  The appellant moved the High Court  under  Section
482,  for  quashing the criminal proceedings  sought  to  be
initiated  against him by the said complaint. His  principle
contention was that he being a public servant removable from
office	only by the State Government, the  magistrate  could
not take cognizance of the alleged offences and that  previ-
ous  sanction of the State Government as contemplated  under
section 197, Cr.P.C. was necessary. The High Court  rejected
the contention of the appellant and dismissed the  petition.
He has filed this appeal after obtaining special leave	from
the Court.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD: The privilege or immunity from prosecution without
sanction  extends only when the accused is a public  servant
of  the kind mentioned in Section 197, Cr.P.C. He must be  a
public servant as defined in Section 21 of the Indian  Penal
Code  and not removable from his office save by or with	 the
sanction  of the State Government or the Central  Government
as  the case may be. The offence must also be one  committed
by  the	 accused while acting or purporting to	act  in	 the
discharge of his official duty. Section 197, Cr.P.C. clearly
intends	 to draw a line between public servants and to	pro-
vide  that only in the case of the higher ranks	 should	 the
sanction  of the Government to their prosecution  be  neces-
sary. [513C-D, H]
512
    The	 words "removable from office" occurring in  Section
197 signify removal from the office one is holding. [514B]
    In	the instant case, the appellant was not holding	 any
public	office in connection with the affairs of the  State.
The  State  Government	had merely entrusted  him  with	 the
functions  of  a Public Analyst which could be	granted	 and
taken  by  an administrative Act. It was on account  of	 his
being  employed	 by the Municipal Corporation  that  he	 was
appointed as a Public Analyst in the cadre against any post.
The  Prevention of Food Adulteration Act also does not	con-
tain any deeming provision to treat the Public Analyst as  a
public servant. [514D-E]
    The appellant is not therefore a public servant  remova-
ble only by the State Government. [514G]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 387
of 1990.
    From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  12.1.1984  of	 the
Gujarat	 High Court at Ahmedabad in Misc.  Crl.	 Application
No. 48 of 1982.
S.H. Sheth and S.C. Patel for the Appellant.
B. Datta, Sunil Dogra and P.H. Parekh for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
FATHIMA BEEVI, J. Leave granted.
    The	 appellant is aggrieved by the judgment of the	High
Court  holding	that  sanction of the  State  Government  as
required  under Section 197, Cr.P.C., is not  necessary	 for
taking	cognizance of the offences against the appellant  on
the  basis  of the complaint filed by  the  respondent.	 The
appellant  is  an  employee of	the  Municipal	Corporation,
Ahmedabad. While holding the post of Laboratory Officer, the
State  Government by a Notification  dated  21.12.1966.under
Section	 8 of the Food Adulteration Act, 1954 appointed	 the
appellant  as a Public Analyst for the local area  comprised
within	the  limits of the Corporation.	 The  complaint	 was
filed  by the respondent before the Magistrate for  the	 of-
fences	punishable under Sections 465,468 and  201,  I.P.C.,
alleged to have been committed by the appellant while  exer-
cising the functions as Public Analyst.
513
    The	 appellant moved the High Court under  Section	482,
Cr.P.C., for quashing the criminal proceedings on the ground
that,  he being a public servant removable from office	only
by the State Government the Magistrate could not take cogni-
zance  of the offence alleged to have been  committed  while
discharging the duties as Public Analyst without the  requi-
site  sanction	under Section 197, Cr.P.C.  The	 High  Court
rejected this contention and dismissed the petition.
    Under Section 197(1), Cr.P.C., when a public servant not
removable  from his office save by or with the	sanction  of
the  Government, is accused of any offence alleged  to	have
been  committed by him while acting or purporting to act  in
the  discharge	of his official duty, no  Court	 shall	take
cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction
of  the Government. The section extends immunity from  irre-
sponsible,  frivolous and vexatious prosecution. The  privi-
lege  of immunity from prosecution without sanction  extends
only  when the accused is a public servant of the kind	men-
tioned	therein. He must be a public servant as	 defined  in
Section	 21 of the Indian Penal Code and not removable	from
his office save by or with the sanction of the State Govern-
ment  or  the  Central Government as the case  may  be.	 The
offence	 must  also be one committed by	 the  accused  while
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duty. Section 21, I .P.C., reads as under:
21.  "Public servant"--The words "public servant"  denote  a
person	falling	 under any of the  descriptions	 hereinafter
following, namely:
Twelfth .--Every person--
      (a)  in the service or pay of the Government or  remu-
nerated	 by  less or commission for the performance  of	 any
public duty by the Government;
      (b)  in  the service or pay of a	local  authority,  a
corporation established by Or under a Central, Provincial or
State Act or a Government company as defined in Section 6 17
of the Companies Act, 1956 ( 1 of 1956).
 Section  197,  Cr.P.C., clearly intends to draw  a	line
between public servants and to provide that only in the case
of the higher ranks
514
should	the sanction of the government to their	 prosecution
be  necessary. While a public servant holding an  office  of
the kind mentioned in the Section is as such public  servant
appointed to another office, his official acts in connection
with  the latter office will also relate to the	 former	 of-
fice. The words "removable from office" occurring in Section
197  signify  removal  from the office he  is  holding.	 The
authority  mentioned in the section is the  authority  under
which the officer is serving and competent to terminate	 his
services. If the accused is under the service and pay of the
local authority, the appointment to an office for exercising
functions  under  a particular statute will  not  alter	 his
status as an employee of the local authority.
    The appellant herein is admittedly the Laboratory  Offi-
cer  in the service and pay of the Municipal Corporation  of
Ahmedabad. The appointment as Public Analyst by the  Govern-
ment  does not confer on him the status of a public  servant
or  an officer under the service and pay of the	 Government.
He  is	not remunerated by any fee by  the  Government.	 The
appellant  was not the employee of the State Government	 and
was  not  employed  in connection with the  affairs  of	 the
State.	He was not holding any public office  in  connection
with  the  affairs of the State. The  State  Government	 had
merely entrusted him with the functions of a Public  Analyst
which  could be granted and taken by an administrative	act.
It  was	 on account of his being employed by  the  Municipal
Corporation that he was appointed as a Public Analyst by the
Government.  He	 is not appointed as Public Analyst  in	 the
cadre against any post. The Prevention of Food	Adulteration
Act also does not contain any deeming provision to treat the
Public Analyst as a public-servant.
    The	 appellant  is holding an office from  which  he  is
removable by the Local Authority and not by the	 Government.
The cancellation of the appointment as Public Analyst  would
not amount to removal from office. Section 197, Cr.P.C.,  in
this context contemplates the removal of the appellant	from
the office of the Laboratory Officer and not his transfer or
removal	 from the office of the Public Analyst. The  removal
of the appellant from the office of Public Analyst would not
affect	his office as a Laboratory Officer under  the  Local
Authority  and would not amount to removal from office.	 The
appellant  is not therefore a public servant removable	only
by  the	 State Government. The High Court was right  in	 its
view. We accordingly dismiss the appeal.
Y. Lal				       Appeal dismissed.
515




