
Supreme Court of India
V. Ravi Kumar vs The State Rep. By Inspector Of ... on 14 December, 2018Author: I Banerjee
Bench: I Banerjee, R Banumathi
                                                                                         1


                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                   THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 111 OF 2011


                         V. Ravi Kumar                                  …Appellant


                                                  VERSUS


                         State, Rep. by Inspector of Police,
                         District Crime Branch, Salem,
                         Tamil Nadu & Ors.                            …Respondents




                                              JUDGMENT

                         Indira Banerjee, J.



                             This appeal is against the final judgment and order

                         dated   20-03-2006    passed    by    the   High   Court   of

                         Judicature at Madras, inter alia, allowing Criminal

                         Original Petition No.27039 of 2005 filed under Section

                         482 Cr.P.C. and quashing the criminal proceedings being

Signature Not Verified
                         Crime No.54 of 2005 against the petitioners before the
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.12.14
16:47:25 IST
Reason:
                         High Court and also against the first accused company,

                         which was not party before the High Court.
                                                                 2
2.   The appellant, Shri Ravi Kumar carries on business

of cotton ginning and conversion of cotton into yarn at

Salem, Tamil Nadu as proprietor of “SARAVANA YARN

TRADERS”.

3.   The appellant as proprietor of “SARAVANA YARN

TRADERS” entered into transactions with Sri. Rajendran

Mills Ltd., Salem (hereinafter referred to as “the Mill”).

The respondent No.2/accused No.2 is the Managing

Director of the Mill and the respondent No.3/accused

No.3 Sri Sundaram is its Chairman, respondent No.

4/accused No.4 Sri Sundar is the son of the Managing

Director being the respondent No.2/accused No.2 and is

in charge of the affairs of the Mill. The respondents/

accused   Nos.5    to     13   are   also    responsible   for

administering the Mill.

4.   In December 2001, the Mill requested the appellant

to supply cotton lint to the Mill for conversion of the

same into yarn.     The appellant and the respondents

entered into transactions in 2001.          Later, in January

2002, a Memorandum of Understanding in writing was

executed between the appellant and the Mill.
                                                                   3
5.    The appellant has alleged that pursuant to the

Memorandum of Understanding, the appellant supplied

1,03,920 Kgs of cotton lint to the Mill for conversion into

yarn. The appellant has further alleged that respondent

No.2/accused No.2 Shri Chokalingam had, from out of

the said quantity of cotton lint, purchased lint weighing

about 47,164 kgs of the value of Rs.26,93,289/- on

credit   basis   and      the   balance   which    was    worth

Rs.35,26,561.69 had been entrusted to the Mill for

conversion into yarn.

6.    According to the appellant, the Mill did not take any

step to convert the lint into yarn in spite of repeated

requests. The appellant later came to know that all the

accused had connived with each other and in criminal

breach of trust sold the entire cotton lint weighing about

1,08,920/- kgs of the value of about Rs.62,19,850.50 and

appropriated the sale proceeds thereof.

7.    On 20-05-2004, the appellant lodged a complaint at

the   Edapadi    Police    Station,   Salem   district   against

respondents for offences under Sections 420 and 409

read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
                                                              4
8.   As the Police failed to register any case, the

appellant invoked Section 156(3) of the Cr.P.C. to seek

orders of the learned Judicial Magistrate II, Sankagiri for

registration of the complaint.

9.   Even after orders under Section 156(3) of the

Cr.P.C., the Police did not register any complaint.

Thereafter, the appellant filed a petition being Crl. O.P.

No.7715 of 2005 praying for direction on the Inspector of

Police to register a case on the basis of the complaint

made by the appellant.

10. It is stated that since the amount involved exceeded

the limit for invocation of the pecuniary jurisdiction of

the local Police Station, the Superintendent of Police

transferred the investigation to the District Crime Branch

and the same was registered as Crime No.54/2005

under Sections 420, 409 and 34 IPC on 22-06-2005.

11. According to the appellant, since the police did not

conduct the investigation properly, the appellant was

constrained to file Crl. O.P. No.23354 of 2005 in the High

Court of Madras for direction on the Investigation Officer

of Crime No.54 of 2005 to arrest the accused mentioned

in the FIR, complete the investigation and file a final
                                                               5


report.

12. By an order dated 29-08-2005, the High Court

disposed of the criminal original petition by directing the

respondent to file a final Report within three months

from the date of receipt of a copy of the said order.

13. It is pleaded that as the Police could not complete

the investigation within three months as directed, it filed

Criminal Miscellaneous Petition being Crl.M.P. No.9149 of

2005 in Crl. O.P. No.23354 of 2005 for extension of time,

by a further period of six months, for completion of

investigation in Crime No.54 of 2005.

14.   On 22-09-2005 respondent Nos.2 to 13 filed Crl.

O.P. 27039 of 2005 under Section 482 Cr.P.C. in the High

Court for quashing FIR No. 54 of 2005 alleging that the

allegations in the complaint did not prima facie make out

the offences for which the respondents had been

charged.

15. The respondent State filed its counter affidavit to

the aforesaid application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and

prayed that the said application be dismissed.        In the

affidavit   in   opposition,   it   was   contended     that

investigation revealed that the accused persons had
                                                                    6


forged documents using blank letter head, papers and

cheque leaves of the appellant given to him before

entering into business transactions. As such ingredients

of Sections 468, 471, 420, 409 and 120 (b) IPC were to

be found.    Furthermore, there was evidence that one of

the accused mentioned in the FIR namely Prasanna

Chakravarthy had deposed about the forged letter

prepared by him on the instruction of Kasi Viswanathan,

Meiyappan, Rajarathinam, and Jayapal.

16. On 18-10-2005, the appellant, as a de facto

complainant, filed an application numbered Crl.M.P.

No.8370     of    2005   for   intervention   in   Crl.   O.   P.

No.27039/2005.

17. By an order dated 24-11-2005, the High Court

granted the police six months’ time for completing the

investigation in FIR No.54 of 2005 and for filing final

report therein.

18. On 30-11-2005, the High Court referred the matter

to the Conciliation and Mediation Centre for resolution of

the dispute between the parties, in the absence of the

appellant, being the complainant.
                                                                    7
19. The appellant opposed the conciliation proceedings

contending that the offences were non-compoundable

whereupon the case was again referred back to the High

Court for decision on merits.

20. By the impugned order dated 20-03-2006, the High

Court allowed the application under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

observing that the complainant had, without assigning

any reason, withdrawn the first complaint and launched

prosecution    by   filing   a   fresh    complaint;   that   the

complaint arose out of a commercial transaction; and

that the complainant would have to approach the Civil

Court for recovering dues if at all arising out of

commercial transaction.

21. The short question in this appeal is whether the

High   Court    should       have   quashed      the    criminal

proceedings being Crime No.54 of 2005 on the grounds

that the appellant had withdrawn an earlier complaint

without   assigning    reasons;     the    transactions   being

commercial in nature, the ingredients of an offence

under the Sections referred to above were absent; and

that the remedy of the appellant lay in filing a civil suit.
                                                                   8
       22. There is no provision in the Criminal Procedure Code

       or any other statute which debars a complainant from

       making a second complaint on the same allegations,

       when the first complaint did not lead to conviction,

       acquittal or discharge. In Shiv Shankar Singh v. State

       of Bihar and Anr.1, this Court held:

          “18. Thus, it is evident that the law does not
          prohibit filing or entertaining of the second
          complaint even on the same facts provided the
          earlier complaint has been decided on the basis of
          insufficient material or the order has been passed
          without understanding the nature of the complaint
          or the complete facts could not be placed before
          the court or where the complainant came to know
          certain facts after disposal of the first complaint
          which could have tilted the balance in his favour.
          However, the second complaint would not be
          maintainable wherein the earlier complaint has
          been disposed of on full consideration of the case of
          the complainant on merit.”


       23. As held by this Court in Jatinder Singh and

       Others v. Ranjit Kaur2, it is only when a complaint is

       dismissed on merits after an inquiry, that a second

       complaint cannot be made on the same facts. Maybe, as

       contended by the respondents, the first complaint was

       withdrawn without assigning any reason.     However, that

       in itself is no ground to quash a second complaint.


1 (2012) 1 SCC 130
2 2001 (2) SCC 570
                                                                                  9
       24. In Pramatha Nath Talukdar and Anr. v. Saroj

       Ranjan Sarkar3, this Court dealt with the question

       whether the second complaint by the respondent should

       have been entertained when the previous complaint had

       been withdrawn.            The application under Section 482

       Cr.P.C. was allowed and the complaint dismissed by the

       majority Judges observing that an order of dismissal

       under       Section    203    Cr.P.C.   was    no        bar   to    the

       entertainment of second complaint on the same facts,

       but    it     could   be    entertained   only      in    exceptional

       circumstances, for example, where the previous order

       was      passed       on     an   incomplete        record      or    a

       misunderstanding of the nature of the complaint or the

       order passed was manifestly absurd, unjust or foolish or

       where there were new facts, which could not, with

       reasonable diligence, have been brought on record in

       previous proceedings.

      25.    In Poonam Chand Jain and Anr. v. Fazru 4, this

      Court relied upon its earlier decision in Pramatha Nath

      (supra) and held that an order of dismissal of a complaint

      was no bar to the entertainment of second complaint on


3 AIR 1962 SC 876
4 (2010) 2 SCC 631
                                                                   10


      the same facts, but it could be entertained only in

      exceptional circumstances, such as, where the previous

      order was passed on incomplete record, or on a

      misunderstanding of the nature of the complaint or was

      manifestly absurd, unjust or foolish or where there were

      new facts which could not, with reasonable diligence,

      have been brought on the record in the previous

      proceedings.

      26.    In Poonam Chand Jain (supra) this Court further

      held that:-


            “...this question again came up for consideration
            before this Court in Jatinder Singh v. Ranjit Kaur.
            There also this Court by relying on the principle in
            Pramatha Nath held that there is no provisions in
            the Code or in any other statute which debars a
            complainant from filing a second complaint on the
            same allegation as in the first complaint. But this
            Court added when a Magistrate conducts an
            enquiry under Section 202 of the Code and
            dismisses a complaint on merits a second
            complaint on the same facts could not be made
            unless there are “exceptional cirumstances”. This
            Court held in para 12, if the dismissal of the first
            complainant then there is no bar in filing a second
            complaint on the same facts. However, if the
            dismissal of the complaint under Section 203 of the
            Code was on merit the position will be different.”


       27. In M/s Jayant Vitamins Ltd. v. Chaitanyakumar

       and Another5 this Court held that in the absence of
5 (1992) 4 SCC 15
                                                                           11


        compelling         and   justifiable   reasons,   it   was   not

        permissible for the Court to stop investigation by

        quashing an FIR.

        28. In Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Limited and

        Ors v. Mohd. Sharaful Haque and Another6 this

        Court referred to State of Haryana and Ors. v.

        Bhajan Lal and Ors.7 and summarized and illustrated

        the category of cases in which power under Section 482

        of the Criminal Procedure Code could be exercised. This

        court observed and held:-

          "(1) Where the allegations made in the first
          information report or the complaint, even if they are
          taken at their face value and accepted in their
          entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or
          make out a case against the accused.

          (2) Where the allegations in the first information
          report and other materials, if any, accompanying
          the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence,
          justifying an investigation by police officers under
          Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of
          a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of
          the Code.

          (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in
          the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in
          support of the same do not disclose the commission
          of any offence and make out a case against the
          accused.

          (4) Where the allegations in the FIR do not
          constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only
6 2005 (1) SCC 122
7 (1992) Supp. 1 SCC 335
                                                                       12


           a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is
           permitted by a police officer without an order of a
           Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of
           the Code.

           (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or
           complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable
           on the basis of which no prudent person can ever
           reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient
           ground for proceeding against the accused.

           (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in
           any of the provisions of the Code or the Act
           concerned (under which a criminal proceeding is
           instituted) to the institution and continuance of the
           proceedings and/or where there is a specific
           provision in the Code or Act concerned, providing
           efficacious redress for the grievance of the
           aggrieved party.

           (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly
           attended with mala fide and/or where the
           proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior
           motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and
           with a view to spite him due to private and personal
           grudge."


     29.     There can be no doubt that a mere breach of

     contract is not in itself a criminal offence, and gives rise to

     the civil liability of damages.   However, as held by this

     Court in Mridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma and Ors. v.

     State of Bihar and Anr.8, the distinction between mere

     breach of contract and cheating, which is a criminal

     offence, is a fine one.    While breach of contract cannot

     give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating, fraudulent or
8 (2000) 4 SCC 168
                                                                 13


dishonest intention is the basis of the offence of cheating.

In this case, in the FIR, there were allegations of

fraudulent and dishonest intention including allegations of

fabrication of documents, the correctness or otherwise

whereof can be determined only during trial when

evidence is adduced.

30.   Exercise of the inherent power of the High Court

under Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code would

depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. It is

neither proper nor permissible for the Court to lay down

any straitjacket formula for regulating the inherent power

of the High Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.

31.   Power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. might be exercised

to prevent abuse of the process of law, but only when, the

allegations, even if true, would not constitute an offence

and/or were frivolous and vexatious on their face.

32.   Where the accused seeks quashing of the FIR,

invoking inherent jurisdiction of the High Court, it is wholly

impermissible for the High Court to enter into the factual

arena to adjudge the correctness of the allegations in the

complaint. Reference may be made to the decision of this

Court, inter alia, in State of Punjab v. Subhash Kumar
                                                                      14


     and Ors.9        and Janata Dal v. H.S. Chowdhary and

     Ors.10

     33.      In Vesa Holdings (P) Ltd. and Anr. v. State of

     Kerala and Ors.11, this Court observed:

           “12. The settled proposition of law is that every
           breach of contract would not give rise to an offence
           of cheating and only in those cases breach of
           contract would amount to cheating where there was
           any deception played at the very inception.”

           13. It is true that a given set of facts may make out
           a civil wrong as also a criminal offence and only
           because a civil remedy may be available to the
           complainant that itself cannot be a ground to quash
           a criminal proceeding. The real test is whether the
           allegations in the complaint disclose the criminal
           offence of cheating or not.”

     34.      In Vesa Holding (P) Ltd. (supra), this Court found

     that there was nothing to show that at the very inception

     there was any intention on behalf of the accused persons

     to cheat, which was a condition precedent for an offence

     under Section 420 IPC. The complaint was found not to

     disclose any criminal offence at all.

     35.      It is well settled that a judgment is a precedent for

     the issue of law which is raised and decided. Phrases and

     sentences in a judgment are to be understood in the

     context of the facts and circumstances of the case and

9 (2004) 13 SCC 437
10 (1992) 4 SCC 305
11(2015) 8 SCC 293
                                                             15


the same cannot be read in isolation.

36.   As observed above, every breach of contract does

not give rise to an offence of cheating. The language and

tenor of Vesa Holdings (P) Ltd. (supra), particularly,

the observation that breach of contract would give rise to

an offence of cheating only in those cases where there

was any deception played at the very inception, is to be

understood in the context of the facts of that case and

accordingly construed. The phrase “in those cases where

there was any deception played at the very inception”

cannot be read out of context.     This is not a case of

breach of contract simplicitor but there are serious

allegations of forgery of documents, use of blank letter-

head, papers and cheque leaves of the appellant.

37.   In this case, it cannot be said that there were no

allegations which prima facie constitute ingredients of

offences under Sections 420, 409 and 34 of the Indian

Penal Code in complaint.   There were clear allegations of

fraud and cheating which prima facie constitute offences

under Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code. The

correctness of the allegations can be adjudged only at the

trial when evidence is adduced. At this stage, it was not
                                                               16


for the High Court to enter into factual arena and decide

whether the allegations were correct or whether the same

were a counter-blast to any proceedings initiated by the

respondents.

38.    In Jatinder Singh (supra), this Court clearly held

that if dismissal of the complaint was not on merit, but on

default of the complainant, moving the Magistrate again

with   a   second   complaint   on   the   same   facts   is

maintainable. But if the dismissal of the complaint under

Section 203 of the Code was on merits, the position could

be different.

39.    The failure to mention the first complaint in the

subsequent one is also inconsequential as held, in effect,

in Jatinder Singh (supra).      Mentioning of reasons for

withdrawal of an earlier complaint is also not a condition

precedent for maintaining a second complaint.       In our

considered opinion, the High Court clearly erred in law in

dismissing the complaint, which certainly disclosed an

offence prima facie.     At the cost of repetition, it is

reiterated that it was not for the High Court to enter the

factual arena and adjudicate the merits of the allegations.
                                                                       17
40.      The appeal is, therefore, allowed and the impugned

order of the High Court quashing the complaint is set

aside.    The first respondent shall proceed with further

investigation in accordance with law.




                                 .................................J.
                                            (R. BANUMATHI)




                                 .................................J.
                                        (INDIRA BANERJEE)
  NEW DELHI
  DECEMBER 14, 2018

