
Supreme Court of India
State Of Punjab vs Labh Singh on 19 July, 1996Equivalent citations: JT 1996 (6), 598	  1996 SCALE  (5)366
Author: K Ramaswamy
Bench: Ramaswamy, K.
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF PUNJAB

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
LABH SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	19/07/1996

BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
G.B. PATTANAIK (J)

CITATION:
 JT 1996 (6)   598	  1996 SCALE  (5)366


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
			    WITH
	     CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs.731-33 OF 1996
	[@ SLP [Crl. Nos.2475, 2476 & 2477 of 1991]
			 O R D E R
     Leave granted.
     These  appeals  arise  under  the	Narcotic  Drugs	 and
Pschotropic  Substances	 Act,  1985.  The  respondents	were
acquitted on trial on the ground that they were not informed
of their  valuable right  that under  Section 50  of the Act
they were  entitled to	be searched  in the  presence  of  a
Gazetted Officer. Violation therefore. vitiates the trial as
the accused  have the  statutory right	to be  searched. The
absence of  their information as to the said right is one of
the infirmities to the validity of their prosecution.
     The question  was considered  in State  of	 Punjab	 vs.
Balbir Singh  [1994) 3 SCC 299]. Subsequently, another Bench
of this	 Court in  State of Punjab v. Jasbir Singh [(1996) 1
SCC 288]  has pointed out hat it would be open to the search
officer to  inform the	suspect, at the time of search, that
he is  entitled to be searched in the presence of a Gazetted
Officer and also to take in writing from the accused that he
has been  so informed  and that	 the accused has waived that
right.	Thus   it  would   form	 part	of  the	  record  as
contemporaneous evidence.  Thereafter, it may not be open to
the accused to take the plea of noncompliance of Section 50.
It would be for the Court to consider, at the trial, whether
the officer  who conducted  the	 search,  had,	as  a  fact,
informed the  accused of  that right and whether the accused
had waived that right of being searched only in the presence
of a Gazetted Officer. This Court held that:
     "The  matter   of	appreciation  of
     evidence and  the totality	 of  the
     facts and	circumstances have to be
     considered by  the trial  Court. On
     the facts in that case, it was held
     that since	 the Additions	Sessions
     Judge was	not inclined  to  accept
     the prosecution case in the absence
     of anything  in writing, this Court
     confirmed the acquittal."
     In State  of Himachal  Pradesh v.	Prithi Chand  & Anr.
[(1996) 2 SCC 37], this Court further elaborately considered
the effect  of the violation of Section 50 and held that any
evidence recorded  and recovered  in violation of the search
and the	 contraband seized  in violation  of  the  mandatory
requirement does  not  ipso  facto  invalidates	 the  trial.
Section 50 contemplates right to be searched in the presence
of a  Gazetted	Officer.  It  depends  upon  the  facts	 and
circumstances in  each case. It was found that the discharge
of the accused on that ground was deprecated. In view of the
long delay  in the  matter, this Court declined to interfere
with the  discharge recorded  by t  he	Additional  Sessions
Judge.
     In view  of the settled legal position that the accused
has valuable  right to	be  informed  of  his  right  to  be
searched in  the presence  of a Gazetted Officer, the search
officer invariably  would conduct  the search subserving the
salutory right	given under  Section 50. Each case should be
considered in  the light  of the  facts and circumstances in
which the  contraband was seized, viz., time when the search
was conducted, the place where it was seized, whether police
had prior  information of  the contraband being in transport
or  place   of	concealment,   whether	there	was   proper
opportunity to	the police  to	secure	the  presence  of  a
Gazetted Officer;  whether the	delay in  search and seizure
would result  in the  escape of	 the accused  from arrest or
contraband would be destroyed or wisked away and host of all
relevant attendant circumstances. Each case depends upon its
own factual  scenario  and  no	exhaustive  or	mathematical
formula of universal application can be laid down. The Court
has to consider each case on its own setting. In view of the
absence of  any writing	 from the accused to the effect that
the accused  was informed of his right and that the same was
waived taken  by the  officer who conducted the searched and
seized the contraband and in view of the long delay that has
taken place, we think that these may not be cases warranting
interference with the order of acquittal at this distance of
time.
     The appeals are accordingly, dismissed. The respondents
are directed to be set at liberty forthwith.

