
Supreme Court of India
Changdeo Nivrutti Kamathe vs State Of Maharashtra on 7 October, 2009Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, R.M. Lodha
                                                   1



                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 17 OF 2003




   CHANGDEO NIVRUTI KAMATHE                       .....                  APPELLANT

                                     VERSUS

   STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                              .....           RESPONDENT

                                   with
                        SLP(CRL.) NO. 5513 of 2002


                                  O R D E R

        The broad facts for the disposal of the present

appeal are as under:-

        19    persons    in    all    including    A1     -   Changdeo

Nivruti Kamathe, the appellant herein were brought to

trial    for offences under Sections 302, 326, 324, 353,

332,    387   read   with     Section   149/148    IPC    for   having

caused the death of Kalo Ram and injuries to several of

the witnesses, on the 12th of April, 1985 during the

course of a fair and a religious procession in the

village of which both the parties were              residents.     The

Sessions      Judge,     Pune,       vide   his    judgment      dated

16.05.1986 acquitted all the accused holding inter alia

that the witnesses were interested parties and that

they had deposed against the accused persons on account

of enmity and that the prosecution version was not
                                               2



supported by the medical evidence or the evidence of

the police officer who had investigated the matter.

         The matter was thereafter taken in appeal before

the Bombay High Court, which, by its order dated 23rd

July, 2002, partly allowed the appeal and convicted the

appellant under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code

simplicitor           and     sentenced        him        to       undergo     life

imprisonment          and    to   the    payment         of    a    fine    with    a

default clause and convicted two of the other accused

Vishnu       Nivruti        Kamathe,    Shankar           Mugut     Kamathe       and

Bhanudas @ Bhalchandra Gulab Kamathe under Section 323

IPC    and     also    sentenced        them       to    undergo      a    term    of

imprisonment.


         Two appeals have been filed by Changdeo Nivrutti

Kamathe alone who has been convicted for the offence of

murder and the other that is S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 5513 of

2003     has been filed by the other accused.                              We grant

leave in this matter as well.


         Mr.     R.     Sundaravardhan,                 the    learned       senior

counsel for the appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 17 of

2003 has raised several arguments during the course of

the hearing.            He has pointed out that it was well

settled that the High Court in dealing with an appeal
                                            3



against acquittal should not ordinarily                       interfere with

the judgment of the trial court unless that judgment

could    be    said   to     be    perverse       and   as    this     cardinal

principle       had   been        discarded       by    the     High     Court,

interference by this Court was called for to rectify

what was an apparent mistake. He has also submitted

that     the    observations         of     the    High       Court    on   the

statements of the witnesses (that the trial court found

were not worthy of belief as they were relatives of the

complainant party) were also erroneous as the medical

evidence did not support the ocular testimony.



         Mr. Ravindra         K. Adsure the learned counsel for

the State of Maharashtra has, however, supported the

judgment of the High Court and submitted that as the

judgment of the Sessions Judge was erroneous to the

point of perversity,               interference by the High Court

was justified.


         We have considered the arguments advanced by the

learned counsel for the parties.


         In the light of the fact that all P.Ws. some of

them    injured,      have    specifically         named      the     appellant

herein    i.e    Changdeo         Nivruti    Kamathe      as    the     primary
                                4



mover of the crime and has attributed the fatal injury

on the person of Kaluram deceased to him, we are of the

opinion that his presence appears to be proved on the

record.     It has come in the evidence of the witnesses

that Kaluram had fallen on the ground and as his son

attempted to save him a gupti which had been concealed

by the appellant was used to cause an injury on the

person of Kaluram and one injury            on the back of

Sudhakar (PW 6).     The presence of the injury on the

deceased is evident from the medical evidence.



      Mr.     Sundaravardhan   has   then     fallen   back

alternatively on the argument that Section 302 was not

made out as only one injury had been found as per the

medical evidence and that too during a fracas involving

a large number of persons on both sides the matter

would fall under Section 304 Part I or 304 Part II IPC.



      We have considered this argument and find that

it has merit.


      We see from the evidence of P.W. 9        Dr. Sheikh

who had performed the post mortem on the dead body and

had noted one injury 2.5cm X =cm     X 11cm at 2 cms left

lateral to the first thoracic spine on the shoulder.
                                          5



On an examination of the said injury he found that it

had penetrated into the aorta.                     We also see that the

incident     happened     during     the       course       of    a     heated

argument between a large number of persons present on

both sides.       It is also clear from the evidence of

P.Ws. 7 and 8, police constables who were on bandobast

duty during the procession, that a crowd of 400 to 500

representing rival groups had collected at the place

and stone pelting by rival groups and fiery speeches

had   been   made   as    a   prelude         to    the   incident      which

happened despite the efforts of those                        present       to

pacify    both   sides.       We   also       see    that   the       incident

happened in the year 1985 and that the trial court by

its judgment dated 16.05.1986 had acquitted all the

accused.


         In view of the above stated facts, we feel that

the ends of justice would be met if the offence is

converted into one 304 Part-I                      and the sentence is

reduced to five years rigorous imprisonment.



         With this above modification, the above appeal

is dismissed.


SLP(Crl.)    No. 5513/2002
                                  6



      For the reasons recorded in Criminal Appeal No.

17   of   2003,   the   special   leave    petition   stands

dismissed.


                                          ..................J
                                          [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                          ..................J
                                          [R.M. LODHA]

NEW DELHI
OCTOBER 07, 2009.

