
Supreme Court of India
Rattiram & Ors vs State Of M.P.Tr.Insp.Of Police on 17 February, 2012Author: D Misra
Bench: Dalveer Bhandari, T.S. Thakur, Dipak Misra
                                                                             Reportable



                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 223 OF 2008





Rattiram & Ors.                                            .............Appellant


                                    Versus


State of M. P. Through 

Inspector of Police                                 .........Respondent 



                                     WITH


                CRIMINAL  APPEAL NO. 458 OF 2008




Satyanarayan & ors.                                        ............Appellant


                                    Versus


The State of Madhya Pradesh Through 

Incharge, Police Station Cantt.                           .........Respondent 





                              J U D G M E N T

Dipak Misra, J.

      Perceiving divergent and contradictory views as regards the 



effect   and   impact   of   not   committing   an   accused   in   terms   of 



Section   193   of   the   Code   of   Criminal   Procedure   (for   short   `the 



Code')   in  cases   where  charge-sheet  is   filed  under   Section   3(1)(x) 



of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 


                                                                                   2


Atrocities)   Act,   1989   (for   brevity   `the   Act')   and   cognizance   is 



directly taken by the Special Judge under the Act, a   two-Judge 



Bench   thought   it   apposite   to   refer   the   matter   to   a   larger   Bench 



and   on   the   basis   of   the   said   reference,   the   matter   has   been 



placed before us. At this juncture, it is requisite to clarify that the 



real conflict or discord is manifest in Moly and Another v. State  


of Kerala1  and Vidyadharan v. State of Kerala2  on one hand 


wherein it has been held that the conviction by the Special Court 



is   not   sustainable   if   it   has  suo  motu  entertained   and   taken 



cognizance   of   the   complaint   directly   without   the   case   being 



committed   to   it   and,   therefore,   there   should   be   retrial   or   total 



setting aside of the conviction, as the case may be, and the other 



in  State   of   M.   P.    v.  Bhooraji   &   Ors.3  wherein,   taking   aid   of 



Section 465 (1) of the Code, it has been opined that when a trial 



has been conducted by the court of competent jurisdiction and a 



conviction has been recorded on proper appreciation of evidence, 



the same cannot be erased or effaced merely on the ground that 



there   had   been   no   committal   proceeding   and   cognizance   was 



taken by the Special Court inasmuch as the same does not give 



rise to failure of justice. 

1 AIR 2004 SC 1890 

2 (2004) 1 SCC 215

3 AIR 2001 SC 3372


                                                                                  3
2.    The   necessitous   facts   required   to   be   adumbrated   for   the 



purpose   of   answering   the   present   reference   are   that   the 



appellants were charge sheeted  under Section 3 (1) (x) of the Act 



but   eventually,   charges   were   framed   under   Sections   147,   148 



and   302   read   with   Section   149   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   (for 



short,   `the   IPC').     The   learned   Trial   Judge   vide   judgment   dated 



31.08.1996   in   Sessions   Trial   No.   97   of   1995   convicted   all   the 



accused   persons   barring   Mohan   for   the   offences   under   Section 



302   read   with   Section   149   IPC   and   sentenced   them   to 



imprisonment   for   life   with   a   fine   of   Rs.   1000/-,   in   default   of 



payment of fine, to suffer further rigorous imprisonment for three 



months   and   sentenced   to   one   month   rigorous   imprisonment 



under Section 147 of the IPC.  The accused Mohan was convicted 



for   the   offence   under   Sections   148   and   302  of  the  IPC  and  was 



sentenced to undergo one month   rigorous imprisonment on the 



first   score   and   to   further   life   imprisonment   and   pay   a   fine   of 



Rupees   1000/-,   in   default   of   payment   of   fine,   to   suffer   further 



R.I. for three months on the second count.

3.    Being   dissatisfied   with   the   judgment   of   conviction   and   the 



order   of   sentence,   the   appellants   along   with   others   preferred 


                                                                            4


Criminal   Appeal   No.   1568   of   1996   before   the   High   Court   of 



Judicature   of   Madhya   Pradesh   at   Jabalpur.     Apart   from   raising 



various contentions on merits, it was pressed that the entire trial 



was   vitiated   as   it   had   commenced   and   concluded   without 



committal of the case to the Court of Session as provided under 



Section 193 of the Code.  Heavy reliance was placed on Gangula  


Ashok and Another    v.  State of Andhra Pradesh4  and   Moly  


and   Another  (supra)     and  Vidyadharan  (supra)     but   the 


Division   Bench   placed   reliance   on  Bhooraji  (supra)   wherein 


Gangula   Ashok  (supra)   was   distinguished   keeping   in   view   the 


stage of the case and regard being had to the provision contained 



in Section 465 of the Code and treated the same to be a binding 



precedent in view of the special Bench decision of the High Court 



of   Madhya   Pradesh   rendered   in  Jabalpur   Bus   Operators  


Association   and   Another  v.  State   of   Madhya   Pradesh   and  


Another5    and   repelled   the   contention   accordingly.     Thereafter, 


as the impugned judgment would reveal, the Bench proceeded to 



deal   with   the   matter   on   merits   and   eventually   sustained   the 



conviction   and   affirmed   the   sentence   as   has   been   indicated 



hereinbefore. 

4 AIR 2000 SC 740 

5  2003 (1) MPJR 158


                                                                                  5
4.         We   have   heard   Mr.   Fakhrudin,   learned   senior  counsel   and 



Mr. Anis Ahmed Khan for the appellants in both the appeals and 



Ms.   Vibha   Datta   Makhija,   learned   counsel   for   the   respondent-

State. 

5.   At   the   very   outset,   we   shall   advert   to   the   jurisdiction   or 



authority   of   the   Special   Court   to   take   cognizance   of   the   offence 



under the Act regardless of the interdict stipulated in Section 193 



of the Code.  Section 193 of the Code reads as follows:

                   "193.   Cognizance   of   offence   by   Court   of 

                 Session-       Except   as   otherwise   expressly 

                 provided   by  this  Code  or  by  any other  law  for 

                 the   time   being   in   force,   no   court   of   Session 

                 shall take cognizance of any offence as a court 

                 of   original   jurisdiction   unless   the   case   has 

                 been   committed   to   it   by   a   Magistrate   under 

                 this code."
           On a plain  reading  of the  aforesaid  provision,  it is  clear  as 



noon   day   that   no   Court   of   Session   can   take   cognizance   of   any 



offence   as   a   court   of   original   jurisdiction   except   as   otherwise 



expressly   provided   by   the   Code   or   any   other   law   for   the   time 



being in force.  

     6.    The   questions   that   emanate,   as   a   natural   corollary,   for 



consideration are whether the Special Court as constituted under 


                                                                                     6


the   Act   is   a   Court   of   Session;   and   whether   there   is   any   special 



provision in the Act enabling the said court to take cognizance.  

7.     In  Gangula   Ashok  (supra),   a   two-Judge   Bench   of   this 



Court, after taking note of Section 6 of the Code and Section 14 



of   the   Act,   came   to   the   conclusion   that   the   intendment   of   the 



legislature   is   to   treat   the   Special   Court   under   the   Act   to   be   a 



Court of Session even after specifying it as a Special Court and it 



would  continue  to  be  essentially   a  Court  of  Session   and not  get 



denuded   of   its   character   or   power   as   a   Court   of   Session.     The 



Court   scanned   the   anatomy   of   the   Act   and   analysed   the 



postulates   contained   in   Sections   4   and   5   of   the   Code   and 



thereafter, referring to the Constitution Bench decisions in  A. R.  

Antulay  v.  Ramdas   Sriniwas   Nayak   and   another6  and   in 


Directorate   of   Enforcement                 v.     Deepak   Mahajan   and  


another7, expressed thus:     

               "16.  Hence   we   have   no   doubt   that   a   Special 

               Court   under   this   Act   is   essentially   a   Court   of 

               Session   and   it   can   take   cognizance   of   the 

               offence when the case is committed to it by the 

               Magistrate in accordance with the provisions of 

               the   Code.     In   other   words,   a   complaint   or   a 

               charge-sheet   cannot   straight   away   be   laid 

               down before the Special Court under the Act.   



6  (1984) 2 SCC 500

7 (1994)  3 SCC 440


                                                                                  7
8.     In  Vidyadharan  (supra),   the   Court   delved   into   the   said 



issue and eventually proceeded to state as follows:

              "23.  Hence,   we   have   no   doubt   that   a   Special 

              Court   under   this   Act   is   essentially   a   Court   of 

              Session   and   it   can   take   cognizance   of   the 

              offence when the case is committed to it by the 

              Magistrate in accordance with the provisions of 

              the   Code.   In   other   words,   a   complaint   or   a 

              charge-sheet   cannot   straight   away   be   laid 

              down   before   the   Special   Court   under   the   Act. 

              We are reiterating the view taken by this Court 

              in  Gangula Ashok  v.  State   of   A.P.  [(2000)   2 

              SCC   504   :   2000   SCC   (Cri)   488]   in   the   above 

              terms   with   which   we   are   in   respectful 

              agreement.   The   Sessions   Court   in   the   case   at 

              hand,   undisputedly,   has   acted   as   one   of 

              original   jurisdiction,   and   the   requirements   of 

              Section 193 of the Code were not met."


       The aforesaid view was reiterated in Moly (supra).  In M. A.  


Kuttappan  v.  E   Krishnan   Nayanar   and   another8,  another 


two-Judge   Bench   ruled   that   the   Special   Judge   under   the   Act 



cannot   entertain   a   complaint   filed   before   it   and   issue   process 



after taking cognizance without the case being committed to it for 



trial by the competent Magistrate. It is apt to mention here that 



similar view has been spelt out in Bhooraji (supra).

9.     After careful perusal of the aforesaid decisions, we have no 



scintilla   of   doubt   that   the   view   expressed   which   has   a   base   of 





8 (2004) 4 SCC 231


                                                                                   8


commonality   is   absolutely   correct   and   there   is   no   necessity   to 



dwell upon the same more so when there is no cavil or conflict in 



this   regard   and   there   has   been   no   reference   on   the   said   score. 

Additionally,   no   doubt   has   been   expressed   relating   to   the 



exposition of the said view, and irrefragably correctly so.

10.    The demonstrable facet of the discord is that if cognizance is 



directly taken by the Special Judge under the Act and an accused 



without   assailing   the   same   at   the   inception   allows   the   trial   to 



continue   and   invites   a   judgment     of   conviction,   would   he   be 



permitted in law to question the same and seek quashment of the 



conviction on the bedrock that the trial Judge had no jurisdiction 



or authority to take cognizance without the case being committed 



to  it  and thereby  violated  the  mandate   enshrined   under  Section 



193 of the Code.  

11.    To   make   the   maze   clear,   it   is   profitable   to   note   that   in 


Gangula   Ashok  (supra),   the   appellants   had   called   in   question 


the legal substantiality of the order passed by the   Single Judge 



of   the   High   Court   of   Andhra   Pradesh   who,   after   expressing   the 



view   that   the   Special   Judge   had   no   jurisdiction   to   take 



cognizance   of   the   offence   under   the   Act   without   the   case   being 


                                                                                     9


committed to it,     set aside the proceedings of the Special Court 



and further  directed the  charge-sheet  and the connected  papers 



to   be  returned  to   the   police  officer  concerned  who,   in  turn,  was 



required to present the same before the Judicial Magistrate of Ist 



Class for the purpose of   committal to   the Special Court.   That 



apart, the Single Judge further directed that on such committal, 



the Special Court shall frame appropriate charges in the light of 



the observation made in the order. 

12.    The   two-judge   Bench   accepted   the   view   as   far   as   it 



pertained   to   setting   aside   of   the   impugned   order   but   did   not 



approve   the   direction   issued   for   the   steps   to   be   taken   by   the 



Special Judge for framing of charges as it was of the view that no 



direction   could   have   been   issued   to   the   Special   Court   as   it   was 



open to the appellants therein to raise all their contentions at the 



stage   of   framing   of   charge   if   they   wished   to   advance   a   plea   for 



discharge.       Thus,  it  is   evident   that  the   accused-appellants   had 



challenged the order of framing of charge and sought quashing of 



the same before the High Court.  They did not wait for the trial to 



commence and the judgment of conviction to visit them.   

                                                                                     10
13.     After the dictum in Gangula Ashok (supra), the High Court 



of   Madhya   Pradesh   was   dealing   with   an   appeal,  Bhooraji  



(supra),  wherein   the   appellants   were   convicted   under   Sections 



148,   323,   302/149   IPC   and   sentenced   to   various   punishments 



including imprisonment for life. It is worth noting that they were 



tried   by   the   Special   Judge   under   the   Act   as   charge-sheet   was 



filed   under   Section   3   (2)   of   the   Act   along   with   other   offences   of 



the IPC.   When the matter came up before the Division Bench of 



the   High   Court,   the   learned   Judges   commenced   the   judgment 



with the prelude that the case had sluggished for more than nine 



years and the end was not in sight as direction for retrial seemed 



inevitable   because   of   the   decision   rendered   by   this   Court   in 


Gangula Ashok (supra). 

 14.    Be   it   noted,   cognizance   was   taken   directly   by   the   Special 



Judge   in  the   said   case   also.    The   anguish  and  the   helplessness 



expressed by the High Court was taken note of when the State of 



Madhya   Pradesh   approached   this   Court.     This   Court   laid 



emphasis   on   the   fact   that   it   was   a   case   where   the   accused 



neither raised any objection when they were heard at the time of 



framing of the charge nor did they raise such a plea at any stage 



either before or after the evidence was recorded by the trial Court 


                                                                                11


but, a significant one, proponed such a contention only after the 



conviction   was   recorded   and   that   too   after   the   decision   in 


Gangula Ashok (supra) was rendered.  

15.    As is perceptible, the Bench posed the question whether the 



High   Court   necessarily   should   have   quashed   the   trial 



proceedings to be repeated  only on account of the declaration of 



the legal position made by this Court concerning the procedural 



aspect about the cases involving the offences under the Act.  The 



Bench   referred   to   the   provisions   contained   in   Sections   462   and 



465   of   the   Code   and   adverted   to   the   concept   of   "a   failure   of 



justice" and held thus:

             "15.   A   reading   of   the   section   makes   it   clear 

             that   the   error,   omission   or   irregularity   in   the 

             proceedings   held   before   or   during   the   trial   or 

             in   any   enquiry   were   reckoned   by   the 

             legislature as possible occurrences in criminal 

             courts.     Yet   the   legislature   disfavoured   axing 

             down the proceedings or to direct repetition of 

             the   whole   proceedings   afresh.     Hence,   the 

             legislature   imposed   a   prohibition   that   unless 

             such   error,   omission   or   irregularity   has 

             occasioned   "a   failure   of   justice"   the   superior 

             court   shall   not   quash   the   proceedings   merely 

             on   the   ground   of   such   error,   omission   or 

             irregularity.  


                     xxx    xxx     xxx    xxx    xxx




             17. It is an uphill task for the accused in this 

             case to show that failure of justice had in fact 


                                                                  12


occasioned   merely   because   the   specified 

Sessions Court took cognizance of the offences 

without   the   case   being   committed   to   it.   The 

normal   and   correct   procedure,   of   course,   is 

that   the   case   should   have   been   committed   to 

the   Special   Court   because   that   court   being 

essentially   a   Court   of   Session   can   take 

cognizance   of   any   offence   only   then.   But   if   a 

specified   Sessions   Court,   on   the   basis   of   the 

legal position then felt to be correct on account 

of   a   decision   adopted   by   the   High   Court,   had 

chosen to take cognizance without a committal 

order, what is the disadvantage of the accused 

in following the said course?


18. It is apposite to remember that during the 

period prior to the Code of Criminal Procedure 

1973,   the   committal   court,   in   police   charge-

sheeted   cases,   could   examine   material 

witnesses,   and   such   records   also   had   to   be 

sent   over   to   the   Court   of   Session   along   with 

the   committal   order.   But   after   1973,   the 

committal   court,   in   police   charge-sheeted 

cases, cannot examine any witness at all. The 

Magistrate   in   such   cases   has   only   to   commit 

the cases  involving  offences exclusively triable 

by the Court of Session. Perhaps it would have 

been   possible   for   an   accused   to   raise   a 

contention   before   1973   that   skipping 

committal proceedings had deprived him of the 

opportunity to cross-examine witnesses  in the 

committal court and that had caused prejudice 

to his defence. But even that is not available to 

an accused after 1973 in cases charge-sheeted 

by the police. We repeatedly asked the learned 

counsel   for   the   accused   to   tell   us   what 

advantage   the   accused   would   secure   if   the 

case   is   sent   back   to   the   Magistrate's   Court 

merely for the purpose of retransmission of the 

records   to   the   Sessions   Court   through   a 

committal   order.   We   did   not   get   any 


                                                                             13


            satisfactory   answer   to   the   above   query   put   to 

            the counsel."

16.    After so stating, the Court proceeded to deal with the stance 



whether   the   Special   Judge   as   a   Court   of   Session   would   remain 



incompetent to try the case until the case is committed and, after 



critical   ratiocination,   declined   to   accept   the   said   stand   and 



opined that the expression "a Court of competent jurisdiction" as 



envisaged   in   Section   465   of   the   Code   is   to   denote   a   validly 



constituted court conferred with the jurisdiction to try the offence 



or   offences   and   such   a   court   could   not   get   denuded   of   its 



competence   to   try   the   case   on   account   of   any   procedural   lapse 



and   the   competence   would   remain   unaffected   by   the   non-

compliance   with  the  procedural   requirement.  The  Bench  further 



proceeded to lay down that the inability to take cognizance of an 



offence   without   a   committal   order   does   not   mean   that   a   duly 



constituted court becomes an incompetent court for all purposes. 

It was also ruled that had an objection been raised at the earlier 



stage,   the   Special   Judge   could   have   sent   the   record   to   the 



Magistrate for adopting committal proceeding or return the police 



report   to   the   Public   Prosecutor   or   the   police   for   presentation 



before the Magistrate.  In essentiality, it has been laid down that 


                                                                               14


the bar against taking cognizance of certain offences or by certain 



courts cannot govern the question  whether the Court concerned 



is   a   "Court   of   competent   jurisdiction"   and   further   the   condition 



precedent for taking cognizance is not the standard to determine 



whether   the   Court   concerned   is   "a   Court   of   competent 



jurisdiction".   In   the   ultimate   eventuate,  Bhooraji  (supra)   ruled 



that when the trial had been conducted by a Court of competent 



jurisdiction,   the   same   cannot   be  annulled   by   such  a  lapse  and, 



accordingly, remitted the matter to the High Court for disposal of 



the appeal afresh on the basis of evidence already on record.   It 



needs no special emphasis to highlight that in  Bhooraji  (supra), 



the controversy  had emerged on the  similar   set of facts  and the 



legal   issues   had   emanated   on   the   common   platform   and   were 



dealt   with.     Therefore,   unquestionably,   it   was   a   precedent 



operating in the field.  

17.    It   is   seemly   to   note   that   the   decision   in  Bhooraji  (supra) 



was   possibly   not   brought   to   the   notice   of   their   Lordships   who 



have   decided   the   cases   in  Moly  (supra)   and  Vidyadharan 



(supra).     In  Moly  (supra),   later   two-Judge   Bench   set   aside   the 



judgment   of   conviction   and   remitted   the   matter   as   cognizance 


                                                                                    15


was   directly   taken   by   the   Special   Court.       In  Vidyadharan  



(supra), the Bench held thus:-

              "24.  The   inevitable   conclusion   is   that   the 

              learned   Sessions   Judge,   as   the   undisputed 

              factual   position   goes   to   show,   could   not   have 

              convicted   the   appellant   for   the   offence 

              relatable   to   Section   3(1)(xi)   of   the   Act   in   the 

              background   of   the   legal   position   noted   supra. 

              That   is,   accordingly,   set   aside.   However,   for 

              the   offence   under   Sections   354   and   448   IPC, 

              custodial   sentence   for   the   period   already 

              undergone,   which   as   the   records   reveal   is 

              about   three   months,   would   meet   the   ends   of 

              justice   considering   the   background   facts   and 

              the special features of the case." 




As is perceivable, in one case, the matter was remitted and in the 



other, the conviction under Section 3 (1)(xi) was set aside and no 



retrial was directed.  

18.    At   this   stage,   we   may   proceed   to   x-ray   the   ratio   of  M.   A.  

Kuttappan  (supra).   In   the   said   case,   the   challenge   was   to   the 


order   passed   by   the   High   Court   under   Section   482   of   the   Code 



wherein the learned Judge had quashed the order of the Special 



Judge   taking   cognizance   of  the   offence   under   Section   3   (1)(x)   of 



the   Act.       The   two-Judge   Bench   referred   to   the   authorities   in 


Gangula Ashok  (supra) and  Vidyadharan  (supra) and gave the 


                                                                                       16


stamp   of   approval   to   the   order   passed   by   the   High   Court     and 



eventually, while dismissing the appeal, observed as follows:-

              "However, it will be open to the appellant, if so 

              advised, to file a complaint before a competent 

              Magistrate   who   shall   consider   the   complaint 

              on   its   merit   and   then   proceed   in   accordance 

              with law.  The learned Special Court as well as 

              the High Court have made certain observations 

              touching  on  the  merit  of  the  controversy.     We 

              make  it clear  that in  case  a  complaint  is  filed 

              by   the   appellant   before   a   competent 

              Magistrate,   he   shall   proceed   to   consider   the 

              matter in accordance with law uninfluenced by 

              any   observation   made   either   by   the   learned 

              Special   Judge   or   by   the   High   Court.     Nothing 

              said   in   this   judgment   also   shall   be   construed 

              as   expression   of   opinion   on   the   merit   of   the 

              case."


19.    It   is   apposite   to   note   that   in   the   said   case,   the   assail   was 



different   and   the   Bench   was   not   considering   the   effect   of   non-

committal   under   Section   193   of   the   Code   after   conviction   was 



recorded.     Though   it   referred   to   the   authority   in  Vidyadharan 



(supra),   yet   that   was   to   a   limited   extent.   Hence,   the   said 



pronouncement cannot be regarded or treated   to be one in line 



with  Vidyadharan  (supra)   and   is,   therefore,   kept   out   of   the 



purview   of   conflict   of   opinion   that   has   emerged   in   the   two 



streams of authorities.

                                                                                17
20.    Before   we   advert   whether  Bhooraji  (supra)   was   correctly 



decided or Moly  (supra) and Vidyadharan  (supra) laid down the 



law appositely, it is appropriate to dwell upon whether  Bhooraji 



(supra)   was   a   binding   precedent   and,   what   would   be   the 



consequent effect of the later decisions which have been rendered 



without noticing it.

21.     In Union of India and Another v. Raghubir Singh (dead)  


by   L.   Rs.   And   Others9,  the   Constitution   Bench,   speaking 


through R. S. Pathak, CJ, has held thus:- 

               "We   are   of   opinion   that   a   pronouncement   of 

               law   by   a   Division   Bench   of   this   Court   is 

               binding on  a  Division  Bench  of  the  same or a 

               smaller   number   of   Judges,   and   in   order   that 

               such   decision   be   binding,   it   is   not   necessary 

               that   it   should   be   a   decision   rendered   by   the 

               Full   Court   or   a   Constitution   Bench   of   the 

               Court"


22.    In     Indian   Oil   Corporation               Ltd.,     v.   Municipal  


Corporation   and   Another10,  the   Division   Bench   of   the   High 


Court had come to the conclusion that the decision in Municipal  


Corporation, Indore v. Smt. Ratna Prabha & Ors.11 was not a 


binding   precedent   in   view   of   the   later   decisions   of   the   co-equal 




9 ( 1989) 2 SCC 754

10 AIR 1995 SC 1480

11 AIR 1977 SC 308


                                                                                18


Bench of this Court in Dewan Daulat Rai Kapoor v. New Delhi  


Municipal   Committee12  and  Dr.   Balbir   Singh  v.  Municipal  


Corporation Delhi13.   It is worth noting that the Division Bench 


of the High Court proceeded that the decision in  Ratna Prabha 



(supra)   was   no   longer   good   law   and   binding   on   it.     The   matter 



was   referred   to   the   Full   Bench   which   overruled   the   decision 



passed by the Division Bench.   When the matter travelled to this 



Court, it observed thus:-

               "The Division Bench of the High Court in 1989 

               MPLJ 20 was clearly in error in taking the view 

               that the decision of this Court in Ratna Prabha 

               (AIR 1977 SC 308) (supra) was not binding on 

               it.  In doing so, the Division Bench of the High 

               Court   did   something   which   even   a   later   co-

               equal   Bench   of   this   Court   did   not   and   could 

               not do."


23.    In  Chandra   Prakash   and   Others  v.   State   of   U.P.   and 


Another14,  a subsequent Constitution  Bench reiterated the view 


that had already been stated in Raghubir Singh (supra). 

24.    Thus viewed, the decision in Bhooraji (supra) was a binding 



precedent,   and   when   in   ignorance   of   it   subsequent   decisions 



have been rendered, the concept of per incuriam would come into 



play.   In this context, it is useful to refer to a passage from A. R.  

12 AIR 1980 SC 541

13  AIR 1985 SC 339

14 (2003) SCC (L & S) 827


                                                                                  19


Antulay  (supra),   wherein,   Sabyasachi   Mukharji,   J   (as   his 


Lordship   then   was),   while   dealing   with   the   concept   of  per  



incuriam, had observed thus:- 

               ""Per   incuriam"   are   those   decisions   given   in 

               ignorance or forgetfulness of some inconsistent 

               statutory   provision   or   of   some   authority 

               binding   on   the   court   concerned,   so   that   in 

               such  cases   some  part   of  the  decision  or some 

               step  in   the   reasoning   on  which   it   is   based,   is 

               found,   on   that   account   to   be   demonstrably 

               wrong." 


Again, in the said decision, at a later stage, the Court observed:- 

               "It is a settled rule that if a decision has been 

               given per incuriam the court can ignore it."

25.    In      Punjab   Land   Development   &   Reclamation  


Corporation   Ltd.  v.   Presiding     Officer,   Labour   Court,  


Chandigarh & Ors.15, another Constitution Bench, while dealing 


with the issue of per incuriam, opined as under:-

               "The   Latin   expression  per   incuriam  means 

               through inadvertence.   A decision can be said 

               generally   to   be   given  per   incuriam  when   this 

               Court   has   acted   in   ignorance   of   a   previous 

               decision  of  its own  or  when   a High  Court  has 

               acted in ignorance of a decision of this Court."


26.    In  State   of   U.   P.   And   Another  v.   Synthetics   and  


Chemicals Ltd. And Another16,  a two-Judge Bench adverted in 


15 (1990) 3 SCC 682

16  (1991) 4 SCC 139


                                                                                 20


detail to the aspect of per incuriam  and proceeded to highlight as 



follows:- 

               "`Incuria'   literally   means   `carelessness'.     In 

               practice  per   incuriam  appears   to   mean  per  

               ignoratium.      English   courts   have   developed 

               this principle in relaxation of the rule of stare 

               decisis.     The   `quotable   in   law'   is   avoided   and 

               ignored   if   it   is   rendered,   `in   ignoratium  of   a 

               statute   or  other   binding  authority'.     (Young  v.  

               Bristol   Aeroplane   Co.   Ltd.17).     Same   has   been 

               accepted, approved and adopted by this Court 

               while   interpreting   Article   141   of   the 

               Constitution   which   embodies   the   doctrine   of 

               precedents as a matter of law."


27.    Recently, in  Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre  v. State  of  


Maharashtra   and   Ors.  18,   while   addressing   the   issue   of  per  


incuriam,  a   two-Judge   Bench,   speaking   through   one   of   us 



(Bhandari,   J.),     after   referring   to   the   dictum   in  Bristol  


Aeroplane   Co.   Ltd.  (supra)   and     certain   passages   from 


Halsbury's   Laws   of   England  and  Raghubir   Singh  (supra),   has 



stated thus:-

               "149.   The   analysis   of   English   and   Indian   Law 

               clearly leads to the irresistible conclusion that 

               not   only   the   judgment   of   a   larger   strength   is 

               binding on a judgment of smaller strength but 

               the   judgment   of   a   co-equal   strength   is   also 

               binding   on   a   Bench   of   Judges   of   co-equal 

               strength.     In   the   instant   case,   judgments 


17 (1944) 1 KB 718 : (1944) 2 ALL ER 293

18  AIR 2011 SC 312 : ( 2011) 1 SCC 694


                                                                                   21


             mentioned  in  paragraphs   135  and  136   are   by 

             two   or   three   judges   of   this   Court.     These 

             judgments have clearly ignored a Constitution 

             Bench judgment of this Court in Sibbia's case 

             (supra)   which   has   comprehensively   dealt   with 

             all   the   facets   of   anticipatory   bail   enumerated 

             under   Section   438   of   Code   of   Criminal 

             Procedure             Consequently,               judgments 

             mentioned  in  paragraphs  135  and  136  of  this 

             judgment are per incuriam.


             150. In   case   there   is   no   judgment   of   a 

             Constitution Bench or larger Bench of binding 

             nature and if the court doubts the correctness 

             of the judgments by two or three judges, then 

             the proper course would be to request Hon'ble 

             the Chief Justice to refer the matter to a larger 

             Bench of appropriate strength."


28.    The   sequitur   of   the   above   discussion   is   that   the   decisions 



rendered in Moly (supra) and Vidyadharan (supra) are certainly 



per incuriam. 

29.    Presently, we shall proceed to address which view should be 



accepted   as   just   and   flawless.       The   centripodal   issue,   as   we 



understand,   is   whether   non-compliance   of   the   interdict   as 



envisaged and engrafted under Section 193 of the Code nullifies 



the   final   verdict   after   the   trial   and   warrants   its   total   extinction 



resulting in retrial, or it is incumbent on the part of the convict 



to   exposit  and  satisfy  that  such  guillotining   of  the   interdict  has 



occasioned   in   `failure   of   justice'   or   culminated   in   causation   of 


                                                                                  22


prejudice   to   him   for   the   purpose   of   declaring   that   the   trial   was 



vitiated. 

30.     In Bhooraji (supra), the Bench has referred to Sections 462 



and   465   of   the   Code   which   occur   in   Chapter   35   of   the   Code. 

Section 465 reads as follows:-

              "465.   Finding   or   sentence   when   reversible 

              by reason of error, omission or irregularity. 

              -   (1)   Subject   to   the   provisions   hereinbefore 

              contained,   no   finding,   sentence   or   order 

              passed   by   a   Court   of   competent   jurisdiction 

              shall   be   reversed   or   altered   by   a   Court   of 

              appeal, confirmation or revision on account of 

              any   error,   omission   or   irregularity   in   the 

              complaint,   summons,   warrant,   proclamation, 

              order, judgment or other proceedings before or 

              during   trial   or   in   any   inquiry   or   other 

              proceedings   under   this   Code,   or   any   error,   or 

              irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution 

              unless in the opinion of that court, a failure of 

              justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. 

                    (2)   In   determining   whether   any   error, 

              omission   or   irregularity   in   any   proceeding 

              under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in 

              any   sanction   for   the   prosecution   has 

              occasioned a failure of justice, the Court shall 

              have   regard   to   the   fact   whether   the   objection 

              could   and   should   have   been   raised   at   an 

              earlier stage in the proceedings."




31.     On a studied scrutiny of the anatomy of the said provision, 



it   is   luculent   that   the   emphasis   has   been   laid   on   a   `court   of 



competent jurisdiction' and `error, omission or irregularity in the 


                                                                                   23


complaint, summons, warrant, proclamation, order, judgment or 



other proceedings before or during trial'  and `a failure of justice 



has in fact been occasioned thereby'.   The legislative intendment 



inhered   in   the   language   employed   is   graphically   clear   that 



lancination   or   invalidation   of   a   verdict   after   trial   is   not   to   be 



taken   recourse   to   solely   because   there   is   an   error,   omission   or 



irregularity in  the  proceeding. The term `a failure of justice' has 



been treated as the sine qua non for setting aside the conviction. 

32.      The   submission   of   Mr.   Fakkruddin   and   Mr.   Anis   Ahmed 



Khan, learned counsel for the appellants, is that it is not a mere 



irregularity but a substantial illegality.   They  have placed heavy 



reliance on paragraph 11 of Moly (supra) wherein the Bench has 



used the expression `that Section 193 imposes an interdict on all 



courts   of   Session   against   taking   cognizance   of   an   offence   as   a 



Court   of   original   jurisdiction'   and   have   also   drawn   inspiration 



from   paragraph   17   of   the   said   decision   which   uses   the   words 



`lack   of   jurisdiction'.     The   question   posed   by   us   fundamentally 



relates   to the  non-compliance  of such interdict.  The crux of the 



matter   is   whether   it   is   such   a   substantial   interdict   which 



impinges upon the fate of the trial beyond any redemption or, for 



that   matter   it   is   such   an   omission   or   it   is   such   an   act   that 


                                                                              24


defeats  the   basic  conception   of  fair  trial.     Fundamentally,  a  fair 



and   impartial   trial   has   a   sacrosanct   purpose.     It   has   a 



demonstrable object that  the accused should not  be prejudiced. 

A fair trial is required to be conducted in such a manner which 



would   totally   ostracise   injustice,   prejudice,   dishonesty   and 



favouritism.  

33.    In  Mrs. Kalyani Baskar  v. Mrs. M. S. Sampoornam  19, it 



has   been   laid   down   that   `fair   trial'   includes   fair   and   proper 



opportunities allowed by law to the accused to prove   innocence 



and, therefore, adducing evidence in support of the defence is a 



valuable right and denial of that right means denial of fair trial. 

It is essential that rules of procedure designed to ensure justice 



should   be   scrupulously   followed   and   the   courts   should   be 



zealous in seeing that there is no breach of them.   

34.    In this regard, we may fruitfully reproduce the observations 



from  Sidhartha   Vashisht  v.  State   (NCT   of   Delhi)20  wherein   it 



has been so stated: -

               "In   the   Indian   Criminal   jurisprudence,   the 

               accused   is   placed   on   a   somewhat   advantageous 

               position   than   under   different   jurisprudence   of 

               some of the countries in the world.   The criminal 

               justice   administration   system   in   India   places 



19 (2007) 2 SCC 258

20 (2010) 6 SCC 1


                                                                                       25


              human   rights   and   dignity   for   human   life   at   a 

              much   higher   pedestal.     In   our   jurisprudence   an 

              accused   is   presumed   to   be   innocent   till   proved 

              guilty,   the   alleged   accused  is   entitled   to  fairness 

              and   true   investigation   and   fair   trial   and   the 

              prosecution   is   expected   to   play   balanced   role   in 

              the trial of a crime.   The investigation should be 

              judicious,   fair,   transparent   and   expeditious   to 

              ensure compliance to the basic rule of law.  These 

              are   the   fundamental   canons   of   our   criminal 

              jurisprudence   and   they   are   quite   in   conformity 

              with   the   constitutional   mandate   contained   in 

              Articles 20 and 21 of the Constitution of India."   


                                                       [Underlining is ours]




35.    It   would   not   be   an   exaggeration   if   it   is   stated   that   a   `fair 



trial'   is   the   heart   of   criminal   jurisprudence   and,   in   a   way,   an 



important facet of a democratic polity that is governed by Rule of 



Law.     Denial   of   `fair   trial'   is   crucifixion   of   human   rights.     It   is 



ingrained   in   the   concept   of   due   process   of   law.   While 



emphasising   the   principle   of   `fair   trial'   and   the   practice   of   the 



same   in   the   course   of   trial,   it   is   obligatory   on   the   part   of   the 



Courts to see whether in an individual case or category of cases, 



because   of   non-compliance   of   a   certain   provision,   reversion   of 



judgment of conviction is inevitable or it is dependent on arriving 



at   an   indubitable   conclusion   that   substantial   injustice   has   in 



fact occurred.   The seminal issue is whether protection  given to 



the   accused   under   the   law   has   been   jeopardised   as   a 


                                                                                   26


consequence   of   which   there   has   been   failure   of   justice   or 



causation of any prejudice. In this regard, it is profitable to refer 



to   the   decision   in  Gurbachan   Singh  v.   State   of   Punjab  21 



wherein a three-Judge Bench has opined thus:- 




               "This   court   in   `Willie   (William)   Slaney   v.   The  

               state   of   Madhya   Pradesh22                 elaborately 

               discussed   the   question   of   the   applicability   of 

               Section   537   and   came   to   the   conclusion   that 

               in   judging   a   question   of   prejudice,   as   a   guilt, 

               courts   must   act   with   a   broad   vision   and   look 

               to the substance and not to technicalities, and 

               their   main   concern   should   be   to   see   whether 

               the accused  had  a fair trial, whether  he knew 

               what he was being tried for, whether the main 

               facts   sought   to   be   established   against   him 

               were   explained   to   him   fairly   and   clearly   and 

               whether he was given a full and fair chance to 

               defend himself. 


                                                      [Emphasis added]


36.    Having dealt with regard to the concept of `fair trial' and its 



significant facets, it is apt to state that once prejudice is caused 



to   the   accused   during   trial,   it   occasions   in   `failure   of   justice'. 



`Failure   of   justice'   has   its   own   connotation   in   various 



jurisprudences.     As   far   as   criminal   jurisprudence   is   concerned, 



we may refer with profit to certain authorities. Be it noted that in 


Bhooraji  (supra),   the   Court   has   referred   to  Shamnsaheb   M.  

21  AIR 1957 SC 623 

22  1956 CriLJ 291 : AIR 1956 SC 116


                                                                              27
Multtani v. State of Karnataka23  wherein it has been observed 


as follows:-

                "23.   We   often   hear   about   "failure   of 

                justice" and quite often the submission in 

                a   criminal   court   is   accentuated   with   the 

                said   expression.   Perhaps   it   is   too   pliable 

                or   facile   an   expression   which   could   be 

                fitted   in   any   situation   of   a   case.   The 

                expression   `failure   of   justice'   would 

                appear,   sometimes,   as   an   etymological 

                chameleon   (the   simile   is   borrowed   from 

                Lord   Diplock   in Town   Investments   Ltd. 

                vs.   Department   of   the   Environment24). 

                The   criminal   court,   particularly   the 

                superior   court   should   make   a   close 

                examination   to   ascertain   whether   there 

                was   really   a   failure   of  justice   or   whether 

                it is only a camouflage." 


                                            [Emphasis supplied]





 37.     In  State   by   Police   Inspector  v.  T.   Venkatesh   Murthy25,  



 the  High  Court  of  Karnataka  had  upheld   an  order   of  discharge 



 passed   by   the   trial   court   on   the   ground   that   the   sanction 



 granted   to   prosecute   the   accused   was   not   in   order.     The   two-



 Judge Bench referred to Sections 462 and 465 of the Code and 



 ultimately held thus:- 

23 (2001) 2 SCC 577 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 358

24 (1977) 1 All ER 813 

25 AIR 2004 SC 5117


                                                                                                     28


             "13. In State
                                      of M.P.

                                                      v
                                                        .   
                                                              B
                                                               hooraji and Ors. (2001) 

             (7) SCC 679, the true essence of the expression 

             "failure               of          justice"                was         highlighted. 

 Section 465 of   the   Code   in   fact   deals   with 

             "finding   or   sentences   when   reversible   by 

             reason   of   error,   omission   or   irregularity",   in 

             sanction.

             14. In the instant case neither the Trial Court 

             nor   the   High   Court   appears   to   have   kept   in 

             view   the   requirements   of   sub-section   (3) 

             relating   to   question   regarding   "failure   of 

             justice". Merely because there is any omission, 

             error or irregularity in the matter of according 

             sanction that does not affect the validity of the 

             proceeding   unless   the   Court   records   the 

             satisfaction   that   such   error,   omission   or 

             irregularity   has   resulted   in   failure   of   justice. 

             The same logic also applies to the appellate or 

             revisional   Court.   The   requirement   of   sub-

             section   (4)   about   raising   the   issue,   at   the 

             earliest   stage   has   not   been   also   considered. 

             Unfortunately   the   High   Court   by   a   practically 

             non-reasoned   order,   confirmed   the   order 

             passed   by   the   learned   trial   judge.   The   orders 

             are,   therefore,   indefensible.   We   set   aside   the 

             said orders. It would be appropriate to require 

             the   trial   Court   to   record   findings   in   terms   of 

             Clause   (b)   of   Sub-section   (3)   and   Sub-section 

             (4) of Section 19." 

38.    We have referred to the said authority only for the purpose 



of   a   failure   of   justice   and   the   discernible   factum   that   it   had 



concurred with the view taken in  Bhooraji  (supra).   That apart, 



the matter was remitted to adjudge the issue whether there had 


                                                                                      29


been failure of justice, and it was so directed as the controversy 



pertained to the discharge of the accused.

39.    In  Central   Bureau   of   Investigation  v.  V.   K.   Sehgal26,   it 



was observed: -

               "10. A   court   of   appeal   or   revision   is   debarred 

               from   reversing   a   finding   (or   even   an   order   of 

               conviction and sentence) on account of any error 

               of irregularity in the sanction for the prosecution, 

               unless   failure   of   justice   had   been   occasioned   on 

               account   of   such   error   or   irregularity.     For 

               determining   whether   want   of   valid   sanction   had 

               in  fact  occasioned   failure   of  justice   the   aforesaid 

               sub-section   (2)   enjoins   on   the   court   a   duty   to 

               consider   whether   the   accused   had   raised   any 

               objection on that score at the trial stage.   Even if 

               he   had   raised   any   such   objection   at   the   early 

               stage it is hardly sufficient to conclude that there 

               was failure of justice.  It has to be determined on 

               the  facts  of each  case.     But an  accused  who did 

               not   raise   it   at   the   trial   stage   cannot   possibly 

               sustain such a plea made for the first time in the 

               appellate court."


The   concept   of   failure   of   justice   was   further   elaborated   as 



follows:-

               "11. In   a   case   where   the   accused   failed   to   raise 

               the   question   of   valid   sanction   the   trial   would 

               normally   proceed   to   its   logical   end   by   making   a 

               judicial   scrutiny   of   the   entire   materials.     If   that 

               case   ends   in   conviction   there   is   no   question   of 

               failure   of   justice   on   the   mere   premise   that   no 

               valid   sanction   was   accorded   for   prosecuting   the 

               public   servant   because   the   very   purpose   of 


26 (1999) 8 SCC 501


                                                                                     30


              providing   such   a   filtering   check   is   to   safeguard 

              public   servants   from   frivolous   of   mala   fide   or 

              vindictive prosecution on the allegation that they 

              have   committed   offence   in   the   discharge   of   their 

              official   duties.     But   once   the   judicial   filtering 

              process   is   over   on   completion   of   the   trial   the 

              purpose of providing for the initial sanction would 

              bog   down   to   a   surplusage.     This   could   be   the 

              reason   for   providing   a   bridle   upon   the   appellate 

              and   revisional   forums   as   envisaged   in   Section 

              465 of the Code of Criminal Procedure."




40.       Adverting   to   the   factum   of   irregular   investigation   and 



eventual conviction, the Constitution Bench in M. C. Sulkunte v. 

State of Mysore27 opined thus: -

              "It has been emphasized in a number of decisions 

              of this Court that to set aside a conviction it must 

              be   shown   that   there   has   been   miscarriage   of 

              justice as a result of an irregular investigation."




41.       After   adverting   to   the   concept   of   failure   of   justice,   it   is 



obligatory   to   dwell   upon   the   aspect   whether   there   is   or   can   be 



any failure of justice if a Special Judge directly takes cognizance 



of an offence under the Act.   Section 209 of the Code deals with 



the   commitment   of  case   to   Court   of   Session   when   an   offence   is 



triable exclusively by it. The said provision reads as follows: -

              "209. Commitment of case to Court of Session 

              when   offence   is   triable   exclusively   by   it.   - 

27 AIR 1971 SC 508


                                                                                  31


            When   in   a   case   instituted   on   a   police   report   or 

            otherwise,   the   accused   appears   or   is   brought 

            before   the   Magistrate   and   it   appears   to   the 

            Magistrate   that   the   offence   is   triable   exclusively 

            by the Court of Session, he shall -

            (a) Commit, after complying with the provisions of 

               section 207 or section 208, as the case may be, 

               the case to the Court of Session, and subject to 

               the   provisions   of   this   Code   relating   to   bail, 

               remand   the   accused   to   custody   until   such 

               commitment has been made;

            (b) Subject  to   the   provisions   of  this  Code  relating 

               to bail, remand the accused to custody during, 

               and until the conclusion of, the trial;

            (c) Send to that Court  the record of the case and 

               the   documents   and   articles,   if   any,   which   are 

               to be produced in evidence;

            (d) Notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment 

               of the case to the Court of Session."

42.    Prior to coming into force of the present Code, Section 207 



of   the   Code   of   Criminal   Procedure,   1898   dealt   with   committal 



proceedings.     By   the   Criminal   Law   Amendment   Act,   1955, 



Section 207 of the Principal Act was substituted by Sections 207 



and   207A.     To   appreciate   the   inherent   aspects   and   the 



conceptual differences in the previous provisions and the present 



one, it is imperative to reproduce Sections  207 and 207A of the 



old Code. They read as under:

                                                                         32
"207.         In   every   inquiry   before   a   magistrate 

where the case is triable exclusively by a Court of 

Session   or   High   Court,   or,   in   the   opinion   of   the 

magistrate,   ought  to  be   tried  by  such  Court,   the 

magistrate shall, -

       (a)   In  any   proceeding   instituted   on  a  police 

          report,   follow   the   procedure   specified   in 

          section 207A; and



       (b) In   any   other   proceeding,   follow   the 

          procedure   specified   in   the   other 

          provisions of this Chapter.


207A.         (1)   When,  in   any  proceeding  instituted 

on   a   police   report   the   magistrate   receives   the 

report forwarded under Section 173, he shall, for 

the   purpose   of   holding   an   inquiry   under   this 

section,   fix   a   date   which   shall   be   a   date   of   the 

receipt   of   the   report,   unless   the   magistrate,   for 

reasons to be recorded, fixes any later date.

(2)    If,   at   any   time   before   such   date,   the   officer 

conducting   the   prosecution   applies   to   the 

magistrate   to   issue   a   process   to   compel   the 

attendance   of   any   witness   or   the   production   of 

any document or thing, the magistrate shall issue 

such  process  unless,   for  reasons  to   be  recorded, 

he deems it unnecessary to do so.

(3)    At   the   commencement   of   the   inquiry,   the 

magistrate shall, when the accused appears or is 

brought   before   him,   satisfy   himself   that   the 

documents   referred   to   in   section   173   have   been 

furnished to the accused and if he finds that the 

accused   has   not   been   furnished   with   such 

documents   or   any   of   them,   he   shall   cause   the 

came to be so furnished.

                                                                     33
(4)    The   magistrate   shall   then   proceed   to   take 

the   evidence   of   such   persons,   if   any   as   may   be 

produced  by   the   prosecution  as  witnesses  to  the 

actual   commission   of   the   offence   alleged,   and   if 

the magistrate is of opinion that it is necessary in 

the interests of justice to take the evidence of any 

one   or   more   of   the   other   witnesses   for   the 

prosecution, he may take such evidence also.

(5)    The   accused   shall   be   at   liberty   to   cross-

examine   the   witnesses   examined   under   sub-

section (4), and in such case, the prosecutor may 

re-examine them.

(6)    When the evidence referred to in sub-section 

(4)   has   been   taken   and   the   magistrate   has 

considered   all   the   documents   referred   to   in 

section   173   and   has,   if   necessary,   examined   the 

accused   for   the   purpose   of   enabling   him   to 

explain   any   circumstances   appearing   in   the 

evidence   against   him   and   given   the   prosecution 

and   the   accused   an   opportunity   of   being   heard, 

such   magistrate   shall,   if   he   is   of   opinion   that 

such   evidence   and   documents   disclose   no 

grounds   for   committing   the   accused   person   for 

trial,   record   his   reasons   and   discharge   him 

unless   it   appears   to   the   Magistrate   that   such 

person   should   be   tried   before   himself   or   some 

other magistrate,  in which  case he shall  proceed 

accordingly.

(7)    When,   upon   such   evidence   being   taken, 

such   documents   being   considered,   such 

examination   (if   any)   being   made   and   the 

prosecution   and   the   accused   being   given   an 

opportunity   of   being   heard,   the   magistrate   is   of 

opinion that the accused should be committed for 

trial,   he   shall   frame   a   charge   under   his   hand, 

declaring   with   what   offence   the   accused   is 

charged.

                                                                        34
(8)     As soon as such charge has been framed, it 

shall be read and explained to the accused and a 

copy thereof shall be given to him free of cost.

(9)     The   accused   shall   be   required   at   once   to 

give in, orally or in writing, a list of the persons, if 

any,   whom   he   wishes   to   be   summoned   to   give 

evidence on his trial:

        Provided   that   the   magistrate   may,   in   his 

discretion, allow the accused to give in his list or 

any   further   list   of   witnesses   at   a   subsequent 

time;   and,   where   the   accused   is   committed   for 

trial   before   the   High   Court,   nothing   in   this   sub-

section  shall  be  deemed  to  preclude  the  accused 

from   giving,   at   any   time   before   his   trial,   to   the 

Clerk   of   the   State   a   further   list   of   the   persons 

whom he wishes to be summoned to give evidence 

on such trial.

(10)    When the accused, on being required to give 

in a list under sub-section (9), has declined to do 

so,   or   when   he   has   given   in   such   list,   the 

magistrate   may   make   an   order   committing   the 

accused  for   trial   by   the  High  Court   or  the   Court 

of   Session,   as   the   case   may   be,   and   shall   also 

record briefly the reasons for such commitment.

(11)    When   the   accused   has   given   in   any   list   of 

witnesses   under   sub-section   (9)   and   has   been 

committed for trial, the magistrate shall summon 

the witnesses included in the list to appear before 

the   Court   to   which   the   accused   has   been 

committed:

        Provided   that   where   the   accused   has   been 

committed to the High Court, the magistrate may, 

in   his   discretion,   leave   such   witnesses   to   be 

summoned   by   the   Clerk   of   the   State   and   such 

witnesses may be summoned accordingly:

                                                                          35
        Provided   also   that   if   the   magistrate   thinks 

that   any   witness   is   included   in   the   list   for   the 

purpose   of   vexation   of   delay,   or   of   defeating   the 

ends   of   justice,   the   magistrate   may   require   the 

accused  to   satisfy   him   that  there   are   reasonable 

grounds   for   believing   that   the   evidence   of   such 

witness   is   material,   and   if   he   is   not   so   satisfied, 

may refuse to summon the witness (recording his 

reasons   for   such   refusal),   or   may   before 

summoning   him   require   such   sum   to   be 

deposited as such magistrate thinks necessary to 

defray the expense of obtaining the attendance of 

the witness and all other proper expenses.

(12)    Witnesses   for   the   prosecution,   whose 

attendance   before   the   Court   of   Session   or   High 

Court   is   necessary   and   who   appear   before   the 

magistrate   shall   execute   before   him   bonds 

binding   themselves   to   be   in   attendance   when 

called upon by the Court of Session or High Court 

to give evidence.

(13)    If   any   witness   refuses   to   attend   before   the 

Court   of   Session   or   High   Court,   or   execute   the 

bond   above   directed,   the   magistrate   may   detain 

him   in   custody   until   he   executes   such   bond   or 

until   his   attendance   at   the   Court   of   Session   or 

High Court is required, when the magistrate shall 

send   him   in   custody   to   the   Court   of   Session   or 

High Court as the case may be.

(14)    When the accused is committed for trial, the 

magistrate shall issue an order to such person as 

may   be   appointed   by   the   State   Government   in 

this   behalf,   notifying   the   commitment,   and 

stating   the   offence   in   the   same   form   as   the 

charge;   and   shall   send   the   charge,   the   record   of 

the inquiry and any weapon or other thing which 

is   to   be   produced   in   evidence,   to   the   Court   of 

Session or where the commitment is made to the 

High   Court,   to   the   Clerk   of   the   State   or   other 

officer appointed in this behalf by the High Court.

                                                                               36
            (15)    When  the   commitment   is   made   to   the   High 

            Court   and   any   part   of   the   record   is   not   in 

            English, an English translation of such part shall 

            be forwarded with the record.

            (16)    Until   and   during   the   trial,   the   magistrate 

            shall,   subject   to   the   provisions   of   this   Code 

            regarding the taking of bail, commit  the accused 

            by warrant to custody."

43.   On a bare perusal of the above quoted provisions, it is plain 



as   day   that   an   exhaustive   procedure   was   enumerated   prior   to 



commitment of the case to the Court of Session.   As is evincible, 



earlier if a case was instituted on a police report, the magistrate 



was   required   to   hold   enquiry,   record   satisfaction   about   various 



aspects,   take   evidence   as   regards   the   actual   commission   of   the 



offence   alleged   and   further   was   vested   with   the   discretion   to 



record evidence of one or more witnesses.   Quite apart from the 



above, the accused was at liberty to cross-examine the witnesses 



and   it   was   incumbent   on   the   magistrate   to   consider   the 



documents   and,   if   necessary,   examine   the   accused   for   the 



purpose of enabling him to explain any circumstances appearing 



in   the   evidence   against   him   by   the   prosecution   and   afford   the 



accused   an   opportunity   of   being   heard   and   if   there   was   no 



ground   for   committing   the   accused   person   for   trial,   record 


                                                                                        37


reasons   and   discharge   him.   Thus,   the   accused   enjoyed   a 



substantial right prior to commitment of the case. It was indeed a 



vital   stage.   But,   in   the   committal   proceedings  in   praesenti,   the 



magistrate   is   only   required   to   see   whether   the   offence   is 



exclusively   triable   by   the   Court   of   Session.     Mr.   Fakhruddin, 



learned   senior   counsel,   would  submit   that the  use  of  the  words 



"it   appears   to   the   magistrate"   are   of   immense   signification   and 



the   magistrate   has   the   discretion   to   form   an   opinion   about   the 



case and not to accept the police report.   To appreciate the said 



submission,   it   is   apposite   to   refer   to   Section   207   of   the   1973 



Code which lays down for furnishing of certain documents to the 



accused   free   of   cost.     Section   209(a)   clearly   stipulates   that 



providing of the documents as per Section 207 or Section 208 is 



the   only   condition   precedent   for   commitment.     It   is   noteworthy 



that after the  words,  namely,  "it appears to the  Magistrate",   the 



words that follow are "that the offence is triable exclusively by the 



Court   of   Session".     The   limited   jurisdiction   conferred   on   the 



magistrate   is   only   to   verify   the   nature   of   the   offence.     It   is   also 



worth   noting   that   thereafter,   a   mandate   is   cast   that   he   "shall 



commit".  Evidently, there is a sea of difference in the proceeding 



for commitment to the Court of Session under the old Code and 


                                                                              38


under the existing Code.   There is nothing in Section 209 of the 



Code   to   even   remotely   suggest   that   any   of   the   protections   as 



provided under the old Code has been telescoped to the existing 



one.

44.     It   is   worth   noting   that   under   the   Code   of   Criminal 



Procedure,   1898,   a   full-fledged   Magisterial   enquiry   was 



postulated  in the committal proceeding and the prosecution was 


then required to examine all the witnesses at this stage itself.  In 



1955,   the   Parliament   by   Act   26   of   1955   curtailed   the   said 



procedure   and   brought   in   Section   207A   to   the   old   Code.     Later 



on, the Law Commission of India in its 41st Report, recommended 



thus:- 

             "18.19.   After a careful consideration we are 

             of   the   unanimous   opinion   that   committal 

             proceedings   are  largely   a  waste  of  time  and 

             effort   and   do   not   contribute   appreciably   to 

             the efficiency of the trial before the Court of 

             Session.     While   they   are   obviously   time-

             consuming,   they   do   not   serve   any   essential 

             purpose.   There can be no doubt or dispute 

             as to the desirability of every trial, and more 

             particularly   of   the   trial   for   a   grave   offence, 

             beginning   as   soon   as   practicable   after   the 

             completion   of   investigation.              Committal 

             proceedings   which   only   serve   to   delay   this 

             step,   do   not   advance   the   cause   of   justice. 

             The   primary   object   of   protecting   the 

             innocent   accused   from   the   ordeal   of   a 

             sessions   trial   has   not   been   achieved   in 


                                                                                    39


             practice;   and   the   other   main   object   of 

             apprising   the   accused   in   sufficient   detail   of 

             the case he has to meet at the trial could be 

             achieved   by   other   methods   without   going 

             through   a   very   partial   and   ineffective   trial 

             rehearsal          before         a         Magistrate.         We 

             recommend   that   committal   proceedings 

             should be abolished."


We have reproduced the same to accentuate the change that has 



taken   place   in   the   existing   Code.   True   it   is,   the   committal 



proceedings   have   not   been   totally   abolished   but   in   the   present 



incarnation,   it   has   really   been   metamorphosed   and   the   role   of 



the Magistrate has been absolutely constricted. 

45.    In   our   considered   opinion,   because   of   the   restricted   role 



assigned to the Magistrate at the stage of commitment under the 



new   Code,   the   non-compliance   of   the   same   and   raising   of   any 



objection in that regard after conviction attracts the applicability 



of   the   principle   of   `failure   of   justice'   and   the   convict-appellant 



becomes obliged in law to satisfy the appellate court that he has 



been   prejudiced   and   deprived   of   a   fair   trial   or   there   has   been 



miscarriage   of   justice.     The   concept   of   fair   trial   and   the 



conception   of   miscarriage   of   justice   are   not   in   the   realm   of 



abstraction.     They   do  not  operate   in   a  vacuum.     They   are   to   be 



concretely   established   on   the   bedrock   of   facts   and   not   to   be 


                                                                                   40


deduced   from   procedural   lapse   or   an   interdict   like   commitment 



as enshrined under Section 193 of the Code for taking cognizance 



under   the   Act.     It   should   be   a   manifestation   of   reflectible   and 



visible   reality   but   not   a   routine   matter   which   has   roots   in 



appearance   sans   any   reality.     Tested   on   the   aforesaid   premised 



reasons,   it   is   well   nigh   impossible   to   conceive   of   any   failure   of 



justice or causation of prejudice or miscarriage of justice on such 



non-compliance.  It would be totally inapposite and inappropriate 



to hold that such non-compliance vitiates the trial.

46.    At   this   juncture,   we   would   like   to   refer   to   two   other 



concepts,   namely,   speedy   trial   and   treatment   of   a   victim   in 



criminal jurisprudence based on the constitutional paradigm and 



principle.    The   entitlement   of   the   accused   to   speedy   trial   has 



been   repeatedly   emphasized   by   this   Court.     It   has   been 



recognised as an inherent and implicit aspect in the spectrum of 



Article 21 of the Constitution.  The whole purpose of speedy trial 



is   intended   to   avoid   oppression   and   prevent   delay.     It   is   a 



sacrosanct   obligation   of   all   concerned   with   the   justice 



dispensation   system   to   see   that   the   administration   of   criminal 



justice becomes effective, vibrant and meaningful.  The concept of 



speedy   trial   cannot   be   allowed   to   remain   a   mere   formality   (see 


                                                                                          41
Hussainara   Khatoon   and   Ors.  v.  Home   Secretary,   State   of  


Bihar28,  Moti Lal Saraf   v. State of Jammu & Kashmir29  and 


Raj Deo Sharma v. State of Bihar30).  

47.    While delineating on the facets of speedy trial, it cannot be 



regarded       as   an   exclusive   right   of   the   accused.     The   right   of   a 



victim has been given recognition in  Mangal Singh and Anr.  v. 

Kishan Singh and ors.31 wherein it has been observed thus: -

               "Any   inordinate   delay   in   conclusion   of   a 

               criminal          trial         undoubtedly         has         highly 

               deleterious   effect   on   the   society   generally   and 

               particularly on the two sides of the case.   But it 

               will be a grave mistake to assume that delay in 

               trial does not cause acute suffering and anguish 

               to the victim of the offence.   In many cases the 

               victim   may   suffer   even  more  than  the   accused. 

               There   is,   therefore   no   reason   to   give   all   the 

               benefits   on   account   of   the   delay   in   trial   to   the 

               accused and to completely deny all justice to the 

               victim of the offence."


                                                      [Emphasis supplied]


48.    It   is   worthnoting   that   the   Constitution   Bench   in  Iqbal  


Singh   Marwah   and   another  v.  Meenakshi   Marwah   and  


another32, though in a different context, had also observed that 


delay   in   the   prosecution   of   a   guilty   person   comes   to   his 



28 (1980) 1 SCC 81

29 AIR 2007 SC 56

30 AIR 1998 SC 3281

31 AIR 2009 SC 1535

32 AIR 2005 SC 2119


                                                                                    42


advantage   as   witnesses   becomes   reluctant   to   give   evidence   and 



the evidence gets lost. 


49.    We have referred to the aforesaid authorities to illumine and 



elucidate that the delay in conclusion of trial has a direct nexus 



with the collective cry of the society and the anguish and agony 



of   an   accused.     Decidedly,   there   has   to   be   a   fair   trial   and   no 



miscarriage   of   justice   and   under   no   circumstances,   prejudice 



should   be   caused   to   the   accused   but,   a   pregnant   one,   every 



procedural lapse or every interdict that has been acceded to and 



not   objected   at   the   appropriate   stage   would   not   get   the   trial 



dented or make it unfair. Treating it to be unfair would amount 



to   an   undesirable   state   of   pink   of   perfection   in   procedure.   An 



absolute apple pie order in carrying out the adjective law, would 



only be sound and fury signifying nothing.

50.    In   the   case   at   hand,   as   is   perceivable,   no   objection   was 



raised at the time of framing of charge or any other relevant time 



but   only   propounded   after   conviction.                       Under   these 



circumstances,   the   right   of   the   collective   as   well   as   the   right   of 



the victim springs to the forefront and then it becomes obligatory 



on   the   part   of   the   accused   to   satisfy   the   court   that   there   has 


                                                                                     43


been   failure   of   justice   or   prejudice   has   been   caused   to   him. 

Unless   the   same   is   established,   setting   aside   of   conviction   as   a 



natural   corollary   or   direction   for   retrial   as   the   third   step   of   the 



syllogism solely on the said foundation would be an anathema to 



justice.   Be it noted, one cannot afford to treat the victim as an 



alien   or   a   total   stranger   to   the   criminal   trial.     The   criminal 



jurisprudence,   with   the   passage   of   time,   has   laid   emphasis   on 



victimology   which   fundamentally   is   a   perception   of   a   trial   from 



the   view   point   of   the   criminal   as   well   as   the   victim.     Both   are 



viewed in the social context.   The view of the victim is given due 



regard   and   respect   in   certain   countries.   In   respect   of   certain 



offences in our existing criminal jurisprudence, the testimony of 



the   victim   is   given   paramount   importance.     Sometimes   it   is 



perceived that it is the duty of the court to see that the victim's 



right is protected.   A direction for retrial is to put the clock back 



and it would be a travesty of justice to so direct if the trial really 



has not been unfair and there has been no miscarriage of justice 



or failure of justice.

51.     We   may   state   without   any   fear   of   contradiction   that   if   the 



failure of justice is not bestowed its due signification in a case of 



the present nature, every procedural lapse or interdict would be 


                                                                                      44


given a privileged place on the pulpit. It would, with unnecessary 



interpretative   dynamism,   have   the   effect   potentiality   to   cause   a 



dent   in   the   criminal   justice   delivery   system   and   eventually, 



justice would become illusory like a mirage.   It is to be borne in 



mind   that   the   Legislature   deliberately   obliterated   certain   rights 



conferred  on  the accused at the  committal  stage under  the  new 



Code.  The intendment of the Legislature in the plainest sense is 



that   every   stage   is   not   to   be   treated   as   vital   and   it   is   to   be 



interpreted   to   subserve   the   substantive   objects   of   the   criminal 



trial. 

52.    Judged from these spectrums and analysed on the aforesaid 



premises,   we   come   to   the   irresistible   conclusion   that   the 



objection relating to non-compliance of Section 193 of the Code, 



which eventually has resulted in directly entertaining and taking 



cognizance by the Special Judge under the Scheduled Castes and 



the   Scheduled   Tribes   (Prevention   of   Atrocities)   Act,   1989,   does 



not vitiate the trial and on the said ground alone, the conviction 



cannot be set aside or there cannot be a direction of retrial and, 



therefore,   the   decision   rendered   in  Bhooraji  (supra)   lays   down 



the   correct   law   inasmuch   as   there   is   no   failure   of   justice   or   no 



prejudice   is   caused   to   the   accused.     The   decisions   rendered   in 


                                                                                    45


Moly  (supra)   and  Vidyadharan  (supra)   have   not   noted   the 


decision   in  Bhooraji  (supra),   a   binding   precedent,   and   hence 



they   are  per   incuriam  and   further,   the   law   laid   down   therein, 



whereby   the   conviction   is   set  aside   or  matter   is   remanded   after 



setting aside the conviction for fresh trial, does not expound the 



correct   proposition   of   law   and,   accordingly,   they   are   hereby,   to 



that extent, overruled.

53.    The   appeals   be   placed   before   the   appropriate   Bench   for 



hearing on merits.

                                                  ....................................J.

                                                          [Dalveer Bhandari]




                                                  ....................................J.

                                                            [T. S. Thakur]




                                                  ....................................J.

                                                          [Dipak Misra]




New Delhi;

February 17, 2012.

