
Supreme Court of India
K.Ravichandra vs State Of Karnataka on 6 September, 2018Author: R Banumathi
                                                            1


                                                                                NON-REPORTABLE
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 176 OF 2009


     K.RAVICHANDRA & ORS.                                                      ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

     STATE OF KARNATAKA                                                        ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  J U D G M E N T
     R. BANUMATHI,J.

                      1.           This appeal arises out of the judgment dated

                      02.07.2008 in Crl.A. No. 136 of 2002 passed by the High

                      Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in and by which the High

                      Court of Karnataka has reversed the order of acquittal and

                      convicted the appellants-accused under Section 304 (II),

                      IPC and also for other offences and sentenced them to

                      undergo imprisonment for three years.

                      2.     Appellant No. 1 - accused no. 1 sent a Deepavali

                      greeting     to     PW-16    (daughter    of   PW-1)   expressing    his

                      passionate love for her and PW-16 showed the greetings to

                      her father.       When appellant No. 1 visited the village, PW-

                      1    along   with    PW-7    (H.C.   Jayaramegowda)    went   near   the

                      canteen belonging to one Lingaraju to question accused no.
Signature Not Verified
                      1 about his conduct. During the talks, appellant nos. 1 to
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.09.13
10:53:20 IST
Reason:               4 wielded clubs and attacked PW-1, PW-3 and PW-17 and also

                      the deceased -Ramu. Deceased - Ramu sustained injuries on

                      his on his scalp, parietal                bone, his right thumb and
                                           2


forearm       and     also    sustained         injuries       on       the    leg       and

succumbed to injuries.

3.      Upon    consideration of the evidence, the Trial Court

acquitted all the appellants holding that the prosecution

has failed to prove the motive and also the intention of

the     accused         and     that       the         prosecution            has        not

satisfactorily          explained       the      injuries          on    the     accused

persons. The trial court also held that the evidence of

PW-1 and other witnesses are inconsistent with each other

and that the prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of

accused beyond reasonable doubt. On those findings, the

trial Court acquitted all the appellants.

4.      The High Court in appeal set aside the order of

acquittal and convicted all the appellants as aforesaid

under Section 304 II IPC read with Section 149.

5.      We    have    heard    Mr.    Mahesh      Thakur,          learned       counsel

appearing       for     the   appellants          as     well      as     Mr.       V.    N.

Raghupathy, learned counsel appearing for the State of

Karnataka and perused the impugned judgment and materials

on record.

6.      The     evidence        of      injured             witnesses          PW-1        –

complainant,          PW-3    (wife     of      the     deceased)          and       PW-18

(brother of PW-1) is consistent and corroborating each

other      on   various       aspects      like…….,          (1)    which        accused

assaulted whom (2) the weapon wielded by the accused and

(3)   on      which    part    of    the       body    of    the        witnesses        the
                                      3


injuries    were     caused.    The       evidence     of    these    injured

witnesses and also eye witness PW-7 is corroborated by the

medical evidence also. The prosecution established that

the appellants are responsible for causing injuries to the

witnesses and the death of the deceased - Ramu.

7.      Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that

admittedly witnesses PW-1 and PW-7 went to one Lingaraju’s

canteen     for    panchayat     to       enquire    the     first    accused

regarding his conduct for sending the letter to PW-16.

Drawing our attention to the injuries sustained by the

accused, learned counsel submitted that the prosecution

has not explained the injuries on the                        person of the

accused and the trial Court had rightly held that the

complainant party are the aggressors and rightly acquitted

the accused and the High Court erred in reversing the

same.

8.      Admittedly     the     accused       persons        also     sustained

injuries as seen from the evidence adduced by the accused

party (Exs. D-8 to D-10). It is fairly well settled that

it is not always incumbent upon the prosecution to explain

the injuries of the accused persons. The prosecution is

obligated to explain the injuries of the accused persons

only if the injuries sustained by the accused are grievous

in nature. In the present case, there is no evidence to

show that the injuries on the accused persons are grievous

in nature.        As pointed out earlier, the complainant party
                                       4


    went near the canteen of one Lingaraju only for panchayat

    and they were unarmed. That being so, during the talks

    there was no reason for the accused party to wield clubs

    and attack the complainant party, on whose side at least

    three    of   them   were    injured    apart   from    the       death   of

    deceased - Ramu. When appreciation of evidence by the

    trial court suffered from perversity, the High Court being

    the     Appellate    Court    rightly    reversed      the        order   of

    acquittal and convicted the appellants under Section 304

    (II) IPC and also for other offence for the death of

    deceased.     The High Court, in our view, has shown leniency

    to    the     appellants     by   sentencing     them        to     undergo

    imprisonment only for a period of three years. In view of

    above, we are not inclined to interfere with the impugned

    order.

    9.      The appeal is dismissed.

    10.     The appellants shall surrender within a period of

    four weeks from today to serve out the remaining sentence

    failing which they shall be taken into custody.




                                               ….......................J.
                                               [R. BANUMATHI]


                                               …......................J.
                                               [INDIRA BANERJEE]
NEW DELHI
6TH SEPTEMBER, 2018

