
Supreme Court of India
Gurdeep Singh vs State Of Punjab & Ors on 25 August, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           1





                                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1085 OF 2003




                   GURDEEP SINGH               .....                                                                                                        APPELLANT



                                                                                                   VERSUS



                   STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.                                                                             .....                                 RESPONDENT





                                                                                              O R D E R

               1.                 This appeal arises out of the following facts:

               1.1                The   appellant   Gurdeep   Singh   was   the   husband   of 

               the deceased Rajender Kaur.  The couple had got married 

               on the 14th  of October, 1989 and it is the case of the 

               prosecution   that   a   substantial   amount   of   money   far 

               beyond the means of the bride's family had been spent at 

               that time though the appellant, his parents, sisters and 

               other relatives remained dissatisfied.  It appears that 

               the demands for dowry continued unabated and about one 

               year   before   the   death   the   appellant   demanded   a   sum   of 

               `25,000/-   for   the   purchase   of   a   motorcycle,   and   this 

               amount was indeed handed over to the appellant but was 

               utilised for purchasing a plot instead.   It is further 


Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           2





               the prosecution story that despite having received the 

               aforesaid amount,   the deceased continued to suffer at 

               the   hands   of   her   husband   and   his   relatives   and   that 

               despite   the   efforts   of   a   panchayat   in   the   matter   no 

               suitable result followed.  It is further the prosecution 

               story that the appellant and his relatives administered 

               poison   to   Rajinder   Kaur   on   the   27th  July,   1995   which 

               caused   her   death   and   that   three   days   thereafter 

               information   was   received   by   Gurdev   Singh   P.W.   2,   her 

               brother,   and   Satnam   Singh,   P.W.   3   her   father   on   which 

               they alongwith others rushed to the matrimonial home of 

               Rajinder   Kaur   but   found   that   the   dead   body   had   been 

               hurriedly cremated.   Gurdev Singh P.W.2 thereupon gave 

               an application Exhibit PB to the Station House Officer, 

               Police   Station,   Gidderbaha   and   on   its   basis   a   daily 

               diary entry was recorded and after a preliminary probe, 

               a First Information Report for offences punishable under 

               Section   304B   and   498A   IPC   was   registered   on   the   8th 

               August, 1995.   After investigation, Gurdeep Singh, the 

               appellant   herein,   his   brothers,   Harbhajan   Singh   and 

               Daljit   Singh,   parents,   Jit   Singh   and   Satnam   Kaur,   and 

               sisters   Darshan   Kaur   and   Daljit   Kaur   were   brought   to 

               trial for the aforesaid offences.  The trial court vide 

               its   judgment   dated   15th    July,   2000,   found   the   charge 

               under   Section   304B   proved   against   the   appellant,   Jit 


Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           3





               Singh and Satnam Kaur and the three were, accordingly, 

               sentenced   to   undergo   rigorous   imprisonment   for   ten 

               years.     The   trial   court,   however,   gave   the   benefit   of 

               doubt to Harbhajan Singh, Daljit Singh, Darshan Kaur and 

               Daljit   Kaur   and   acquitted   them   of   the   charge.     The 

               matter was thereafter taken in appeal by the convicted 

               accused,   and   the   High   Court,   has,   by   the   impugned 

               judgment   dismissed   the   appeal   of   Gurdeep   Singh   and 

               allowed the appeal of Jit Singh and Satnam Kaur.   The 

               solitary appellant now before us is Gurdeep Singh.

               2.                 Mr.   Sudhir   Walia,   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

               appellant has raised several arguments before us during 

               the   course   of   the   hearing.     He   has   first   pointed   out 

               that   the   presumption   under   Section   113B   of   the   Indian 

               Evidence   Act   could   be   drawn   with   respect   to     a   dowry 

               death   only   if   the   ingredients   of   Section   304B   of   the 

               Indian Penal Code were spelt out and in the light of the 

               uncertain   evidence   that   had   come   on   record,   more 

               particularly, as there was no evidence of an unnatural 

               death or demands being made for dowry or other articles 

               soon   before   the   death,   the   said   provision   was 

               inapplicable.   It   has   also   been   pointed   out   that   the 

               prosecution story that `25,000/- had been spent to buy a 

               plot   was   on   the   face   of   it   wrong   in   the   light   of   the 

               documentary   evidence   proved   by   D.W.   2   Ram   Chand,   an 


Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           4





               employee of the bank who deposed to the effect that a 

               sum of `93,000/- had been withdrawn from the bank on the 

               27th  of   July,   1994,   and   the   statement   of   DW   4- 

               Pushpinder   Singh,   Junior   Assistant,   Tehsil   Office, 

               Gidderbaha  from the Sub-Registrar's office who deposed 

               that a sale deed for a plot priced at `54,000/- had been 

               executed and as such the facts indicated that the entire 

               amount for the sale had come from the account of Gurdeep 

               Singh   the   appellant   herein.     He   has,   accordingly, 

               pointed out that there was no evidence with respect to 

               any   demand   being   made   soon   before   the   death.     The 

               learned counsel has also placed reliance on a judgment 

               of this Court in  Suresh Kumar Singh  v.  State of Uttar 

               Pradesh (2009) 17 SCC 243.  He has, in addition, argued 

               that the prosecution story that P.W. 2, P.W. 3 and other 

               relatives   had   not   been   called   to   attend   the   cremation 

               was   in   clear   contradiction   vis-a-vis   their   statements 

               recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and the evidence in 

               Court and that this contradiction had been pointed out 

               during   the   course   of   the   cross   examination.     In   the 

               alternative, it has been submitted that assuming for a 

               moment   that   no   statements   of   P.Ws.   2   and   3     under 

               Section   161   Cr.P.C.   had   been   recorded,   as   deposed   by 

               them in their evidence, the prosecution would still not 

               gain any advantage as  a statement recorded in Court for 


Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           5





               the   first   time   would   have   very   limited   evidentiary 

               value.  

               3.                 Mr.   Kuldip   Singh,   learned   counsel   for   the   State 

               has, however, supported the judgment of the trial court 

               and   the   High   Court   and   has   submitted   that   as   the 

               deceased was a young woman,a presumption had to be drawn 

               that   she   had   died   an   unnatural   death   and   as   such   the 

               provisions of Section 113B of the Evidence Act would be 

               applicable  to the facts of the case.

               4.                 We have heard the learned counsel very carefully 

               and have gone through the record.  

               5.                 We  first   find  that   the  evidence   with  respect   to 

               the   appellant   Gurdeep   Singh   is   almost   identical   with 

               that of the six accused who have been acquitted of the 

               same   charge   -   two   by   the   High   Court   and   four   by   the 

               trial court and he appears to have been singled out as 

               being   the   husband.     We   first   take   up   the   argument 

               relating to Section 304B and the presumption drawn under 

               Section   113B.     A   bare   reading   of   Section   304B   pre-

               supposes     several   factors   for   its   applicability,   they 

               being:- (i) death should be of burns or bodily injury or 

               has occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances: 

               (ii) within seven years of the marriage; and (iii) that 

               soon before her death she had been subjected to cruelty 

               or   harrassment   by   her   husband   or   her   relatives.     This 


Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           6





               Court in  Suresh Kumar Singh's case  supra has held that 

               even   if   one   of   the  ingredients   is   not   made   out,   the 

               presumption under Section 113B of the Evidence Act would 

               not be available to the prosecution and the onus would 

               not shift to the defence.  

               6.                 We   find   in   the   present   case   that   there   is   no 

               evidence   of   unnatural   death.     It   is   the   prosecution 

               story   that   the   deceased   had   been   poisoned.     It   has, 

               however, come in the evidence, and in particular, in the 

               report   of   the   Forensic   Science   Laboratory   dated   21st 

               August, 1995, that on an analysis of the bones and ashes 

               no poisonous substance had been found to be present.  In 

               this view of the matter, the mere fact that the deceased 

               happened   to   be   a   young   woman   would   not   lead   to   the 

               inference   that   she   had   died   an   unnatural   death. 

               Likewise, we find that the evidence of demand for dowry 

               or goods soon before death is also lacking. Admittedly, 

               the only evidence of any demand was of Rs. 25,000/- made 

               one year prior to the incident and as per the defence 

               evidence   of   D.W.   2   and   D.W.   4,   the   money   for   the 

               execution of the sale deed had been taken out from the 

               bank a day earlier.   In the light of these two factors 

               it has been held in paragraph 25 of the above cited case 

               as under:

                                                    Indisputably,   in   order   to   attract 
                               Section 304B, it is imperative on the part 


Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           7





                               of   the   prosecution   to   establish   that   the 
                               cruelty   or   harassment   has   been   meted   out 
                               to   the   deceased   `soon   before   her   death'. 
                               There cannot be any doubt or dispute that 
                               it   is   a   flexible   term.   Its   application 
                               would   depend   upon   the   factual   matrix 
                               obtaining   in   a   particular   case.   No   fixed 
                               period   can   be   indicated   therefor.   It, 
                               however,   must   undergo   the   test   known   as 
                               `proximity   test'.   What,   however,   is 
                               necessary for the prosecution is to bring 
                               on   record   that   the   dowry   demand   was   not 
                               too   late   and   not   too   stale   before   the 
                               death of the victim."

               7.                 We,   therefore,   find   that   evidence   clearly   fails 

               the   proximity   test   as   laid   down   in   the   aforesaid 

               judgment.  

               8.                 The   courts   below   have,   however,   drawn   a 

               presumption   against   the   accused   primarily   on   the   plea 

               that they had not informed the parents of the deceased 

               that   she   had   died   and   had   hurriedly   cremated   her   dead 

               body.  We further see from the evidence of P.Ws. 2 and 3 

               that in their statements recorded in Court they did say 

               that they had received no information about the death on 

               which   they   had   been   confronted   with   their   statements 

               recorded under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. in which they 

               had   stated   that   they   had   indeed   been   present   when   the 

               cremation   had   taken   place.     In   order   to   explain   this 

               contradiction   both   these   witnesses   disowned   their   161 

               statements   and   testified   that   they   had   not   made   any 

               statement to the police.  These statements are, however, 

               falsified by the evidence of P.W. 4   ASI Gurmel Singh, 


Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           8





               the   police   officer   concerned,   who   deposed   that   the 

               police   statements   had   been   recorded   by   him   as   per   the 

               dictates   of   the   two   witnesses.     In   the     alternative, 

               even assuming that no statements of P.Ws. 2 and 3 had 

               been   recorded   under   Section   161   Cr.P.C.   this   factor 

               destroys   the   substratum   of   the   prosecution   story   in   a 

               far greater measure as it must then be taken that their 

               statements   were   being   recorded   for   the   first   time   in 

               Court which would rob them of much of their evidentiary 

               value.     In this case, we find that the two witnesses 

               are none other than the brother and the father of the 

               deceased.  

               9.                 We   are,   therefore,   of   the   opinion   that   as   a 

               result of the cumulative discussion above, the appellant 

               has to succeed.  We, accordingly, allow this appeal, set 

               aside the judgments of the courts below insofar as he is 

               concerned   and   order   his   acquittal.     Bail   bonds   stand 

               discharged. 


                                                                                                                 .....................J
                                                                                                                 [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                                                                                 ......................J
                                                                                                                 [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]



               NEW DELHI
               AUGUST 25, 2011.


Crl.A. No. 1085 of 2003                                                                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                                           9



