
Supreme Court of India
Prasanta Kumar Sarkar vs Ashis Chatterjee & Anr on 29 October, 2010Author: D Jain
Bench: D.K. Jain, H.L. Dattu
                                                                           REPORTABLE
                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2086 OF 2010
              (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No.4590 of 2010)


PRASANTA KUMAR SARKAR                           --    APPELLANT (S)

                                VERSUS

ASHIS CHATTERJEE & ANR.                        --     RESPONDENT (S)



                            JUDGMENT

D.K. JAIN, J.:


      Leave granted.


2.    This appeal, by special leave, is directed against order dated 11 th

January, 2010 passed by the High Court of Calcutta in C.R.M. No. 272 of

2010, granting regular bail to respondent No. 1 in this appeal (hereinafter

referred to as "the accused"), under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 (for short "the Code").

3.    The accused is facing trial for an offence punishable under Section

      302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short "IPC") for allegedly

                                                                         1
      committing the murder of one Ms. Mallika Sen. Respondent No.2 is

      the State of West Bengal.


4.    Very briefly stated the facts material for the adjudication of this

      appeal can be stated thus:


      Ms. Mallika Sen, a 57 years old widow was found strangulated at her

residence on 2nd July, 2009. The appellant, who is the brother of the victim,

lodged a written complaint at the Rampurhat Police Station, on the basis of

which FIR No. 111/09 dated 2nd July, 2009 was registered under Section

302, IPC.


      It has been alleged that a neighbour of late Ms. Sen, one            Mr.

Somenath Dutta, saw the accused rushing out of the residence of the

deceased, around the time the incident took place. The accused was arrested

on 13th July, 2009 and produced before the Additional Chief Judicial

Magistrate who remanded him to judicial custody. Thereafter, on the same

day, the police filed a forwarding report in the said court, inter alia,

requesting for holding of a Test Identification Parade (T.I.P.) of the accused.

The T.I.P. was conducted, but perhaps the accused could not be identified.

However, in the second T.I.P., the accused was duly identified by the

aforesaid witness.


                                                                             2
5.        The accused filed several bail applications before the Additional Chief

          Judicial Magistrate which were all dismissed vide orders dated 7th

          September, 2009, 16th September, 2009 and        19th September, 2009.


6.        On 7th October, 2009, charge-sheet No. 138 of 2009 under Section 302

          IPC was filed against the accused before the Additional Chief Judicial

          Magistrate.


7.        Having failed to secure bail from the Sessions Court, the accused

          preferred a bail application, being C.R.M. No. 272 of 2010 before the

          High Court under Section 439 of the Code. As stated above, by the

          impugned order, the High Court allowed the application, and granted

          bail to the accused by a short order, observing thus:

          "Having regard to the nature of the alleged crime, we do not
          think that interest of investigation requires or (sic) justifies
          further detention of the present petitioner at this stage."

8.        Hence the present appeal by the complainant.


9.        Mr. Nagender Rai, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

          appellant, while assailing the impugned order, contended that the said

          order being non-speaking, deserves to be set aside in light of the

          decision of this Court in Masroor Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.1.


1
    (2009) 14 SCC 286

                                                                               3
      Learned counsel submitted that the High Court has failed to take into

      consideration the manner in which a hapless old lady was done to

      death as also the fact that the accused had been duly identified by an

      independent witness.


10.   Per contra, Mr. Ujjwal Banerjee, learned counsel appearing for the

      accused, contended that the case against the accused was false, as is

      evident from the fact that the witness had failed to identify the

      accused in the first T.I.P. Learned counsel contended that the accused

      had been arrested on a mere suspicion, and in light of the fact that he

      has not misused the bail, the impugned order needs to be affirmed.


11.   We are of the opinion that the impugned order is clearly

      unsustainable. It is trite that this Court does not, normally, interfere

      with an order passed by the High Court granting or rejecting bail to

      the accused. However, it is equally incumbent upon the High Court to

      exercise its discretion judiciously, cautiously and strictly in

      compliance with the basic principles laid down in a plethora of

      decisions of this Court on the point. It is well settled that, among other

      circumstances, the factors to be borne in mind while considering an

      application for bail are: (i) whether there is any prima facie or


                                                                              4
        reasonable ground to believe that the accused had committed the

        offence; (ii) nature and gravity of the accusation; (iii) severity of the

        punishment in the event of conviction; (iv) danger of the accused

        absconding or fleeing, if released on bail; (v) character, behaviour,

        means, position and standing of the accused; (vi) likelihood of the

        offence being repeated; (vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses

        being influenced; and (viii) danger, of course, of justice being

        thwarted by grant of bail. (See: State of U.P. through CBI           Vs.

        Amarmani Tripathi2; Prahlad Singh Bhati Vs. NCT, Delhi & Anr.3;

        Ram Govind Upadhyay Vs. Sudarshan Singh & Ors.4)


12.      It is manifest that if the High Court does not advert to these relevant

        considerations and mechanically grants bail, the said order would

        suffer from the vice of non-application of mind, rendering it to be

        illegal. In Masroor (supra), a Division Bench of this Court, of which

        one of us (D.K. Jain, J.) was a member, observed as follows:


        "Though at the stage of granting bail an elaborate examination
        of evidence and detailed reasons touching the merit of the case,
        which may prejudice the accused, should be avoided, but there
        is a need to indicate in such order reasons for prima facie
        concluding why bail was being granted particularly where the
        accused is charged of having committed a serious offence."
2
  (2005) 8 SCC 21
3
  (2001) 4 SCC 280
4
  (2002) 3 SCC 598

                                                                               5
        (See also: State of Maharashtra Vs. Ritesh5; Panchanan
        Mishra Vs. Digambar Mishra & Ors.6; Vijay Kumar Vs.
        Narendra & Ors.7; Anwari Begum Vs. Sher Mohammad &
        Anr8)


13.     We are constrained to observe that in the instant case, while dealing

        with the application of the accused for grant of bail, the High Court

        completely lost sight of the basic principles enumerated above. The

        accused, in the present case, is alleged to have committed a heinous

        crime of killing an old helpless lady by strangulation. He was seen

        coming out of the victim's house by a neighbour around the time of

        the alleged occurrence, giving rise to a reasonable belief that he had

        committed the murder. We feel that under the given circumstances, it

        was not the stage at which bail under Section 439 of the Code should

        have been granted to the accused, more so, when even charges have

        not yet been framed. It is also pertinent to note that, as stated above,

        the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate had rejected three bail

        applications of the accused but the High Court did not find it

        worthwhile to even make a reference to these orders. In this regard, it

        would be useful to refer to the following observations echoed in


5
  (2001) 4 SCC 224
6
  (2005) 3 SCC 143
7
  (2002) 9 SCC 364
8
  (2005) 7 SCC 326

                                                                              6
          Kalyan Chandra Sarkar Vs. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav &

          Anr.9:-

          "In regard to cases where earlier bail applications have been
          rejected there is a further onus on the court to consider the
          subsequent application for grant of bail by noticing the grounds
          on which earlier bail applications have been rejected and after
          such consideration if the court is of the opinion that bail has to
          be granted then the said court will have to give specific reasons
          why in spite of such earlier rejection the subsequent application
          for bail should be granted." (See also: Ram Pratap Yadav Vs.
          Mitra Sen Yadav & Anr.10)


14.        For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed, and the impugned

          order is set aside. The bail bond and the surety furnished by the

          accused in terms of the impugned order stands cancelled and it is

          directed that he will be taken into custody forthwith. Needless to add

          that observations touching the merits of the case against the accused

          are purely for the purpose of deciding the question of grant of bail and

          if in future any such application is filed by the accused, it shall be

          considered on its own merits untrammelled by any of these

          observations.


                                           ...........................................J.

9
    (2004) 7 SCC 528
10
     (2003) 1 SCC 15

                                                                                       7
                    (D.K. JAIN)



                    ............................................J.
                    (H.L. DATTU)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 29, 2010.


                                                                 8

