
Supreme Court of India
Lalu Sakharam Rathod vs State Of Maharashtra on 6 November, 2008Author: ......................J.
Bench: B.N. Agrawal, G.S. Singhvi, Aftab Alam
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.697 OF 2000



Lalu Sakharam Rathod                                      ...Appellant(s)


                                        Versus


State of Maharashtra                                      ...Respondent(s)




                                     O R D E R

           Heard learned counsel for the parties.
           Trial Court convicted the appellant under Section 7 read with Section 13
(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 [hereinafter referred to as "the Act"]
and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of six months and
to pay fine of Rupees five hundred; in default, to undergo further rigorous
imprisonment for a period of two months. He was further convicted under Section 13
(2) of the Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one
year and to pay fine of Rupees one thousand; in default, to undergo further rigorous
imprisonment for a period three months. Both the sentences, however, were ordered
to run concurrently.     On appeal being preferred, High Court confirmed the
convictions. Hence, this appeal by special leave.
                                                                                  ...2/-
                                          -2-
           Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the parties and
perused the records, we are of the view that the Trial Court as well as the High Court
have recorded convictions of the appellant upon threadbare discussion of evidence
and no interference by this Court is called for.
           The appeal, accordingly, fails and the same is dismissed.
           Bail bonds of the appellant, who is on bail, are cancelled and he is directed
to be taken into custody forthwith to serve out the remaining period of sentence for
which the matter shall be reported to this Court by the Trial Court within two
months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.

                                                                         ......................J.
                                                   [B.N. AGRAWAL]



                                                                         ......................J.
                                                   [G.S. SINGHVI]



                                                                         ......................J.
                                                   [AFTAB ALAM]

New Delhi,
November 06, 2008.

