
Supreme Court of India
Salig Ram Sharma vs State Of M.P on 27 February, 2009Author: ....................J.
Bench: D.K. Jain, R.M. Lodha
               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          CRIMINAL APPEAL No.402 of 2009
(Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl) No.5194 of 2008)

Salig Ram Sharma                                                 .....Appellant(s)



                             Versus

State of M.P.                                                    .....Respondent(s)

           ORDER
            Leave granted.

                This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 4th

   October, 2007 rendered by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, at Jabalpur. By

   the impugned order the High Court has upheld the conviction of the appellant for

   offence punishable under Section 392 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal

   Code as also the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years,

   awarded by the Trial Court.


                We have heard learned counsel for the parties.

                It is submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that the prosecution

   has failed to explain the delay in lodging of FIR and there are discrepancies in the

   evidence of the prosecution witnesses, whose testimony has been relied upon by

   the Courts below. It is contended that the prosecution has failed to prove the

   case, against the appellant and therefore, he deserves to be acquitted. Learned

   counsel also stated that the appellant has already undergone more than one year

   of sentence. It is pleaded

                                                       ...2/-


                                   :2:

   that a lenient view may be taken. Learned counsel for the State on the other
       hand, supported the decisions of the lower courts.



                Having gone through the evidence on record, we are of the view that

       there is no ground to set aside the conviction of the appellant. However, bearing

       in mind the circumstances under which the incident had taken place, we are of

       the view that the interest of justice would be subserved if, while sustaining the

       conviction of the appellant, the sentence awarded is reduced to the period already

       undergone. We order accordingly.


                Resultantly, the appeal is partly allowed to the extent indicated above.

       The appellant shall be released forthwith unless he is required to be in custody in

       connection with any other case.


                                               ....................J.
                                          [ D.K. JAIN ]


                 ....................J.                                                      [ R.M.
LODHA ]
  NEW DELHI,
  FEBRUARY 27, 2009.

