
Supreme Court of India
State By Inspector Of ... vs Rajangam on 30 April, 2009Bench: Dalveer Bhandari, Mukundakam Sharma
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.886 OF 2002.

State by Inspector of Police,
NIB, Madurai, Tamil Nadu                         .. Appellant

           Versus

Rajangam                                         .. Respondent




                           ORDER

     This appeal is directed against the judgment of the High

Court of Madras dated 15th June, 2001 delivered in Criminal

Appeal No. 523 of 1997.


     Brief facts of the case in nutshell are as follows:


     Kalidasan, Sub Inspector of Police, P.W.4 received an

information that the respondent (hereinafter referred to as the

accused) was transporting contraband articles and that the

accused could be caught with the contraband if he goes to the

Nandhi Departmental Stores.       This information received by
                                                            2

P.W.4 was conveyed to his superior P.W.5, who was the

Inspector of Police, Narcotic Intelligence Bureau during the

relevant period.    The said information given in writing is

Ex.P.6. On the basis of the said information, P.W.5 met P.W.6

and appraised him of the said fact.   Thereafter, PWs 4, 5 and

6 went to the said departmental store and arrested the

accused. The accused was found in possession of a bag which

contained the narcotic substance.


     The accused was informed of his right under section 50

of the Act.   Thereafter, the bag was searched and the officers

found 5 Kgs. of opium in the said bag. After taking 10 grams

of opium for sample, the remaining opium was also taken in a

packet. The sample packet as well as the other packet was

sealed in the presence of the witnesses.     The accused was

brought to the police station. P.W.6 registered a case in Crime

No. 64 of 1994 and took up investigation. Ex.P.7 is the copy

of the printed first information report.    He questioned the

witnesses and recorded their statements. He sent Ex.P.8 (his

report) to the superior officer under section 57 of the Act. The

same was sent to the court with a requisition to forward them
                                                            3

for analysis.   On receipt of the report from the chemical

analyst, the final report was filed against the accused.


     The accused was convicted by the Special District and

Sessions Judge, Madurai and was directed to undergo 10

years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.1,00,000/- and,

in default, to further undergo 3 years simple imprisonment.


     The accused preferred an appeal before the High Court.

It was submitted on behalf of the accused before the High

Court that the officer who had registered the crime in the case,

also investigated the said crime. It was also submitted that

the crime was registered by P.W.6 and that the case was also

investigated by him.   According to the submission advanced

on behalf of the accused, the crime ought to have been

investigated by another independent officer and not by P.W.6.

The High Court found substance in this submission made on

behalf of the accused and acquitted the accused.


     Aggrieved by the said judgment of the High Court, the

State, through Inspector of Police, NIB, Madurai, Tamil Nadu,

preferred a special leave petition under Article 136 of the
                                                            4

Constitution before this Court. This Court granted leave on

29.8.2002.

     The short question which falls for consideration of this

Court is whether P.W.6 who registered the crime could have

investigated the case or an independent officer ought to have

investigated the case.


     The learned counsel appearing for the accused submitted

that the controversy involved in this case is no longer res

integra. In Megna Singh v. State of Haryana (1996) 11 SCC

709, this Court has taken a categorical view that the officer

who arrested the accused should not have proceeded with the

investigation of the case. The relevant paragraph reads as

under:

     "4. ........ We have also noted another disturbing
     feature in this case.     P.W.3, Sri Chand, Head
     Constable arrested the accused and on search being
     conducted by him a pistol and the cartridges were
     recovered from the accused.         It was on his
     complaint a formal first information report was
     lodged and the case was initiated.         He being
     complainant should not have proceeded with the
     investigation of the case. But it appears to us that
     he was not only the complainant in the case but he
     carried on with the investigation and examined
     witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C. Such practice,
     to say the least, should not be resorted to so that
                                                             5

     there may not be any occasion to suspect fair and
     impartial investigation."
     The ratio of Megna's case has been followed by other

cases.

     In another case in Balasundaran v. State 1999 (113)

ELT 785 (Mad), in para 16, the Madras High Court took the

same view. The relevant portion reads as under:

     "16. Learned Counsel for the appellants also stated
     that P.W. 5 being the Inspector of Police who was
     present at the time of search and he was the
     investigating officer and as such it is fatal to the
     case of the prosecution. P.W. 5, according to the
     prosecution, was present with PWs 3 and 4 at the
     time of search. In fact, P.W. 5 alone took up
     investigation in the case and he had examined the
     witnesses. No doubt the successor to P.W. 5 alone
     had filed the charge sheet. But there is no material
     to show that he had examined any other witness. It
     therefore follows that P.W. 5 was the person who
     really investigated the case. P.W. 5 was the person
     who had searched the appellants in question and he
     being the investigation officer, certainly it is not
     proper and correct. The investigation ought to have
     been done by any other investigating agency. On
     this score also, the investigation is bound to suffer
     and as such the entire proceedings will be vitiated."
     In this view of the legal position, as crystallized in Megna

Singh's case (supra), the High Court was justified in

acquitting the accused. We see no infirmity in the view which
                                                                        6

has been taken by the High Court in the impugned judgment.

In our considered view, no interference is called for.                  The

appeal, being devoid of any merit, is accordingly dismissed.




                                  ..........................................J.
                                    (Dalveer Bhandari)



                                  .........................................J.
                                  (Dr. Mukundakam Sharma)
New Delhi;
April 30, 2009.

