
Supreme Court of India
Bhaskarrao vs The State Of Maharashtra on 26 April, 2018Author: J N.V. Ramana
Bench: S A Nazeer
                                        1


                                                        REPORTABLE



                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 408 OF 2014


          BHASKARRAO & ORS.                             APPELLANTS

                                     VERSUS

          STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                          RESPONDENT

                                      WITH

                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 520 OF 2014


          DILIP UTTAMRAO MANKAR & ANR.                  APPELLANTS

                                     VERSUS

          STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                          RESPONDENT


                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1328 OF 2014


          LAXMAN BHAURAO BHAGAT                         APPELLANT
Signature Not Verified



                                     VERSUS
Digitally signed by
BALA PARVATHI
Date: 2018.04.26
17:06:49 IST
Reason:




          STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                          RESPONDENT
                           2




            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1228 OF 2014


BABARAO LAXMANRAO ADHAO                    APPELLANT

                        VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                       RESPONDENT


            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1223 OF 2014


PRABHAKAR                                  APPELLANT

                        VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                       RESPONDENT


            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1229 OF 2014


MAROTI MAHADEORAO KOSARE                   APPELLANT

                        VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                       RESPONDENT


            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1330 OF 2014
                                       3


RAVINDRA & ANR.                                             APPELLANTS

                                  VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                        RESPONDENT

                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1578 OF 2014


VISHNU BHARAO BHAGAT & ANR.                                 APPELLANTS


                                  VERSUS


STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                                        RESPONDENT




                              JUDGMENT

N.V. RAMANA,  J.

1.          These   appeals   arise   out   of   the   common   judgment   and

order,   dated   21st  December,   2013,   passed   by   the   High   Court   of

Judicature   at   Bombay,   Bench  at Nagpur,  in Criminal  Appeal No.

290 of 1998 whereby the High Court reversed the order of acquittal

passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Amravati in Sessions Trial

No.   40   of   1995   and   convicted   all   the   accused/appellants   herein

except accused no. 6 (since dead) for the offence punishable under
                                            4


Sections   147,   148,   452   read   with   Section   149,   Section   302   read

with Section 149 and Section 506 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).



2.            The prosecution story in short is that, on 19 th June, 1995

at  about  7  pm,   in  the  village Jalka Shahapur an altercation had

taken place between two villagers, namely Shamrao (deceased) and

Balya   (Accused   No.   4)   on   the   road   near   a   grocery   shop   over

repayment of Rs.50/­. It was alleged that Shamrao (deceased) had

slapped Balya (Accused No. 4) during the scuffle. After sometime,

all the sixteen accused persons armed with weapons, while entering

the   house   of   Shamrao   hurling   abuses,   dragged   him   out   of   the

house, assaulted on his hands and legs. They are alleged to have

continuously   assaulted   Shamrao   while   simultaneously   dragging

him   to   a   field   where   they   finally   cut   his   right   palm   and   left   the

place. During the course of assault by the accused, Chanda (PW1)

[wife of Shamrao] followed them pleading not to hurt her husband

and out of fear she took shelter in some cattle shed. Later on she

went to the house of one Harshawardhan Bhalekar and informed

him about the incident. Then Harshawardhan Bhalekar along with
                                        5


PW1 proceeded to Amravati and informed about the occurrence to

the family members of Shamrao. After that they went to the office of

Superintendent of Police, Amravati where they were advised to lodge

a   complaint   at   Nandgaon   Peth   police   station.   Accordingly,   a

complaint (Ext. 55) was lodged on 20th June, 1995 being crime case

No. 72 of 1995. It may be relevant to reduce a part of the FIR as

under­

      Name          and :      1. Gajanan Chincholkar
      addresses   of        2. Balya Bhagat
      accused, if any          3. Pramod Khedkar
                               4. Raju Mohol
                                  +20 to 25 persons
      Names         and :
      addresses   of
      suspects
                                :
      Nature   of   offence         The   incident   is   that   on   the
      with            penal         above dt. Time and place, when
      section.   Give               the   husband   of   the
      short                         complainant   was   in   the   home,
      descriptions   of             when   he   went   to   the   house   of
      stolen   property             Balya   Bhagat   out   of   the
      with   its   value   if       accused   persons   herein   for
      any.                          demanding the money of fishes,
                                    the   accused   persons   came   to
                                    the house of the husband of the
                                    accused   and   the   accused
                                    persons have beaten and pulled
                                    from the house and on account
                                    of   the   said   occurrence,   the
                                    offence is registered and taken
                                       6


                                   for investigation.


3.          Dattatray   Kulkarni,   A.P.I.   (PW17)   took   up   the

investigation and carried a search for missing Shamrao in the Jalka

Shahapur   village   and   ultimately   on   21st  June,   1995   on   the

information of one Ananda Bhurbhure, PW1 and PW17 found the

dead   body   of   Shamrao,   in   the   fields   of   one   Yeshwant   Thawale,

without his  right  palm  which they traced at some distance. After

conducting the panchanama of scene of occurrence, inquest report

was drawn, clothes of the deceased were seized, statements of some

witnesses were recorded and the dead body was sent to the Civil

Surgeon   at   Amravati   for   postmortem.   All   the   accused,   except

accused no. 16 who was stated to be absconding, were arrested and

at   their   instance,   alleged   weapons   used   for   the   crime   were

recovered,   disclosure   statements   recorded,   seizure   panchanama

recorded   and   the   accused   were   got   medically   examined.   After

completion   of   investigation,  charges were framed against  accused

nos. 1 to 15 to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed

trial.
                                          7
4.           In its effort to prove the guilt of the accused, prosecution

has examined as many as 19 witnesses. Learned trial Judge after

conducting   a   full   fledged   trial,   came   to   the   conclusion   that   the

prosecution has failed to establish the guilt of the accused beyond

reasonable   doubt,   therefore,   all   the   accused,   against   whom   trial

was conducted (accused nos. 1 to 15), were acquitted of the offences

they   were   charged   with.   Accused   No.   16,   who   was   absconding,

came   to   be   arrested   at   the   end   of   trial.   Hence,   the   trial   court

directed separate trial against him.


5.           Aggrieved   by   the   order   of   acquittal   passed   by   the   trial

court,   the   State   of   Maharashtra   went   in   appeal   before   the   High

Court. During the pendency of the appeal, before the High Court,

Accused   No.   6   expired.   The   High   Court   found   fault   with   the

acquittal order passed by the trial court and by its judgment which

is   impugned   herein,   convicted   all   the   accused   before   it   except

accused No. 6, for the offence punishable under Sections 147, 148,

452 read with Section 149, Section 302 read with Section 149 and

Section 506, IPC. They were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for
                                        8


a period of two years for the offence punishable under Sections 147,

148   and   452,   IPC.   Whereas   for   the   offence   punishable   under

Section   302   read   with   Section   149,   IPC   they   were   sentenced   to

suffer imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/­ each, in

default, to further suffer imprisonment for one year. They were also

sentenced to suffer imprisonment for a period of six months and to

pay a fine of Rs.500/­ each, in default, to further suffer a period of

one  month  imprisonment for the offence under Section 506, IPC.

However, all the sentences were directed to run concurrently.



6.          Dissatisfied   with   the   judgment   of   the   High   Court   in

reversing the order of acquittal, the Accused Nos. 1 to 5 and 7 to 14

are before us in these appeals assailing the judgment of the High

Court.   It   appears   that   Accused   No.   15,   Gajanan   Pandurang

Chincholkar, has not preferred an appeal against the judgment of

the High Court.


7.          It   may   be   beneficial   to   note   that   the   accused   Nos.   1

(Motiram) and 3 (Ravindra) have filed Criminal Appeal No. 1330 of
                                       9


2014, Accused Nos. 2 (Bhaskarrao), 9 (Maroti Bhaskarrao Bhagat)

and 10 (Bhagwat Bhaurao Bhagat) have filed Criminal Appeal No.

408 of 2014, Accused Nos. 4 (Balya) and 5 (Vishnu Bharao Bhagat)

have filed Criminal Appeal No. 1578 of 2014, Accused No. 7 (Maroti

Mahadeorao Kosare) has filed Criminal Appeal No. 1229 of 2014,

Accused No. 8 (Laxman Bhaurao Bhagat) has filed Criminal Appeal

1328 of 2014, Accused No. 11 (Prabhakar Narsaji Bhagat) has filed

Criminal   Appeal   No.   1223   of   2014,   Accused   No.   12   (Babarao

Laxmanrao Adhao) has filed Criminal Appeal No. 1228 of 2014 and

Accused Nos. 13 (Dilip Uttamrao Mankur) and 14 (Pramod Devidas

Khedkar) have filed Criminal Appeal No. 520 of 2014. 



8.          On   behalf   of   Accused   No.   8,   the   arguments   were

advanced by Mr. V.V.S. Rao, learned senior counsel. Ms. Anagha S.

Desai, learned counsel has argued on behalf of Accused Nos. 2, 7, 9

and 10 to 14, while Mr. Dharmendra Kumar Sinha, learned counsel

made submissions in respect of Accused Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5. Having

heard   the   arguments   advanced   by   the   respective   counsel,   as   the
                                       10


order impugned is one and the same, we proceed to deal with all

these appeals by a common judgment.


9.          It is the case of the appellants—accused that the entire

prosecution   story   has   been   concocted   to   falsely   implicate   the

innocent   appellants   and   is   not   based   on   the   true   facts   and

circumstances.   That   there   were  several   lapses   in  the   prosecution

theory.   That   the   dead   body   of  the  deceased  was  found  in   a  field

which is about two kms away from the house of the deceased, and

there   is   no   eyewitness   to   the   factum   of   accused   committing   the

murder   of   deceased.   His   amputated   palm   was   found   at   some

distance to his dead body, but there was no evidence on record as

to who cut the palm of the deceased. There were also no bloodstains

on any weapon alleged to have been recovered by the investigating

authorities at the instance of accused. All the prosecution witnesses

are inter­related and there was no independent witness to support

the   prosecution   case.   The   trial   Court   has   rightly   discarded   the

evidence of interested witnesses.
                                        11
10.         It is also argued that the prosecution has improvised the

circumstances   from  the   stage of lodging  FIR to the  conclusion  of

trial. In the FIR, there was no mention about the alleged quarrel

that   took   place   between   the   deceased   and   Accused   No.   4   over   a

matter of Rs.50/­ near a grocery shop. PW1 (wife of the deceased)

introduced the story later on. The owner of the grocery shop was

not examined as a witness whose evidence would be crucial to prove

that   a   quarrel   has   taken   place   which   is   the   whole   basis   or

provocation for the incident. It was also alleged that there were two

other witnesses namely Charandas and Anant, but they too were

not examined by the prosecution. In the FIR, the names of accused

were   specified   as   only   four   persons,   but   16   persons   have   been

dragged   into   the   case   as   accused.   The   statements   of   witnesses

varied as to the presence of the accused at the time of occurrence

and   their   depositions   are   quite   contradictory   to   the   prosecution

case. There was also no test identification parade conducted and all

the accused persons are not familiar to the witnesses. The evidence

of prosecution witnesses is unbelievable inasmuch as the allegation

was that the deceased was dragged on the ground for about 2 kms
                                        12


from his house to the place where his dead body was found, even

then there were no injury marks on the body of the deceased.  



11.         It is   further  submitted by the learned counsel that the

High Court failed to take into consideration the crucial facts that no

test   identification   parade   was   conducted,   no   motive   was

established, no injuries on vital parts of the deceased were noted,

and above all medical evidence did not corroborate with the alleged

ocular evidence. The High Court has also failed to take note of the

fact   that   the   trial   Court   has   not   committed   any   legal   error   in

appreciating   the   ocular   and   medical   evidence   to   reach   at   the

conclusion that the accused are innocent. The law is well settled by

this Court with regard to fresh appreciation of evidence in an appeal

against acquittal that even if on the basis of evidence, there is a

possibility of taking a different view than that of the trial Court, the

appellate   Court   should   refrain   from   disturbing   the   findings   and

conclusion recorded by the lower court. In view of the settled law,

the High Court ought not have interfered with the order of acquittal

passed by the trial Court. But by setting aside the order of acquittal
                                         13


passed by the trial Court, the High Court has committed a gross

illegality   by   convicted   the   appellants—accused   thereby   causing

miscarriage   of   justice   which   invites   interference   of   this   Court.   In

support   of   their   arguments   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the

accused—appellants   relied   on   the   judgments   of   this   Court   in

Mahavir Singh vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2016) 10 SCC 220,

L.L.   Kale  Vs.  State   of   Maharashtra   &   Ors.  (2000)   1   SCC   295,

Joginder Singh & Anr. Vs. State of Haryana (2010) 15 SCC 407

and Nankaunoo Vs. State of U.P. (2016) 3 SCC 317.

 

12.          On   the   other   hand,   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the

State—Mr.   Nishant   Ramakantrao   Katneshwarkar,   supported   the

impugned   judgment   and   submitted   that   the   learned   trial   Judge

disbelieved the evidence of prosecution witnesses for no valid and

reasonable cause. The minor discrepancies in the depositions have

been  given   undue   importance  to pass the  acquittal order  against

the accused, who in a brutal manner dragged the deceased to the

fields and assaulted him with sticks, axe and sword. PW1—Chanda,

wife of the deceased, tried her best to save her husband praying at
                                        14


the   accused   to  show  mercy, but all the accused in pursuance of

their   common   object,   attacked   the   deceased   indiscriminately

leading   to   his   death.   The   High   Court   has   correctly   assessed   the

facts and circumstances of the case and there was no legal error in

the impugned order seeking indulgence of this Court.



13.         We have given our consideration to the material placed

before us and the arguments advanced by the learned counsel on

either side. 


14.         As the trial court and High Court, having appreciated the

evidence on record, has come to diametrically opposite conclusions,

mandating herein to observe certain witness statements which may

have   an   important   bearing   in   this   case.   In   the   processes   of

appreciating the evidence at the appellate stage, we need to keep in

mind the views of this court as expressed in Tota Singh and Anr.

v. State of Punjab, 1987 CriLJ 974 ­

        "The High Court has not found in its judgment that
        the reasons given by the learned Sessions Judge for
        discarding the testimony of PW2 and PW6 were either
                                15


unreasonable   or   perverse.   What   the   High   Court   has
done   is   to   make   an   independent   reappraisal   of   the
evidence   on   its   own   and   to   set   aside   the   acquittal
merely   on   the   ground   that   as   a   result   of   such   re­
appreciation, the High Court was inclined to reach a
conclusion   different   from   the   one   recorded   by   the
learned   Sessions   Judge.   This   Court   has   repeatedly
pointed out that  the mere fact that the Appellate
Court   is   inclined   on   a   re­appreciation   of   the
evidence   to   reach   a   conclusion   which   is   at
variance   with   the   one   recorded   in   the   order   of
acquittal   passed   by   the   Court   below   will   not
constitute   a   valid   and   sufficient   ground   for
setting aside the acquittal.  The jurisdiction of the
Appellate Court in dealing with an appeal against an
order   of   acquittal   is   circumscribed   by   the   limitation
that  no interference is to be made with the order
of   acquittal   unless   the   approach   made   by   the
lower Court to the consideration of the evidence
in the case is vitiated by some manifest illegality
or the conclusion recorded by the Court below is
such which could not have been possibly arrived
at by any court acting reasonably and judiciously
and   is,   therefore,   liable   to   be   characterised   as
perverse.  Where   two   views   are   possible   on   an
appraisal of the evidence adduced in the case and the
court below has taken a view which is plausible one,
the   Appellate   Court   cannot   legally   interfere   with   an
order of acquittal even if it is of the opinion that the
view taken by the Court below on its consideration of
the evidence is erroneous."
                                       16
15.         In  Ramesh   Babulal   Doshi  v.  State   of   Gujarat,   1996

CriLJ 2867, this Court observed:

        “This   Court   has   repeatedly   laid   down   that   the   mere
        fact that a view other than the one taken by the trial
        Court can be legitimately arrived at by the appellate
        Court on reappraisal of the evidence cannot constitute
        a valid and sufficient ground to interfere with an order
        of acquittal unless it comes to the conclusion that the
        entire approach of the trial Court in dealing with the
        evidence   was   patently   illegal   or   the   conclusions
        arrived at by it were wholly untenable. While sitting in
        judgment over an acquittal the appellate Court is first
        required   to   seek   an  answer  to  the  question  whether
        the   findings   of   the   trial   Court   are   palpably   wrong,
        manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable.
        If the appellate court answers the above question in
        the   negative   the   order   of   acquittal   is   not   to   be
        disturbed.”
 

16.         Keeping the aforesaid observations in mind, we may note

some statements of the witnesses, who have deposed before the trial

court   concerning   the   incident.   PW­1   [wife   of   the   deceased],   has

deposed   that   she   came   to   know   about   the   scuffle,   from   her

husband,   which   took   place   between   her   deceased   husband   and

accused no. 4 prior to the occurrence of the incident. She further

stated   that   while   she   was   cooking   the   dinner   for   her   husband,
                                       17


accused no. 4, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and absconding accused (Raju)

entered her house. The accused dragged her husband outside onto

the courtyard. She states that she saw accused no. 11 was armed

with an axe, accused no. 13 was armed with a sword and accused

no. 16 was holding an iron pipe. She further states that rest of the

accused   were   armed   with   sticks   and   in   total   there   were   15

assailants. Her husband was dragged to the courtyard of Vinayak

Bhalekar, whose house is said to be after three to four houses. At

that   spot,   they   again   gave   some   beating   to   the   deceased.   PW­1

states that she was continuously requesting the assailants to spare

the life of her husband. At this instant, accused no. 11 is said to

have   threatened   PW­1   so  that   she  may   not   witness   the  incident.

Accordingly, she ran to the cattle shed of one Sudha Bhalekar, who

was   attacked   by   accused   no.   14   in  the  meantime,  and   remained

hidden for about two hours out of fear. Thereafter, PW­1 went to the

house of Harshwardhan Balekar, who first accompanied her to the

district head­quarters at Amravati, wherein she informed the family

of   the   deceased   (parents­in­law   and   the   brother­in­law)   and

thereafter went to the Amravati police station. As they were advised
                                        18


to register the case in Nandgaon Police Station, they came back to

Nandgaon police station to register the complaint.



17.         During the cross­examination she avers that PW­3, 4 and

5 were closely related to her and the accused were also related inter

se. Concerning the relationship between the accused no. 4 and the

deceased,   she   states   that   the   relationship   between   them   were

cordial.   Lastly,   she   could   not   assign   any   reason   as   to   why   the

earlier   scuffle   between   her   deceased  husband  and   accused   no.   4

was not written in the FIR registered by her.


18.         PW­2 avers that on the day of the incident, while he was

watching   television   from   inside   the   house,   he   heard   some

commotion taking place outside his house. When he went outside

the house, he saw that the accused were beating the deceased with

weapons such as axe, pipe, swords and stick. he states that he saw

accused   no.   11   armed   with  an  axe,  accused  no.  4  armed  with  a

bamboo stick, accused no. 13 armed with a sword and accused no.

16 was holding an iron pipe. As he was afraid, he did not go behind
                                          19


the assailants. During the cross examination, he avers that there

might have been more than twenty persons.


19.          PW­3,   states   that   he   saw   the   accused   giving   severe

beating to the deceased with sticks, swords, iron pipes and axe. He

states that he saw accused no. 16, 15 and 11 dragging the deceased

towards the school and he did not follow the accused out of the fear

and on the following day, deceased body was found in the field of

one Yeshwant Sawai. During the cross examination, he states that

the deceased died in front of his house, due to severe beating given

by   the   accused.   Moreover,   he   admits   that   the   deceased   is   his

relative.


20.          It  may   be   noted that  PW­4  and 5  have deposed to  the

same   effect,   concerning   the   incident.   They   have   further   admitted

that   they   were   related   to   the   deceased.   At   this   point   it   may   be

relevant   to   notice   the   witness   statement   of   the   doctor,   who

conducted the post­mortem [PW­7]. Concerning the stick blows on

the body of the deceased, she notes as under­
                                     20


            ‘…Contusions and lacerations are possible in case
         a person is beaten by sticks or from pipe. I did not
         find any lacerated wound or contusion sustained by
         the   deceased and  as such I did not mention such
         injury in P.M. Note….’


Concerning the cause of death, PW­7 states as under­


           ‘The injury sternum as described in Column No.
         20  is possible  in case a person fall down on hard
         surface. Because of loss of blood due to injury the
         deceased went into the shock and which resulted in
         his death. The deceased died due to loss of blood.
         Because   of   loss   of  blood  the  heart  chambers  were
         found   empty   and   other   organs   were   found   pale.
         Vital organs were intact. I did not find any injury
         to   any   vital   part   of   the   body.   Loss   of   blood   is
         gradually   loss   of   blood   and   it   may   take   some
         time. In case of timely medical treatment person
         may survive. Hands and legs are non­vital part of
         the   body.  Because of the amputation of hand and
         because   of   amputation   of   leg   or   both   person   may
         not die. It is not always possible that a person may
         die   because   of   incised   wounds   No.   1,   2   &   5   as
         described in Coloum No. 17’ [sic.]
                                                          [emphasis supplied]




21.         PW­10 was stationed as the head constable of Nandgaon

police   station   at   the   relevant   time   when   PW­1   registered   the
                                         21


complaint.   It   may   be   beneficial   for   the   discussion   to   observe   the

cross examination of the aforesaid witness, as under­

            …3. The complainant PW1­Chanda did not state
          in   her   complaint   the   fact   that   Accused   No.4
          addressed   abuses   to   her   husband   when   her
          husband   demanded   money   to   Accused   No.4.   The
          PW1­Chanda did not state in her complaint the fact
          that Accused No.13 and Accused No.15 arrived and
          they   entered   into  her  house.  PW1­Chanda   did  not
          state   in   her   complaint  the fact that she requested
          the assailants not to beat her husband. The PW1­
          Chanda did not state in her report Exh. 55 the fact
          that Accused No.11 was armed with an axe, PW1­
          Chanda did not state in her report Exh. 55 the fact
          that   the   Accused   No.13   was   holding   sword.   The
          PW1­Chanda did not state in her report Exh.55 the
          fact   that   Accused   No.   15  was  holding   a   pipe.   The
          PW1­Chanda did not state in her report Exh.55 the
          fact   that   the   rest   of   the   Assailants­Accused   were
          holding sticks in their hands. PW1­Chanda did not
          state   in   her   complaint   Exh.55   the   fact   that   the
          Accused­Assailants   had   beaten   to   her   husband
          shamrao in the courtyard….


From the aforesaid witness, it is clear that the FIR did not consist of

all   those   facts   which   were   subsequently   deposed   by   PW­1   and

others before the court.
                                       22
22.         It may not be out of context to mention that the formal

witnesses   concerning   seizure   such   as   PW11   and   13   have   not

supported the case of prosecution in entirety.



23.         Before we proceed to analysis of the case, we must first

focus on the aspect concerning the standard the High Court has to

apply, while hearing a case against an acquittal order of the trial

court. In the case on hand, the trial court, followed by a full­fledged

trial, comes to the conclusion and by cogent reasoning acquits the

accused.   In  such   a   case   the   appellate  Court   is   further   burdened

with the task of reaffirming the innocence of the accused. In such

cases, the appellate Court is expected to be very cautious and its

interference with the order of acquittal is called for only when there

are   compelling   reasons   and   substantial   grounds.   In   other   words,

the High Court has full power to review the evidence upon which an

order of acquittal is founded, yet the presumption of innocence of

the   accused   being   further   reinforced by  his  acquittal  by   the trial

Court, the findings of that Court which had the advantage of seeing

the witnesses and hearing their evidence can be reversed only for
                                         23


very substantial and compelling reasons [refer  Surajpal Singh &

Ors. v. The State, 1952 CriLJ 331].


24.          From   the   facts   and  circumstances  of  this   case,   we   are

called   upon   to   examine,   whether   the  High   Court   was  justified  in

upsetting   the   findings   of   the   trial   court   and   whether   there   were

compelling   reasons   for   the   High   Court   to   set   aside   the   order   of

acquittal   and   convict   the   accused   appellant  of  culpable   homicide

amounting to murder?


25.          We may note that out of eleven circumstances which the

trial court has relied upon to find that the prosecution case was not

proved beyond reasonable doubt, we are of the opinion that we need

to   concentrate   on   four   of   those   circumstance,   which   may   be

sufficient,  to  portray  that the case at hand is not proved beyond

reasonable doubt. 


26.          There is no dispute as to the fact that the prosecution

relies on the circumstantial evidence to prove the case. It may be
                                       24


noted   that,   the   value   of   circumstantial   evidence   rests   in   its

accumulative   effect,   that   is   to   say,   while   a   single   piece   of

circumstantial   evidence   may   only   slightly   increase   the   likelihood

that   the   accused   is   guilty,  several  such   evidences   taken  together

may carry enough probative force to justify the conviction, if such

circumstantial   evidence   forms   an   unbroken   chain   of   events

resulting in only one hypothesis so canvassed.  



27.         Coming back to the appreciation of the evidence at hand,

at the outset, our attention is drawn to the fact that the witnesses

were inter­related, and this court should be cautious in accepting

their   statements.   It   would   be   beneficial   to   recapitulate   the   law

concerning the appreciation of evidence of related witness. In Dalip

Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab, (1954) 1 SCR 145, J. Vivian Bose

for the bench observed the law as under­



         A witness is normally to be considered independent
         unless   he  or   she  springs from sources which are
         likely to be tainted and that usually means unless
         the witness has cause, such as enmity against the
         accused, to wish to implicate him falsely.
                                       25


        Ordinarily,   a   close   relative   would   be   the   last   to
        screen   the   real   culprit   and   falsely   implicate   an
        innocent person. It is true, when feelings run high
        and there is personal cause for enmity, that here is
        a tendency to drag in an innocent person against
        whom a witness has a grudge along with the guilty,
        but   foundation   must   be   laid   for   such   a   criticism
        and the mere fact of relationship far from being a
        foundation is often a sure guarantee of truth.
        However,   we   are   not   attempting   any   sweeping
        generalisation.   Each   case   must   be   judged   on   its
        own   facts.   Our   observations   are   only   made   to
        combat what is so often put forward in cases before
        us as a general rule of prudence. There is no such
        general rule. Each case must be limited to and be
        governed by its own facts.


28.       In  Masalti v. State of U.P., (1964) 8 SCR 133, a five­

Judge Bench of this Court has categorically observed as under­

        There  is   no   doubt   that  when   a  criminal   Court
        has   to   appreciate   evidence   given   by   witnesses
        who are partisan or interested, it has to be very
        careful   in  weighing  such   evidence.   Whether  or
        not   there   are   discrepancies   in   the   evidence;
        whether or not the evidence strikes the Court
        as genuine; whether or not the story disclosed
        by   the   evidence   is   probable,   are   all   matters
        which must be taken into account.
        But   it   would,   we   think,   be   unreasonable   to
        contend   that   evidence   given   by   witnesses
        should be discarded only on the ground that it
        is evidence of partisan or interested witnesses.
        Often enough, where factions prevail in villages
        and   murders   are   committed   as   a   result   of
                                         26


          enmity between such factions, criminal Courts
          have to deal with evidence of a partisan type.
          The   mechanical   rejection   of   such   evidence   on
          the   sole   ground   that   it   is   partisan   would
          invariably lead to failure of justice.
          No hard and fast rule can be laid down as to how
          much   evidence   should   be   appreciated.   Judicial
          approach has to be cautious in dealing with such
          evidence;  but  the  plea that such evidence  should
          be   rejected   because   it   is   partisan   cannot   be
          accepted as correct.
                                                       (emphasis supplied)




29.          In  Darya Singh and Ors. v. State of Punjab, (1964) 3

SCR 397, this Court held that evidence of an eye witness who is a

near   relative   of   the   victim,   should   be   closely   scrutinized   but   no

corroboration   is   necessary   for   acceptance   of   his   evidence.   In

Harbans   Kaur   &   Anr.   v.   State  of  Haryana,  2005   CriLJ  2199,

this Court observed that­

              There is no proposition in law that relatives are
              to be treated as untruthful witnesses. On the
              contrary, reason has to be shown when a plea
              of   partiality   is   raised   to   show   that   the
              witnesses   had   reason   to   shield   actual   culprit
              and falsely implicate the accused.
                                         27
30.          The last case we need to concern ourselves is the case of

Namdeo   v.   State   of   Maharashtra, (2007)  14   SCC  150,   wherein

this Court after observing previous precedents has summarized the

law in the following manner­


               It   is   clear   that   a   close   relative   cannot   be
               characterised as an 'interested' witness. He is a
               'natural' witness. His evidence, however, must
               be   scrutinized   carefully.   If   on   such   scrutiny,
               his   evidence   is   found   to   be   intrinsically
               reliable,   inherently   probable   and   wholly
               trustworthy   conviction   can   be   based   on   the
               'sole'   testimony   of   such   witness.   Close
               relationship   of   witness   with   the   deceased   or
               victim is no ground to reject his evidence. On
               the   contrary,   close   relative   of   the   deceased
               would normally be most reluctant to spare the
               real   culprit   and   falsely   implicate   an   innocent
               one.


31.          From the study of the aforesaid precedents of this court,

we may note that whoever has been a witness before the court of

law, having a strong interest in result, if allowed to be weighed in

the   same   scales   with   those   who   do   not   have   any   interest   in   the

result, would be to open the doors of the court for perverted truth.

This   sound   rule   which   remain   the   bulwark   of   this   system,   and

which determines the value of evidence derived from such sources,
                                           28


needs to be cautiously and carefully observed and enforced. There

is no dispute about the fact that the interest of the witness must

affect   his   testimony   is   a   universal   truth.   Moreover,   under   the

influence of bias, a man may not be in a position to judge correctly,

even if they earnestly desire to do so. Similarly, he may not be in a

position   to   provide   evidence   in   an   impartial   manner,   when   it

involves his interest. Under such influences, man will, even though

not consciously, suppress some facts, soften or modify others, and

provide favorable color. These are most controlling considerations in

respect to the credibility of human testimony, and should never to

be overlooked in applying the rules of evidence and determining its

weight in the scale of truth under the facts and circumstances of

each case.


32.          The   prosecution   has   heavily   relied   on   the   statement   of

PW1   that   the   accused—appellants   assaulted   her   husband   with

deadly weapons on his hands and legs while dragging him for about

2   kms   from   his   house   to   the   fields,   which   led   to   his   death.   The

weapons used in the crime were stated to be sword, sticks, axe and
                                         29


pipe.   Admittedly,   there   were   no   bloodstains   found   on   any   of   the

weapons   allegedly   recovered   from   the   accused.   The   allegation

particularly levelled was that the accused carried the assault on the

deceased at three places i.e., in front of the house of the deceased

and near the house of PW3—Vinayak Bhalekar and at the fields of

Yeshwant Thawale. However, in their depositions PWs 2, 4 and 5

did   not   mention   about   such   assault   on   the   deceased   in   front   of

Vinayak Bhalekar house. It appears from the material that there are

no eyewitness who had seen the accused attacking the deceased in

the fields of Yashwant Thawale. The statements of PW3—Vinayak

Bhalekar also appears to be not consistent throughout. At one point

of   time,   he   deposed   that   the   deceased   had   died   in   front   of   his

house.   Altogether   a   different   statement   was   given   to   the

investigating   authorities   and   in   the   Court.   Similar   is   the   case   of

PW4—Sudha,   who   has   made   improvements   as   regards   to   the

assault on the deceased. Also there were varying statements by the

prosecution   witnesses   as   regards   PW4—Sudha   on   the   aspect   of

receiving the blow.  
                                       30
33.         The deposition of PW4—Sudha Bhalekar shows that she

had seen the involvement of A­1, A­4, A­11, A­13, A­14 and A­16 in

the   crime.   Though   she   stated   that   she   could   recognize   the

assailants by their face as she does not know their names, yet test

identification parade was not conducted which is fatal to the case of

prosecution. In their depositions PWs 2, 3 and 5 gave contradictory

statements as to the involvement of number of accused persons in

the   crime   and   also   about   noticing   the   accused   who   dragged   the

deceased   while   assaulting   him   and   dragging   towards   school

whereas PWs 1 and 4 were silent on this aspect. There were also

contradictory  statements  by prosecution witnesses as regards the

availability of light at the time of occurrence.   According to PW3—

Vinayak, husband of PW4—Sudha, whose house is the last in the

mohalla and situated at a distance of four other houses from the

house of deceased, the incident took place at 9 pm. The way behind

his house goes to the school and there is a tamarind tree in front of

his house and the house of Shamrao is not visible by sitting in the

courtyard of his house. In his cross­examination, he denied to have

deposed to police that the house of deceased Shamrao is situated in
                                          31


the rear side of his house. He further stated, there is ‘L’ type turn

from his house to the house of deceased which is not visible from

his courtyard. According to him, deceased Shamrao died in front of

his house and on the next day, he saw the dead body of Shamrao in

the field.


34.          Now   coming   to   the   facts   of   the   case,   PW1   (wife   of   the

deceased)   has   not   witnessed   the   chopping   of   the   hand,   which

resulted in the ultimate death of her husband. It is prudent for this

Court to not believe in absence of cogent evidence concerning the

culpability   of   the   accused   herein,   as   her   evidence   is   ridden   with

apparent internal contradictions and inconsistencies.

 

35.          Due to the nature and quality of evidence involved in this

case, the prosecution relies on the motive to strengthen the case by

bringing   in  the   earlier   scuffle,  wherein  the  deceased  had  slapped

the   Accused   no.   4.   This   Court   has   on   number   of   occasions   has

expressed   a   general   disdain   towards   motive   in   direct   evidence

cases1.   On   the   other   hand   this   Court   has   never   approved   the

1   Hari Shanker Vs. State of U.P., (1996) 9 SCC 40.
                                            32


extreme position as portrayed in some English cases2 which is best

explained by Jerome Hall, when he stated ‘[h]ardly any part of penal

law is more definitely settled than that motive is irrelevant’.3 We may

note   that   the   law   in   India   is   now   well   settled   that   in   a   case   of

circumstantial evidence, motive has a role to play 4, but to dislodge

prosecution’s case solely based on lack of motive would amount to

giving credit to this factor, where it is not due. 5 The motive behind

the   accused   assaulting   the   deceased   was   said   to   be   the   quarrel

during   which   the   deceased   had   slapped   Accused   No.   4   near   a

grocery shop in the village. Incidentally, prosecution could also not

prove the same by examining the independent witness present at

the grocery shop, though as many as 19 witnesses were examined

by the prosecution. PW10—Shrikrishna, Head Constable of the PS

Nandgaon Peth who reduced the oral complaint of PW1 into writing,

categorically   stated   that   PW1   had   also   not   mentioned   about

previous   quarrel  at  the   time of  lodging  of  complaint. There were,

undoubtedly lot of improvements in the statement of PW1 from the

2 Chandler v. DPP, [1964] AC 763
3 Jerome Hall, General Principles of Criminal Law 88 (2d ed. 1960).
4 Ujjagar Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (2007) 13 SCC 90) and State of
U.P. Vs. Kishanpal & Ors., (2008) 16 SCC 73.
5 Bipin Kumar Mondal v. State of West Bengal , (2010) 12 SCC 91.
                                          33


stage   of   complaint   to   her   examination­in­chief.     Moreover,   the

evidence of PW1 concerning the quarrel is barred for being hearsay

evidence. 


36.          Alternatively, the prosecution has alleged that motive for

the   crime   was   that   the   accused   party   belongs   to   non­SC/ST

community   whereas   the   victim   was   belonging   to   SC   community.

But,   in   the   opinion   of   the   trial   Court,   the   prosecution   could   not

prove   that   the   deceased   belong   to   Scheduled   Caste   and   accused

were from non­Scheduled Caste or Tribe and the prosecution has

failed to prove any charge against the accused including the charge

under   Section   3(i)(x)   and   2(v)   of   the   Scheduled   Castes   and

Scheduled   Tribes   (Prevention   of   Atrocities)   Act.   As   against   that

charge, the High Court also confirmed the view taken by the trial

Court, which in other words proved the prosecution version to be

wrong.


37.          Now we need to concentrate on the other aspects of the

case   such   as   the   contradictions   in   the   evidence   of   prosecution
                                       34


witnesses   as   to   the   number   of   accused   persons   involved   in   the

alleged crime and also in respect of their identification thereby the

very purpose of  the  prosecution in proving the common object of

unlawful assembly gets defeated to attract the provisions of Section

149, IPC. An accused is, of course, vicariously guilty of the offence

even if he is not directly indulged in the commission of offence but

committed by other accused, in case he is proved to be a member of

unlawful assembly sharing its common object.  It is evident that as

per PW1 (wife of the deceased)—complainant, in the FIR (Ext. 55)

the   number   of  persons  mentioned by her, who have entered into

their house was four, while about 20 to 25 persons were assembled

outside the house and all of them assaulted the deceased. However,

in the examination­in­chief she deposed that there were in all 15

assailants who attacked her husband. Though she failed to name

the assailants in her deposition she made out a point that she knew

all the assailants. According to PW10—Shrikrishna, the author of

complaint, PW1 did not state about entry of accused Nos. 13 and 15

into her house. There was also no mention by her at the time of

lodging of FIR about carrying an axe by A­11, a sword by A­13, a
                                        35


pipe by A­15 and sticks by other accused. Going by the material on

record, it can be said that there was no satisfactory explanation on

the part of PW1 for omissions in the FIR and improvements before

the Court.


38.          PW11—Sagar, a panch witness of seizure of bloodstained

clothes of the accused Nos. 1 to 7, did not support the prosecution

case. According to him, police called him to the police station and

obtained his signature. Similarly, the seizure is doubtful in the case

of clothes pertaining to accused No. 11 to which PW13—Gunwant

was witness who stated that he had seen those clothes for the first

time in the village panchayat office and he had signed the paper at

the   instance   of   police   without   knowing   the   correctness   of   its

contents.   Going   by   the   material   on   record,   the   correctness   of

seizure   of   clothes   of   other   accused   persons   also   do   not   inspire

confidence. 


39.          It is also clear from the record that PW6—Sukhdev who

proved   the   recovery   of   weapons   at   the   instance   of   accused—
                                        36


appellants,   could   not   point   out   his   signature   on   the   respective

disclosure statements and seizure panchnamas. He also admitted

that Ext.72 (memorandum) and Ext. 73 (seizure panchnama) does

not bear his signature. PW9—Ananda Ramteke deposed that after

recovering   sticks   from   the   houses   of   accused   Nos.   1   to   7,   they

returned to the village panchayat office where almost all the papers

were   scribed.   It   is   also   important   to   note   that   based   on   the

Chemical Analysis report, those sticks cannot be considered to be

incriminating articles as there were no blood stains on those sticks.

In   the   same   way,   the   sword   and   axe   allegedly   recovered   from

Accused Nos. 13 and 11 respectively also do not have bloodstains.

In   these   circumstances,   the   prosecution   cannot   be   said   to   have

proved the fact that the palm of the deceased has been amputated

by the accused with those weapons.


40.         In   the   opinion   of   Dr.   Pushpa   Sadhawani—PW7,   who

conducted postmortem on the body of the deceased, the cause of

the death was due to heavy loss of blood owing to the amputation of

his hand. However, his vital organs were found to be normal and
                                    37


there was no injury to the vital organs. There were incised wounds

over dorsal aspect of right amputated wrist and forearm and lower

part of the leg. PW7 has specifically mentioned that there was no

laceration or contusion sustained by the deceased and opined that

had there been timely medical treatment, the deceased would have

survived. At the same time she made it clear that in case a person

is beaten up with sticks and iron pipe, as alleged by the prosecution

in the present case, contusions and lacerations are possible. In her

cross­examination,   the   Doctor   also   revealed   that   because   of

amputation of hand and leg or both, a person may not die. Thus, in

totality,   the   medical   evidence   is   not   corroborating   with   the

prosecution’s case.  


41.        It is quite surprising that PW1—Chanda who witnessed

the horrific assault on her husband, remained hidden in the cattle

shed   for   about   two   hours   and   then   went   to   the   house   of

Harshwardhan  Bhalekar   to  whom  she had narrated the incident.

After that, both of them, without searching for the deceased went to

the house of PW1’s in­laws at Amravati. Then they visited the office
                                          38


of Superintendent of Police and then they went to the police station

to lodge the complaint. Ironically, the said Harshwardhan Bhalekar

who could have been a prime witness has not been examined. The

conduct of PW1 and non­examination of such an important witness

Harshwardhan   Bhalekar,   weakens   the   prosecution   case.   At   the

same time, there was no proper explanation forthcoming for what

purpose they visited the office of Superintendent of Police, instead

of   searching   for   the   deceased   or   going   to   police   station   to   lodge

complaint. As per the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 3 Laxman Bhalekar,

Bhaurao, Arun Bhalekar and Namdeo Bhalekar are neighbours of

the   deceased   living   in   the   same   vicinity,   but   none   of   them   was

examined. Another laches in the prosecution case is that in the FIR

it   was   mentioned   that   one   Dhanjay   Sontakke   and   Janardhan

Alekar had also seen the accused assaulting the deceased, but they

too were not examined.   Similarly, one Anant Bhurbhure who first

found the dead body of the deceased in the fields of Yashwantrao,

was also not examined. It is clear that all those persons, especially

neighbours   of   the   deceased,   who   witnessed   the   important

circumstances and who could be vital independent witnesses have
                                          39


not   been   examined   by   the   prosecution.   There   is   no   convincing

explanation forthcoming from the prosecution side.



42.          Another facet that creates doubt on the prosecution story

is   that   PW5—Maroti,   the   real   brother   of   PW2—Narendra   and

nephew of PW4—Sudha, in his cross­examination (Ext.70) differed

with the statement recorded by police and marked ‘A’ that he and

his   brother   (PW2)   saw   the   deceased   lying   in   front   of   the   door.

According   to   him   he   did   not   say   that   fact,   police   arrived   in   the

village next day morning at 8 am, and he went to the field along

with   police   at   10   am.   PW3—Vinayak   husband   of   PW4—Sudha,

made a statement that he had seen the dead body in the field of

Yashwant Thawale. PW2—Narendra has also stated that at about

9.30 am on 20.6.1995, he along with other villagers found the dead

body of the deceased in the said field. We notice that in the midst of

several contradictory statements among the prosecution witnesses,

there   is   no   proper   explanation   on   record   for   PW1   and   police

searching for the deceased at the wells and nullahs of the village,

instead of searching around the school, as per the prosecution story
                                          40


PWs   2,   3  and   5  were   fully  aware that  the deceased was dragged

towards   school.   Moreover,   looking   at   the   ambiguous   narration   of

sequences  described  by the witnesses, the chain of events in the

case cannot be said to have been properly brought on record by the

prosecution.   It   is   always   the   duty   of   the   Court   to   separate   chaff

from the husk and to dredge the truth from the pandemonium of

Statements.   It   is   but   natural   for   human   beings   to   state   variant

statements due to time gap but if such statements go to defeat the

core of the prosecution then such contradictions are material and

the  Court has  to be mindful of such statements [See:  Tahsildar

Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 1959 SC 1012].  


43.          We   have   also   found   from   the   impugned   judgment   that

the   High   Court   has   misconstrued   certain   aspects   of   the   case.

According to PW2—Narendra the incident occurred at about 9 p.m.

on 19.6.1995. In the FIR also the time was mentioned as 9 p.m. But

the   High   Court   in   its   judgment   observed   “insofar   as   the

submissions regarding the availability of light is concerned, we find

that the incident took place at about 7.30 p.m. in the village in the
                                        41


month of June and looking to the availability of light in the month

of June in Vidarbha region, we have no hesitation in holding that

the   eyewitnesses   had   sufficient   light   to   identify   the   accused

persons”. It is clear from the record that the alleged incident has

occurred at 9 p.m. and not at 7.30 p.m. as assumed by the High

Court,   and   there   were   also   no   eyewitnesses   to   the   alleged

amputation of the hand of deceased and causing his death.



44.         At the conclusion of arguments, it is informed at the Bar

that the trial Court had conducted separate trial in respect of Raju

—Accused No. 16, who was earlier absconding, and acquitted him

of   all   the   charges   and   the   State   has   not   preferred   any   appeal

against  his   acquittal.   We  have  also  noticed  that   PWs 1,  2  and  3

have given contrary statements at the subsequent trial in Special

(Atrocities) Case No. 12 of 2008 held against Raju—Accused No. 16,

deviating from what they deposed in the present case.



45.         Taking   note   of   the   foregoing   shortcomings   and

discrepancies   in   the   prosecution   case   coupled   with   the
                                           42


improvements and contradictions in the statements of prosecution

witnesses,   it   cannot   be   said  that  the  accused  persons  had  really

formed into an unlawful assembly and carried out an assault on the

deceased   that   too   with   a   view   to   kill   him,   so   as   to   attract   the

provisions   of   criminal   law.  In the  facts and  circumstances of  the

case, it is abundantly clear that the guilt of the accused persons

was not proved beyond reasonable doubt. We are of the considered

view   that   the   trial   Court   had   dealt   with   the   case   in   a   fool­proof

manner by drawing out 11 important circumstances and delivered a

well reasoned judgment thereby acquitting the accused, with which

the High Court ought not to have interfered. In our view, there are

no compelling reasons and substantial grounds for the High Court

to   interfere   with  the  order  of acquittal passed by  the trial Court.

Added to the above, we are informed that the accused have already

undergone   about   three   years'   of   imprisonment   before   they   were

enlarged on bail. 


46.          Keeping in view the substratum of the prosecution case

and   the   material   available   on   record,   we   are   of   the   considered
                                          43


opinion that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove the guilt

of   accused   beyond   reasonable   doubt.   In   the   aforementioned

circumstances,   we   allow   these   appeals,   set   aside   the   impugned

order passed by the High Court and restore the judgment and order

passed   by   the   trial   Court   in   respect   of   the   appellants   before   us.

Resultantly,   their   bail   bonds   stand   discharged.   Pending

applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of.


                                                     …………......................J.
                                                      (N.V. RAMANA)




                                                      ..................................J.
                                                       (S. ABDUL NAZEER)

NEW DELHI,
APRIL 26, 2018.

