
Supreme Court of India
Lajpat vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 6 December, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                                      REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1569  OF 2018
                         (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No. 10034 of 2018)




                         Lajpat  & Ors.                            ….Appellant(s)



                                                VERSUS



                         State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.               ….Respondent(s)   
                                           J U D G M E N T



                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.

                         1.   Leave granted.

                         2.   This appeal is filed against the final judgment

                         and   order   dated   10.09.2018   passed   by   the   High

                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad in an Application
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.12.07
14:54:06 IST
Reason:

                         No.35 of 2017 filed under Section 482 of the Code of




                                                                                       1
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as

“the   Code”)   whereby   the  Single  Judge   of   the   High

Court   dismissed   the   application   filed   by   the

appellants herein.

3.    Few facts need mention infra to appreciate the

short controversy involved in this appeal.

4.    By   impugned   order,   the   Single   Judge   of   the

High   Court   dismissed   the   appellants’   application

filed   under   Section   482   of   the   Code   wherein   the

challenge   was   to   quash   Charge   Sheet   No.1   dated

07.05.2016 in  Case Crime No.441 of 2015   under

Sections   420,   406   and   504   of   the   Indian   Penal

Code,   1860   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “IPC”),   P.S.

Khair,   District   Aligarh   in   Case   No.486   of   2016

(State  vs. Lajpat & Ors.) pending  in the Court of

Judicial Magistrate, Khair, Aligarh.

5.    The   short   question,   which   arises   for

consideration   in   this   appeal,   is   whether   the   High




                                                                    2
Court   was   justified   in   dismissing   the   appellants’

application filed under Section 482 of the Code. 

6.    Heard Mr. Siddharth Mittal,   learned counsel

for   the   appellants.     Mr.   Manoj   Mishra,   learned

counsel was asked to take notice for the State.  

7.    Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

are   inclined   to   set   aside   the   impugned   order   and

remand the case to the High Court for deciding the

appellants’   application,   out   of   which   this   appeal

arises, afresh on merits in accordance with law after

notice to other side.

8.    On perusal of the impugned order, we find that

the Single Judge has only quoted the principles of

law   laid   down   by   this   Court   in   several   decisions

relating to powers of the High Court to interfere in

the cases filed under Section 482 of the Code from

Para 2 to the concluding para but has failed to even




                                                                   3
refer   to   the   facts   of   the   case   with   a   view   to

appreciate the factual controversy, such as, what is

the   nature   of   the   complaint/FIR   filed   against   the

appellants, the allegations on which it is filed,  who

filed   it,   the   grounds   on   which   the

complaint/FIR/proceedings   is   challenged   by   the

appellants,   why   such   grounds   are   not   made   out

under Section 482 of the Code etc.

9.    We are, therefore, at a loss to know the factual

matrix of the case much less to appreciate except to

read the legal principles laid down by this Court in

several decisions. 

10.   In   our   view,   the   Single   Judge   ought   to   have

first set out the brief facts of the case with a view to

understand the factual matrix of the case and then

examined the challenge made to the proceedings in

the light of the principles of law laid down by this

Court and then recorded his finding as to on what




                                                                    4
basis   and   reasons,   a   case   is   made   out   for   any

interference or not. 

11.   In our view, this is the least that is required in

every   order   to   support   the   conclusion   reached   for

disposal of the case. It enables the Higher Court to

examine the question as to whether the reasoning

given   by   the   Court   below   is   factually   and   legally

sustainable. 

12.   We find that the aforementioned exercise was

not   done   by   the   High   Court   while   passing   the

impugned order and hence interference is called for.

13.    We, therefore, find ourselves unable to concur

with   such   disposal   of   the   application   by   the   High

Court  and   feel  inclined to set aside the  impugned

order and remand the case to the High Court (Single

Judge)   with   a   request   to   decide   the   application

afresh on merits in accordance with law keeping in




                                                                    5
view the aforementioned observations after issuing

notice to respondent Nos. 1 and 2.

14.    Having formed an opinion to remand the case

in the light of our reasoning, we do not consider it

proper to go into the merits of the case.

15.    In view of the foregoing discussion, the appeal

succeeds   and   is   accordingly   allowed.   Impugned

order is set aside. The case is remanded to the High

Court for its decision on merits uninfluenced by any

of our observations in this order after notice to the

respondents.  


                               ………...................................J.
                                 [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                                   …...……..................................J.
                                               [INDU MALHOTRA]
New Delhi;
December 06, 2018 




                                                                                6

