
Supreme Court of India
Dr. Jagdish Prasad vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 3 December, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                                       REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1542 OF 2018
                          (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No. 9365 of 2018)


                         Dr. Jagdish Prasad & Ors.                      ….Appellant(s)

                                                 VERSUS


                         State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.                ….Respondent(s)  
                                           J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.

                         1.    Leave granted.

                         2.    This appeal is filed against the final judgment

                         and   order   dated   13.09.2018   passed   by   the   High

                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad in an Application

                         under   Section   482   of   the   Code   of   Criminal
Signature Not Verified



                         Procedure,   1973   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “the
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.12.03
17:00:38 IST
Reason:


                         Code”)   bearing   No.35595   of   2017   whereby   the


                                                                                         1
Single Judge dismissed the application filed by the

appellants herein.

3.      Few   facts   need   mention   hereinbelow   to

appreciate   the   short   controversy   involved   in   this

appeal.

4.      By impugned order, the learned Single Judge

dismissed   the   appellants’   application   filed   under

Section 482 of the Code wherein the challenge was

to   quash   the   order   dated   21/09/2017   as   well   as

entire   proceedings   in   Complaint   Case   No.2540   of

2017   (Mamta  vs.  Jagdish   Prasad   &   Ors.)   under

Sections 498­A and 323 of the Indian Penal Code,

1860 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”) and Sections

3   and   4   of   Dowry   Prohibition   Act,   1961   Police

Station Mahila Thana, District Hathras pending in

the   Court   of   Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   Hathras,

U.P. 


                                                                 2
5.    The   short   question,   which   arises   for

consideration   in   this   appeal,   is   whether   the   High

Court   was   justified   in   dismissing   the   appellants’

applications filed under Section 482 of the Code. 

6.    Heard Mr. Rakesh Taneja, learned counsel for

the   appellants   and Mr. Chandra Shekhar, learned

counsel for the respondents. 

7.    Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case we

are   inclined   to   set   aside   the   impugned   order   and

remand the case to the High Court for deciding the

appellants’   application,   out   of   which   this   appeal

arises, afresh on merits in accordance with law.

8.    On perusal of the impugned order, we find that

the   Single   Judge   has  quoted the  principles of  law

laid down by this Court in several decisions relating

to   powers   of   the   High   Court   on   the   issue   of

interference in cases filed under Section 482 of the




                                                                   3
Code  from  Para  2 to the concluding  para but has

not referred to the facts of the case to appreciate the

controversy of the case. 

9.    We are, therefore, unable to know the factual

matrix   of   the   case   after   reading   the   impugned

judgment   except   the   legal   principles   laid   down   by

this Court in several decisions. 

10.   In   our   view,   the   Single   Judge   ought   to   have

first set out the brief facts of the case with a view to

understand  the   factual  matrix  and then  examined

the challenge made to the proceedings in the light of

the principles of law laid down by this Court with a

view to record the findings on the grounds urged by

the   appellants   as   to   whether   any   interference

therein is called for or not. 

11.   We find that the aforementioned exercise was

not   done   by   the   High   Court   while   passing   the

impugned order. 


                                                                    4
12.      We, therefore, find ourselves unable to concur

with   such   disposal   of   the   application   by   the   High

Court  and   feel  inclined to set aside the  impugned

order and remand the case to the High Court (Single

Judge)   with   a   request   to   decide   the   application

afresh on merits in accordance with law keeping in

view the aforementioned observations.

13.     Having formed an opinion to remand the case

in the light of our reasoning mentioned above, we do

not consider it proper to go into the merits of the

case.

14.     In view of the foregoing discussion, the appeal

succeeds  and  is  accordingly  allowed.    Impugned




                                                                    5
order is set aside. The case is remanded to the High

Court for its decision on merits uninfluenced by any

of our observations in this order.  



                               ………...................................J.
                                 [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                                   …...……..................................J.
                                               [INDU MALHOTRA]
New Delhi;
December 03, 2018 




                                                                                6

