
Supreme Court of India
State Of Rajasthan vs Babu Lal on 21 April, 2009Author: . Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Asok Kumar Ganguly
                                REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 859 OF 2004


State of Rajasthan                                                   ...     Appellant(s)

            Versus

Babu Lal                                                               ...   Respondent(s)



                                       JUDGMENT

Dr.ARIJIT PASAYAT,J.

               Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of acquittal passed by a

     learned Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court, Jodhpur Bench. The respondent

     was convicted for offence punishable under Section 8/21 of the Narcotics Drugs and

     Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter refeerred to as 'the Act').       The

     respondent was found in possession of a huge quantity of Brown Sugar and the Trial

     Court held that all the requisite procedure was followed and, therefore, according to

     the Trial Court, the prosecution version was established. The High Court found that

     there was non-compliance with the requirement of Section 42(2) of the Act.




                                              -2-



     Various factual aspects have been highlighted by the High Court to come to this

     conclusion.
                  Learned counsel for the State submitted that some minor variations, if

     any, in not following the the procedure would not render the conviction bad. The

     learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand supported the judgment of the

     High Court.

                  We find that the High Court after referring to the various factual aspects

     came to the conclusion that provisions of Section 42(2) were not complied with. The

     documents required to prove the receipt of oral information were not brought on

     record. That being so, we are not inclined to interfere with the judgment of the High

     Court. The appeal fails and it is dismissed accordingly.



                                             ...................J.
                                           (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)



                                          ....................J.
                                          ((ASOK KUMAR GANGULY)

New Delhi,
April 21, 2009.

