
Supreme Court of India
Aradadi Ramudu & Aggiramudu vs State,Rep.By Insp. Of ... on 15 February, 2012Author: ...................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Anil R. Dave
                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION





              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 404 OF 2012


      (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(CRL.)NO.8012 OF 2010)





ARADADI RAMUDU @ AGGIRAMUDU                                  ... APPELLANT





                                  VERSUS





THE STATE, THROUGH


INSPECTOR OF POLICE, YANAM                                  ... RESPONDENT





                                 O R D E R

1.          Leave granted.

2.          This   appeal   is   directed   against   the 


judgment   and   order   passed   by   the   High   Court   of 


Judicature          at         Madras         in         Criminal         Appeal 


No.1083/2007   dated   05.11.2009.   By   the   impugned 


judgment   and   order,   the   High   Court,   after   re-

appreciating   the   entire   evidence   on   record,   has 


confirmed   the   Order   of   the   Additional   Sessions 


Judge,   Pondicherry   in   S.C.No.99   of   1997   dated 


29.04.1999,   by   which   the   appellant-accused   was 





                                                                             1


convicted   under   Section   302   of   the   Indian   Penal 


Code (for short "the IPC") and sentenced to undergo 


rigorous imprisonment for life.

3.        The   deceased   (Gangammal)   was   the   wife   of 


appellant-accused.          It         is         the         case         of         the 


prosecution   that   the   accused   was   an   alcoholic,   and 


habitually   beating   his   wife   after   picking   up   a 


quarrel  with  her  for  silly  reasons.  He  also  didn't 


reside   under   the   same   roof   with   her,   and   only 


occasionally   visited   her.   Gangammal   was   eking   her 


livelihood by working as a domestic servant. At the 


time of the incident, Gangammal and the accused had 


a son and a daughter.

4.        It   appears   that   on   the   previous   night   of 


the   incident,   the   accused   severely   beat   Gangammal 


as   he   doubted   her   fidelity.   On   13.08.1997,   around 


6.45   a.m.,   the   accused   attacked   her   neck   with   a 


kitchen   knife,   causing   her   to   bleed   profusely, 


which ultimately led to her death. 

5.        It   has   come   in   the   evidence   of   P.W.2   (the 


neighbour)   that   she   barged   into   the   Gangammal's 


house   on   hearing   her   shriek   in   pain,   and   found 


Gangammal   in   a   severely   injured   condition.   In   her 


evidence,   she   has   also   stated   that   Gangammal   told 


her that the accused had caused the knife injury on 


her   neck.   Thereafter,   P.W.2   has   deposed   that   she 





                                                                                      2


asked   Gangammal   to   change   her   blood   soaked   saree 


and   arranged   for   a   rickshaw   puller   to   shift 


Gangammal from the house to the Government Hospital 


at Yanam.

6.        In   the   hospital,   P.W.1   (the   doctor) 


treated   the   deceased.   In   the   Examination-in-Chief, 


he   has   elaborated   the   nature   of   the   injuries   that 


Gangammal   had   suffered   and   the   treatment   that   was 


given   to   her.   He   has   further   stated   that,   for 


better  treatment,  he  had  advised  P.W.2  to  take  her 


to   the   Government   Hospital,   Kakinada.   He   has 


further stated that Gangammal had told him that the 


accused   had   first   tried   to   throttle   her   neck   and 


later on stabbed her on the neck with a knife. 

7.        We   have   the   evidence   of   P.W.3   (son   of   the 


accused   and   deceased)   and   P.W.4   (daughter   of   the 


accused   and   deceased),   who,   at   that   time,   were   16 


years   and   14   years   respectively.   Both   of   them,   in 


one   voice,   have   stated   that   there   used   to   be 


quarrel   between   their   mother   and   father   and   their 


father   used   to   beat   their   mother.   They   have   also 


stated that after they came back to the house, they 


were informed that the accused had caused the knife 


injury on the neck of their mother.

8.        P.W.5   (the   rickshaw   puller   who   transported 


the   deceased   to   Government   Hospital,   Yanam)   has 





                                                               3


testified  that  the  deceased  had  stated  to  him  that 


the   accused   had   stabbed   her   on   the   neck.   P.W.12 


(the   doctor   who   treated   the   deceased   at   Government 


Hospital, Kakinada) has explained the treatment she 


gave   to   the   deceased   in   her   evidence,   and   has 


confirmed that the death of the deceased was caused 


by   the   stab   injury   inflicted   on   her   neck.   In   the 


evidence   of   P.W.13   (the   medical   examiner   who 


conducted   the   post   mortem)   and   the   post   mortem 


report, the nature of the injury on the body of the 


deceased   and   the   seriousness   of   the   same   has   come 


on record.

9.        The   Trial   Court,   after   appreciating   and 


analysing   the   entire   evidence   on   record,   has   came 


to   the   conclusion   that   the   knife   injury   caused   by 


the   accused   on   the   neck   of   the   deceased   was 


sufficient   to   cause   her   death.   Accordingly,   it   has 


convicted   and   sentenced   the   accused   under   Section 


302   of   the   IPC,   awarding   rigorous   imprisonment   for 


life.   The   same   is   confirmed   by   the   High   Court, 


which decision is impugned before us.

10.       We   have   heard   Shri.   Shekhar   Prit   Jha, 


learned   amicus   curiae   appearing   for   the   appellant 


and   Shri.   V.   Kanagaraj,   learned   senior   counsel 


appearing   for   the   respondent.   We   have   also   perused 


the   evidence   on   record   and   the   testimonies   of   the 





                                                              4


various witnesses. 

11.       After   a   careful   analysis   of   the   evidence 


on   record,   we   are   of   the   firm   opinion   that   the 


conviction   and   sentence   awarded   by   the   Trial   Court 


and   confirmed   by   the   High   Court,   does   not   suffer 


from   any   legal   infirmity   which   would   call   for   our 


interference under Article 136 of the Constitution.

12.       However,   Shri   Jha,   learned   amicus   curiae 


would   contend   before   us   that   in   the   instant   case, 


the   sentence   requires   to   be   modified   from   Section 


302 IPC to Section 304 Part-II of IPC. According to 


the   learned   amicus   curiae   that   the   accused   had   no 


intention to kill the deceased and the injury which 


was inflicted on the deceased was not sufficient to 


convict   and   sentence   the   accused   under   Section   302 


of the IPC. 

13.       Shri.   V.   Kanagaraj,   learned   senior   counsel 


appearing   for   the   respondent   has   stated   that   the 


factum   of   the   accused   causing   the   knife   injury   on 


the   neck   of   the   deceased   has   come   in   the 


testimonies   of   P.W.1,   P.W.2,   P.W.3,   P.W.4,   P.W.5 


and   P.W.6   (a   village   elder).   He   would   also   state 


that the injury sustained by the deceased was of a 


serious nature and ultimately led to her death. The 


learned   senior   counsel   would   submit   that   in   light 


of   the   evidence   on   record,   our   interference,   in 





                                                             5


respect of the sentence, was not called for.

14.         Though   the   submission   of   the   learned 


amicus   curiae   looks   attractive   at   the   first   blush, 


weighing   the   same   with   the   facts   of   the   present 


case   and   evidence   on   record,   in   our   opinion,   the 


same has no merit.

15.         In   State   of   UP   v.   Indrajeet,   (2000)   7   SCC 


249, this Court held:

       "7......Absence   of   intention   to   cause   death 

       coupled   with   the   lack   of   knowledge   that 

       death   would   be   inevitably   caused   on 

       account   of   the   injury   would   make   the 

       offence   fall   only   under   Section   304   Part 

       II IPC, and not under Section 302 IPC......"



In Satish Narayan Sawant v. State of Goa, (2009) 17 


SCC 724, this Court held:

       "41......It is trite law that Section 304 Part 

       II   comes   into   play   when   the   death   is 

       caused by doing an act with knowledge that 

       it   is   likely   to   cause   death   but   there   is 

       no   intention   on   the   part   of   the   accused 

       either   to   cause   death   or   to   cause   such 

       bodily   injury   as   is   likely   to   cause 

       death."


16.         In   other   words,   this   Court   has   held   that 


for   modification   of   sentence   from   Section   302   to 


Section   304   Part   II,   not   only   should   there   be   an 


absence   of   the   intention   to   cause   death,   but   also 


an absence of intention to cause such bodily injury 





                                                                    6


that in the ordinary course of things was likely to 


cause death. 

17.         There   is   concurrent   affirmative   finding   of 


fact   by   both   the   Courts   below   regarding   the 


intention   of   the   accused   to   kill   the   deceased. 

Having   perused   the   evidence   on   record,   and   on 


account   of   the   concurrent   findings,   we   are   unable 


to   accept   the   submission   of   Shri.   Jha   that   there 


was an absence of intention to kill on the part of 


the accused, meriting our interference in sentence. 

Further,   this   Court,   in   Chahat   Khan   v.   State   of 


Haryana, (1972) 3 SCC 408, held:

       "9......When   a   person   is   causing   an   injury   on 


       such   a   vital   part   the   intention   to   kill 


       can certainly attributed to him..."




18.         Assuming for a moment that the accused had 


no intention to kill the deceased, it can still be 


said   that   he   had   the   intention   to   cause   an   injury 


which  would  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things  would 


cause   her   death.   In   Virsa   Singh   v.   The   State   of 


Punjab, 1958 SCR 1495, this Court, speaking through 


Vivian Bose, J., held (at pg. 1501):

       "...It   does   not   matter   that   there   was   no 

       intention   to   cause   death.   It   does   not 

       matter that there was no intention even to 

       cause   an   injury   of   a   kind   that   is 





                                                                   7


        sufficient   to   cause   death   in   the   ordinary 

        course   of   nature   (not   that   there   is   any 

        real distinction between the two). It does 

        not even matter that there is no knowledge 

        that an act of that kind will be likely to 

        cause   death.   Once   the   intention   to   cause 

        the   bodily   injury   actually   found   to   be 

        present is proved, the rest of the enquiry 

        is   purely   objective   and   the   only   question 

        is   whether,   as   a   matter   of   purely 

        objective         inference,         the         injury         is 

        sufficient   in   the   ordinary   course   of 

        nature   to   cause   death.   No   one   has   a 

        license   to   run   around   inflicting   injuries 

        that   are   sufficient   to   cause   death   in   the 

        ordinary   course   of   nature   and   claim   that 

        they   are   not   guilty   of   murder.   If   they 

        inflict   injuries   of   that   kind,   they   must 

        face   the   consequences;   and   they   can   only 

        escape   if   it   can   be   shown,   or   reasonably 

        deduced   that   the   injury   was   accidental   or 

        otherwise unintentional."


19.          In   Arun   Raj   v.   Union   of   India,   (2010)   6 


SCC 457, held:

        "22......   The   appellant   in   this   instance   has 

        used a kitchen knife. A kitchen knife with 

        sharp   edges   is   a   dangerous   weapon   and   it 

        is   very   obvious   that   the   appellant   was 

        aware   that   the   use   of   such   a   weapon   can 

        cause death......"


20.          In the instant case, it has come on record 


that the accused was an alcoholic and he was in the 


habit of beating his wife regularly after consuming 


enough and more liquor. It is also a matter of fact 


confirmed by the two Courts below that on the date 





                                                                               8


of   the   incident,   there   was   a   quarrel   between   the 


accused   and   the   deceased,   and   the   accused   caused 


injury   on   the   neck   of   the   deceased   with   a   kitchen 


knife. 

21.        The   doctor   (P.W.1)   in   his   medical   report 


has   stated   the   nature   of   the   injuries   suffered   by 


the deceased due to the knife injury caused by the 


accused.   A   perusal   of   the   medical   report   would 


definitely   indicate   that   those   injuries   were 


sufficient   enough   to   cause   the   death   of   the 


deceased.   That   apart,   we   should   also   notice   that 


before   the   deceased   was   shifted   to   the   Government 


Hospital   at   Yanam   for   treatment   of   the   injuries, 


the saree worn by the deceased was literally soaked 


in blood. Therefore, her neighbour, who has come on 


record   as   (P.W.2),   has   stated   that   she   had   to 


advise the deceased to change her saree. This would 


indicate   that   because   of   the   injuries   suffered, 


there   was   profuse   loss   of   blood   which   itself   was 


sufficient   enough   to   cause   the   death   of   the 


deceased. 

22.        In   our   view,   the   evidence   on   record   is 


more   than   sufficient   to   indicate   that   the   accused 


had the intention to cause such injury on the body 


of   the   deceased   that   would   be   in   all   likelihood 


cause   her   death   in   the   natural   course   of   things, 





                                                               9


fulfilling the conditions imposed by Section 300 of 


IPC for punishment under Section 302.

23.       Keeping   in   view   all   these   aspects,   the 


submission of Shri. Jha, learned amicus curiae that 


the   conviction   and   sentence   awarded   by   the   Trial 


Court   and   confirmed   by   the   High   Court   requires   to 


be   modified   from   Section   302   IPC   to   Section   304 


Part-II IPC, cannot be accepted by us.

24.       In   view   of   the   above,   we   do   not   see   any 


merit   in   this   appeal.   Accordingly,   the   appeal 


stands dismissed.

          Ordered accordingly.

                                       ...................J.

                                                  (H.L. DATTU)





                                       ...................J.

                                                (ANIL R. DAVE)





NEW DELHI,

FEBRUARY 15, 2012 





                                                               10

