
Supreme Court of India
Rajinder Singh & Kada vs State Of Punjab on 21 April, 1992Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 1433, 1992 SCR  (2) 574
Author: M Punchhi
Bench: Punchhi, M.M.
           PETITIONER:
RAJINDER SINGH & KADA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/04/1992

BENCH:
PUNCHHI, M.M.
BENCH:
PUNCHHI, M.M.
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR 1433		  1992 SCR  (2) 574
 1992 SCC  Supl.  (3)  13 JT 1992 (2)	575
 1992 SCALE  (1)822


ACT:
		       : Criminal Law
:  Indian  Penal Code, 1860-Section 302-Offence	 of  Murder-
Presence  of  eye witnesses at the scene of  occurrence	 not
free  from  doubt-Investigation	 in  doubt  as	to  culprit-
Introduction  of second dying declaration with names of	 eye
witnesses-Despatch  of FIR after recording of  second  dying
declaration-Contradictions in two dying	 declarations-Inves-
tigation  not free from taint-Material	witnesses-Not  exam-
ined-Whether High Court justified in reversing trial court's
decision acquitting the accused-Absconding of accused-Wheth-
er  per	 se establishes guilt-Whether  accused	entitled  to
benefit of doubt.



HEADNOTE:
		 : The appellant was alleged to have fired a
shot  from his pistol hitting the left flank of one `C'	 who
rushed	inside PW.3's house and hid himself by chaining	 the
door from inside. PW.3 and another person raised alarm,	 but
the appellant escaped from the place of occurrence with	 his
pistol. PW.4 who had also arrived at the spot saw the occur-
rence.	While  PW.3 went to the village Police	Station	 and
lodged the First Information Report, two other persons	took
the  injured person to the City Civil Hospital,	 where	PW.2
the doctor, attended on the injured person, who remained  in
the hospital for about 13 days, and ultimately succumbed  to
the injury. PW.2, who performed the autopsy of the deceased,
opined that the death was due to toxemia and shock resulting
from  peritonitis,  as a consequence of fire arm  injury  in
which  the  small gut was injured, and that the	 injury	 was
sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.
     The  appellant  was charged under Section 302  IPC	 and
Section	 27  of the Arms Act, 1959, for the murder  and	 for
making	use  of	 a  pistol  for	 an  unlawful  purpose.	 The
appellant  was declared absconder. He was arrested  when  in
possession of a pistol 40 months after the incident.
     The prosecution supported its case by production of two
eye wit-
						   575
nesses, PWs 3 and 4. It also introduced	 two dying  declara-
tions, one recorded by PW.14, the then Executive Magistrate,
and the second recorded by PW.15 the S.I. of Police  Station
of  the village in which the incident took  place.  Besides,
the fact of accused's absconding after the incident was also
pressed into service. The Sessions Judge, placed no reliance
either	of the occular version or the dying declarations and
acquitted  the appellant. However, on appeal, by the  State,
the  High  Court set aside the acquittal and  convicted	 the
appellant  under Section 302 IPC and Section 27 of the	Arms
Act,  and sentenced him to life imprisonment and a  fine  of
Rs.2,000  and,	in default, a further period of	 one  year's
rigorous imprisonment and also one year's rigorous imprison-
ment respectively.
     Allowing  the appeal of the accused, by giving  benefit
of doubt, this court,
     HELD: 1.1	The presence of the two witnesses, PWs.3 and
4,  at the scene of occurrence is not free from	 doubt.	 The
investigation  was in doubt as to who was the culprit. As  a
first  step, the theory of the first dying  declaration	 was
introduced  without  taking somebody independent,  like	 the
doctor, into confidence. The investigation later  introduced
the  story of another dying declaration. This one  was	with
the aid of the doctor, but this brought in the names of	 the
two  eye-witnesses to figure at a time when  everything	 was
manageable from the official point of view in reporting	 the
matter	to  the Magistrate. The investigation also,  in	 the
instant	 case, therefore, is not free from taint.  The	High
Court,	therefore, was not right in setting aside the  trial
court's decision and conviction the appellant.
					    [584 F-H, 585 A]
     1.2  There	 are contrasting features in the  two  dying
declarations. The presence of PW.3 and PW.4 at the scene  of
occurrence had not been mentioned specifically in the  first
dying  declaration. However, their names got  introduced  in
the  second dying declaration. Besides, the brother  of	 the
appellant  had been introduced in the second dying  declara-
tion  as a coculprit. Though the City Police was present  in
attendance  at the hospital, after it had been	informed  of
the  arrival  of the injured there, it was not	prepared  to
carry the burden of getting recorded a dying declaration. In
this situation, it is rather dramatic that PW.14 should jump
into the fray without having been asked by anyone  official-
ly,  under proper documents, to record the statement of	 the
injured at 6.45 p.m. and without complying with the
						576
essential  formalities	of  making  an	application  to	 the
doctor,	 disclosing his identity, seeking his opinion as  to
the  fitness  of  the injured to make a	 statement,  and  if
permitted, having recorded the statement, the injured in the
presence  of  the  doctor. The role of PW.14,  even  if	 the
suspicion entertained by the Sessions Judge on his  veracity
on  the basis of his judicial career is left aside, is	sug-
gestive of an overdoing, shared by the police to not let  go
a  crime  against their fellow policeman unpunished.  It  is
also  plain  that while introducing  the  expression  "other
persons" to be present in the first dying declaration it was
like drawing a blank cheque to be filled in at a later stage
conveniently,  in order to plug in convenient witnesses,  if
the ones mentioned already were not prepared to support	 the
prosecution. The effort in that regard was to say the  least
naive, if not clumsy. [582 F-G;583 A-D]
     The  dying declaration recorded by PW.15, S.I.  of	 the
village	 Police	 Station  on  the  following  morning	also
demonstrates that by that time PWs.3 and 4 had been tied  up
as willing witnesses.[583 D]
     1.3  PW.3, one of the two eye-witnesses has  said	that
the reason for his being at the spot was that he had gone to
the house of his friend for taking a plough. He lives in the
east  of  the  village whereas the house of  the  friend  is
towards	 the west of the village. He appears to be a  chance
witness	 altogether. There could be plenty of ploughs to  be
borrowed in his own neighbourhood. So far as the second eye-
witness, PW.4 is concerned his house is towards the south of
the  place  of	occurrence and there  intervened  about	 150
houses between the two places. He too is a chance witness.
						   [584 B-C]
     1.4  Nobody  from	the locality  was  examined  by	 the
prosecution.  Material witnesses, who were claimed  to	have
seen the occurrence and removed the injured to the  hospital
in  their jeep, were not examined by the prosecution. It  is
due  to the second dying declaration recorded by  PW.15	 the
S.I.  of the Village Police Station that the names of  these
two  i.e. PWs.3 and 4 came in the forefront, and  on  accom-
plishing such a fiat, the F.I.R. was written thereafter	 and
the  report  despatched	 the next day at 8.00  p.m.  to	 the
Magistrate afterwards. There was, in the interval, plenty of
time to withhold the despatch of F.I.R. till the story could
be woven, concerning as it was, a fellow policeman.[584 D-E]
	  1.5 The First Information Report was shown to have
recorded  on  the  day of the incident at  6.15	 p.m.  under
section 307/34 IPC and under
						    577
section 25/27/54/59 of the Arms Act, 1959 and despatched  to
the  Magistrate the following day at 8.00 p.m.,	 much  after
recording  of the second dying declaration, and received  by
the  Magistrate	 still	two days later	at  10.05  a.m.	 The
investigation  stretched  its timings. The version  was	 im-
proved.	 It  was  said that after the  occurrence  when	 the
appellant  ran away with his pistol, he was joined near	 the
Kikar  trees by his brother, who too is a Constable  in	 the
police. He is suggested to have been waiting for the  appel-
lant  as  an aide. Then both of them are said to  have	fled
away. Since the appellant was shown to have been absconding,
the brother of the appellant was hurriedly put up for  trial
for  offence under section 302/34 IPC. The  Sessions  Judge,
however,  discharged  the  brother of  the  appellant.	This
apparently was an attempt to try the appellant in  absentia,
but the effort failed. [583 E-H]
     1.6 The abscondence of the accused is not a determining
factor, and not one which could outweigh the  other material
appearing on the record. It by itself does not establish the
guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt. [585 B]
     1.7 In the circumstances, the appellant is extended the
benefit of doubt and acquitted. [585 C]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
531 of 1981.
     From  the	judgment and Order dated  11.3.1981  of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 1044 of
1979.
     A.N. Mulla, T.L. Garg and N.D. Garg for the Appellant.
     Ranbir   Singh  Yadav  and	 R.S.  Suri(N.P.)  for	 the
Respondent.
     The judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PUNCHHI,  J.  This	 appeal under  section	379  of	 the
Criminal  Procedure Code is directed against  the  judgement
and  order  dated March 11, 1981 of the Punjab	and  Haryana
High Court at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No.1044 of 1979.
     The appellant herein, Rajinder Singh, was charged under
section	 302  IPC and under section 27 of the Arms  Act	 for
causing the murder of Chamkaur Singh and for making use of a
pistol for an unlawful purpose,
						    578
before	the Sessions Judge, Ferozepur. He was  acquitted  by
the  learned  Sessions Judge on February 9. 1979.  On  State
appeal to the High Court the acquittal was set aside and the
appellant  was convicted under section 302 IPC and was	sen-
tenced to life imprisonment as also to pay a fine of Rs.2000
or  in default further rigorous imprisonment for  one  year.
The  fine, if realised, was ordered to be paid to the  heirs
of  Chamkaur  Singh deceased. He was  also  convicted  under
section 27 of the Arms Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for one year.
     The  prosecution  case is that  Chamkaur  Singh,  since
deceased, and the appellant herein belonged to village Ghall
Khurd. The deceased had four brothers. One of them,  namely,
Thana  Singh,  had  died 20 days before	 the  occurrence  on
account	 of taking liquor. The deceased suspected  that	 the
appellant has administered poison to Thana Singh in  liquor.
On December 20, 1974, just before sunset, the deceased	came
from the side of the bus stand to his village. Harbans Singh
P.W.3 was standing in front of the house of one Jagtar Singh
for taking a plough and he beckoned the deceased to come  to
him.  At  the moment, the appellant is stated to  have	come
from  the side of the lane and made Chamkaur Singh  deceased
stop,  accusing	 him that he had talked ill to him  to	some
shopkeeper but Chamkaur Singh denied having done so.  There-
upon Chamkaur Singh moved forward towards his house accompa-
nied  by  one Darbara Singh. The appellant at  the  juncture
took out his pistol from underneath the blanket, with  which
he  had wrapped himself, and fired a shot hitting  the	left
flank  of Chamkaur Singh. After receiving the shot  Chamkaur
Singh rushed inside the house of Harbans Singh Sansi and hid
himself	 by  chaining the door from  inside.  Harbans  Singh
P.W.3  and Darbara Singh raised alarm saying "do  not  kill"
"do  not kill" but the appellant escaped from the  place  of
occurrence  with  his pistol. Hakam Singh,  P.W.4  had	also
arrived at the spot from the side of his fields and saw	 the
occurrence. Two others, Mohinder Singh and Gura Singh,	took
Chamkaur Singh to the Civil Hospital Ferozepur while Harbans
Singh  to P.W.3 went to the Police Station Ghall  Khurd,  in
the  same village, and lodged the First Information  Report.
On arrival at the hospital Dr. S.I.S. Sandhu P.W.2  attended
to him. Chamkaur Singh remained in the hospital for about 13
days  till January 2, 1975 when he died. It fell to the	 lot
of Dr. Sandhu again to perform the autopsy of the  deceased.
In the opinion of Dr. Sandhu the death of Chamkaur Singh was
due  to	 toxemia and shock as a result of peritonitis  as  a
consequence  of fire arm injury in which the small  gut	 was
injured. According to the
						     579
doctor	the  injury  was sufficient to cause  death  in	 the
ordinary course of nature.
     The  prosecution  further alleges	that  the  appellant
could  not be arrested and was declared an absconder. It  is
only  on April 12, 1978, about 40 months later, that he	 was
arrested at a check-post in another part of district Feroze-
pur  and at that time he was holding a pistol. It was  taken
into  possession  as  well as the ammunition  found  on	 his
person.
     When the case we sent up for trial after completion  of
investigation,	 the  prosecution  supported  its  case	  by
production  of	two eye witnesses, Harbans Singh  P.W.3	 and
Hakam  Singh  P.W.4  to give the occular  version.  It	also
introduced  in	evidence  two  dying  declarations  of	 the
deceased. One was said to have been made on December 20,1974
to  Shamsher  Singh,  P.W.14 who  then	posted	as  Judicial
Magistrate,  First  Class,  Ferozepur.	He  was	 no  more  a
Magistrate when his statement was recorded at the trial. The
other  one was of December 21,1975 recorded by	S.I.  Vasdev
P.W.15.Besides, the absocondence of the accused was  pressed
into  service. The learned Sessions Judge however placed  no
reliance on either the ocular version or the dying  declara-
tion and acquitted the appellant, but he was reversed by the
High Court. The exercise in the instant appeal is to examine
whether	 the High Court was justified in interfering in	 the
acquittal of the appellant.
     As	 said before, Chamkaur Singh had been taken  to	 the
Civil  Hospital,  Ferozepur  the same  day,  i.e.,  December
20,1974.  On his arrival, Dr. S.I.S. Sandhu,  Surgical	Spe-
cialist,  Civil Hospital, Ferozepur sent message Ex.P.B.  at
6.00  p.m.  to	the S.H.O. police  Station  Ferozepur  city,
intimating the arrival of the injured. The Hospital and	 the
Police Station are opposite each other. Another message	 Ex.
P.C. was sent likewise at 6.20 p.m. suggesting recording  of
dying declaration of Chamkaur Singh since his condition	 was
serious.  At 10.30 p.m. vide application Ex.PD	S.I.  Vasdev
asked  the opinion of Dr. Sandhu whether Chamkaur Singh	 was
fit  to make statement, but the doctor opined that  the	 in-
jured was not fit to make a statement. Then on the next	 day
on  21.12.1974,	 again opinion was sought by the  Police  to
that  effect  at  11.00 a.m. and then  the  doctor  declared
Chamkaur  Singh fit to make a statement. Dr. Sandhu  claimed
to have ordered giving pethedin injection to the injured  by
way of sedation on the arrival of the injured in the  Hospi-
tal, and another injection on 21-12-74 at
						       580
4.00 p.m. That was the reason that on the earlier day,	i.e.
on 20-12-1974, When his opinion was sought about the ability
of  the injured to make a statement, he had opined  that  he
was unfit to make a statement due to sedation. It is  worthy
of notice at this stage that it was Vasdev S.I. attached  to
Police	Station	 Ghall Khurd who responded to  the  need  of
recording  a dying declaration and not the police of  Police
Station	 Ferozepur  City.  It is also worthy  to  note	that
Chamkaur Singh himself was a constable serving in the office
of S.P. Ferozepur City. From the medical report Ex.P.J., Dr.
Sandhu, when called again as a court witness, explained that
Chamkaur Singh was conscious when he was brought for  exami-
nation	at 6.15 p.m. and at that time he was fit to  make  a
statement  although  his condition was serious.	 He  however
went  on to say that he had ordered a pethedin injection  to
be  given  to the patient so that he goes  to  sleep,  which
injection should have had its effect after half an hour.
     The  first dying  declaration of the deceased, as	said
before, was recorded by Shamasher Singh P.W.14.According  to
Shamsher  Singh P.W.14 he received a police  application  on
the  basis  of	which he went to the Hospital  in  order  or
record	the dying declaration of the deceased at  6.45	p.m.
Having	reached there he obtained the opinion of Dr.  Sandhu
regarding  fitness  of Chamkaur Singh to be fit	 to  make  a
statement. Noticeably no document was prepared by P.W.14  in
that regard. He claimed to have prepared his own proceedings
in  the form of a memorandum Ex.P.N. and noted therein	that
Dr. Sandhu had certified Chamkaur Singh to be fit to make  a
statement and that on his pointing out Chamkaur Singh he had
recorded the dying declaration of the deceased. The memoran-
dum  Ex.P.N. itself contains the dying declaration of  Cham-
kaur  Singh which is pointed as Ex.P.N.2 P.W.14 claims	that
it  was recorded on the dictation of the injured, which	 was
read out to him after recording and to which injured put his
signatures.  This  dying  declaration is  to  the  following
effect:
     "My  brother  Thana  Singh had  died  earlier.  He	 was
poisoned  in liquor. Now I have come to know as to  who	 had
done  it.  Earlier I did not know. I wanted to	go  from  my
headquarters after taking leave but could not get an  oppor-
tunity.	 Today, I got down at Ghall Khurd Bus Stop.  Darbara
Singh  member Panchayat was with me. Rajinder Singh  accused
came there. He said that I had talked something about him to
some shopkeeper. I replied in the negative. I proceeded	 and
then saw
						       581
back that the accused took out a pistol from underneath	 his
blanket.  He  fired,  which hit me on the left	side  of  my
flank. I entered some one's house but the accused ran  away.
Jagat  Singh,Jagtar  Singh,  Darbara Singh  and	 many  other
people had come there".
     P.W.14  further stated that the dying  declaration	 was
sent  by  him to the Area Magistrate but  corrected  himself
that Police Station Ghall Khurd fell within his jurisdiction
and stood shifted to another Magistrate. He also stated that
he had resigned from the post of Judicial Magistrate,  First
Class,	Ferozepur.  He while giving his	 evidence  described
himself	 as a practising advocate at Kharar, a tehsil  town.
In  his memorandum Ex. P.N. besides his version	 and  narra-
tion,  there is no signature of Dr. Sandhu even	 though	 his
name prominently  figures in it. Even after recording it Dr.
Sandhu was not asked to certify the recording of it. Accord-
ing  to P.W.14 there was no necessity for it because he	 was
himself	 satisfied  that Chamkaur Singh was fit	 to  make  a
statement  all through. Memorandum Ex. P.N. was not  put  to
Dr.  Sandhu  or he even apprised to  know  its	contents.The
prosecution  dare not risk it. Dr. Sandhu may  have  totally
denied	his involvement in the recording of the first  dying
declaration.  Another significant factor emerging  from	 the
first  dying declaration is that the names of the  two	eye-
witnesses Harbans singh P.W..3 and Hakam Singh P.W.4 do	 not
find mentioned as persons who had seen the occurrence. Other
were so named.
     The  second dying declaration is claimed to  have	been
recorded  by  S.I. Vasdev, P.W.15 of  Police  Station  Ghall
Khurd.	As he says, on 20-12-1974 at 6.15 p.m.	he  recorded
the   First  Information report at the instance	 of  Harbans
Singh  P.W.3.  After recording it he went to  the  spot	 and
recovered  therefrom  an empty cartridge.  He  recorded	 the
statements of Hakam Singh P.W. 4 at that time. He then	went
to Civil Hospital , Ferozepur reaching there at 9.30P.M.  He
then made application Ex. P.D. at 10.30 P.M. enquiring	from
the  doctor  about the fitness of Chamkaur Singh to  make  a
statement. The opinion being negative, he ventured again  on
the  next day at 11.00 a.m. This time the  doctor's  opinion
was positive and then he recorded the dying declaration	 Ex.
P.O.  The  dying declaration recorded by P.W.15	 reads	like
thus:
     "I	 am a constable in the police, on 20-12-1974 I	came
on leave
						    582
to Ghall Khurd. I came by bus, Darbara Singh was with me.
He  and	 I  came in front of the house of  Harbans  Singh  .
Accused	 Rajinder  Singh came from the front  side.  he	 was
having a blanket around. He said that I had talked to a shop
keeper about him. I told him that some-one had misled him. I
Proceeded forward and looked backwards. The accused took out
his pistol and fired towards me. After that I started  rais-
ing raula. The shot fired by accused hit me on my left flank
and  I got injured. Out of fear I entered the house of	Har-
bans  Singh  Sansi. I bolted the door  from  inside.  Jagtar
Singh  son  of Joginder Singh, Harbans Singh  son  of  Sawan
Singh	Jats,  Hakam singh son of Isher Singh had  seen	 the
occurrence.  Rajinder singh fled away with the	pistol	from
the  spot.  He ran towards Kikar trees.	 Where	Kewal  Singh
brother,  was waiting for him. They both ran away. They	 had
both connived to kill me. The cause of enmity is that on 21-
12-1974	 my  borther Thana singh died by  taking  liquor.  I
later  on came to know that Rajinder Singh had poisoned	 him
in  liquor due to which the death occurred. As I  could	 not
know  earlier. I could not proceed further. On Diwali  night
my brother Balam Singh and Rajinder Singh gambled.  Rajinder
Singh  won some money. I had got that amount  returned	from
Rajinder Singh . While I was injured state, Gurnam Singh son
of  Hari   Singh and Mohinder Singh son of  Arjan  Singh  of
Ghall  Khurd  took me in a jeep and got me admitted  in	 the
hospital".
     As is evident there are contrasting features in the two
dying declarations. The presence of Harbans singh P.W.3	 and
Hakam  singh P.W.4, as said before, had not  been  mentioned
specifically  in the first dying declaration. In the  second
dying  declaration,  the names of those	 two  witnesses	 got
introduced.  It is yet to be seen whether Harbans Singh	 and
hakam  singh,  P.W.s can be said to  be	 reliable  witnesses
whose  presence at the spot could be taken  as	established.
besides	 in the second dying declaration the brother of	 the
appellant,  by the name of Kewal singh, had been  introduced
as  a  co-culprit.  Though it is the admitted  case  of	 the
prosecution  that Police Station city stood informed of	 the
arrival of the injured at the Hospital, and that ASI Rajind-
er Kumar of City Police Station had come there with  consta-
ble  Ashok kumar to be given the bag of clothes of  the	 in-
jured  on 20-12-1974,it indicates that even though the	Fer-
ozepur
						     583
police was there in attendance, it was not prepared to carry
the burden of getting recorded a dying declaration. In	this
situation, it is rather dramatic that Shamsher singh, P.W.14
should	jump  into  the fray without having  been  asked  by
anyone	officially,  under proper documents, to	 record	 the
statement of the injured at 6.45 p.m. and without  complying
with the essential formalities of making an application	  to
the doctor, disclosing his identity, seeking his opinion  as
to  the fitness of the injured to make a statement,  and  if
permitted  having recorded the statement of the	 injured  in
the  presence  of  the doctor. The role	 of  Shamsher  Singh
P.W.14, even if we leave aside the suspicion entertained  by
the  Sessions  Judge  on his veracity on the  basis  of	 his
judical	   career,   seems   to	  us   suggestive   of	  an
overdoing,shared by the police to not let go a crime against
their  fellow  policeman unpunished. It is also	 plain	that
while  introducing  the	 expression "other  Persons"  to  be
present in the first dying declaration it was like drawing a
blank cheque to be filled in at a later stage  conveniently,
in  order to plug in convenient witnesses, if the ones	men-
tioned already were not Prepared to support the Prosecution.
The effort in that regard was to say the least naive, if not
clumsy.	 The dying declaration recorded by SI Vasdev on	 the
following  morning also demonstrates that by that time	Har-
bans  Singh  and  Hakam singh had been tied  up	 as  willing
witnesses.
     The  first	 Information Report was shown to  have	been
recorded on 20-12-1974 at 6.15 p.m. under section 307/34 IPC
and  under section 25/27/54/59 of the Arms Act. It is  shown
to have been despatched to the magistrate the following	 day
on 21.12-1974  at 8.00 p.m. much after the recording of	 the
second dying declaration. It is shown to have been  received
by  the	 Magistrate still two days later  on  23-12-1974  at
10.05  a.m.  The investigation stretched  its  timings.	 The
version was improved. It was said that after the  occurrence
when  the appellant ran away with his pistol, he was  joined
near the kikar trees by his brother Kewal Singh, who too  is
a  constable  in the Police . He is suggested to  have	been
waiting for the appellant as an aide. Then both of them	 are
said  to  have fled away. Since the appellant was  shown  to
have  been absconding, Kewal Singh brother of the  appellant
was  hurriedly	put up for trial for offence  under  section
302/34 IPC. The learned Sessions Judge, Ferozepur,  however,
discharged  the	 accused Kewal singh on	 9-9-1975  vide	 his
decision in Sessions Case No.66 of 1975. This apparently was
an attempt to try the appellant in absentia, but the  effort
failed.
						     584
     We have also gone through the evidence of	the two	 eye
witnesses.  Harbans singh P.W.3 when detailing	the  version
said  that  after talking to the appellant,  Chamkaur  singh
along  with Darbara singh moved forward towards their  house
and  when  Chamkaur Singh turned back he was hit  by  pistol
shot  fired  by the appellant. His reason for being  at	 the
spot  was that he had gone to the house of one	Jagir  Singh
for  taking  a plough. He lives in the east of	the  village
where as the house of Jagir Singh is towards the west of the
village.  Though  he says that his house and that  of  Jagir
Singh was about 20 houses apart, the defence suggestion	 was
that  about 200 houses intervene. He appears to be a  chance
witness altogether . There could be plenty of ploughs to  be
borrowed  in  his own neighbourhood. So far as	Hakam  singh
P.W.4  is concerned, his house is towards the south  of	 the
place  of occurrence and there intervened about	 150  houses
between	 his house and the place of occurrence. He too is  a
chance witness. Nobody from the locality was examined by the
prosecution.  Material witnesses like Darbara  Singh,  Jagat
singh  and Jagtar singh, as well as Guna Singh and  Mohinder
Sigh,  who  were  claimed to have seen	the  occurrence	 and
removed the injured to the hospital in their jeep, were	 not
examined  by the prosecution. It is due to the second  dying
declaration recorded by SI Vasdev P.W.15, that the names  of
these  two i.e., Harbans Singh and Hakam singh came  in	 the
forefront,  and	 on accomplishing such a  fiat,	 the  F.I.R.
seems  to have been written thereafter and the	report	des-
patched on 21-12-1974 at 8.00 p.m. to the Magistrate  after-
wards. There was in the interval plenty of time to  withhold
the  despath of F.I.R. till the story could be	woven,	con-
cerning as it was, to a fellow policeman.
     Thus  it appears to us that the presence of  these	 two
witnesses  Harbans  Singh and Hakam Singh at  the  scene  of
occurrence  is not free from doubt.The investigation was  in
doubt as who was the culprit. As a first step, the theory of
the  first dying declaration was introduced  without  taking
somebody independent, like Dr. Sandhu, into confidence.	 The
investigation  later introduced the story of  another  dying
declaration.  This one was with the aid of Dr.	Sandhu,	 but
this brought in the names of the two eye witnesses to figure
at  a time when everything was manageable from the  official
point of view in reporting the matter to the Magistrate. The
investigation also in the instance case therefore appears to
us  to	be  not free from taint. The views  of	the  learned
Sessions  Judge,Ferozepur  in acquitting  the  appellant  as
compared  to  those expressed by the High  Court  have	been
weighed again by us with the evidence on record, and we tend
to
						  585
agree  with the learned Session judge, disagreeing with	 the
views  expressed  by  the High Court, so as  to	 acquit	 the
appellant.
     The abscondence of the accused relied upon by the	High
Court  remains of no consequence. In the first place  it  is
not  a determining factor and not one which  could  outweigh
the  other  matarial appearing on the record. It  by  itself
does  not establish the guilt of  the appellant beyond	rea-
sonable doubt.
     For the views afore-expressed, we find it difficult  to
sustain	 the conviction of the appellant. Accordingly he  is
extended  the benefit of doubt and acquitted. The appeal  is
accordingly allowed.
N.P.V.					   Appeal Allowed.
						    586




