
Supreme Court of India
Raj Kumar Khurana vs State Of (Nct Of Delhi) & Anr on 5 May, 2009Author: S.B. Sinha
Bench: S.B. Sinha, Mukundakam Sharma
                                                                       REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 913 OF 2009
                [Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 8059 of 2007]


Raj Kumar Khurana                                        ...Appellant

                                      Versus

State of (NCT of Delhi) and Anr.                         ...Respondents




                            JUDGMENT

S.B. SINHA, J :


1.    Leave granted.


2.    Whether return of a cheque by the bank on the ground that it was

reported lost by the drawer would attract the penal provisions contained in

Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (for short "the Act") is

the question involved in this appeal. It arises out of a judgment and order

dated 18.09.2007 passed by the High Court of Delhi in Criminal M.C. No.

2890 of 2007.
                                     2
3.    The said question arises in the following factual matrix.



      Appellant kept two blank cheques in his office along with some stamp

papers. They were said to have been stolen from his office. Information as

regards missing of the said cheques was also given to the bank. He lodged a

First Information Report with regard thereto, stating:


             "...On my return to Digras, I found that the
             cheques and the stamp worth Rs. 50 bearing only
             my signatures had been stolen, therefore, to
             prevent any misuse of my cheques, I sent a written
             information to State Bank, Branch Digras and
             subsequently on 21-04-01 I filed a complaint in
             Police Station Digras...."
      The blank cheques were allegedly filled up on 24.06.2001. They were

presented before the bank but the same were returned dishonoured with the

remarks "said cheque reported lost by the drawer".



      Respondent No. 2 thereafter upon issuance of notices in terms of the

proviso appended to Section 138 of the Act filed a complaint petition in the

Court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi, inter alia, alleging:
                                    3
           "5. That the above said cheque in question was
           presented by the complainant for encashment
           through its bearers, namely State Bank of India,
           Azadpur Branch, Delhi - 33, but the same was
           returned as dishonoured with the remarks "SAID
           CHEQUE REPORTED LOST BY THE
           DRAWER". This intimation was received by the
           complainant from the bankers on 27.7.2001 and
           accordingly a notice dt. 3.8.2001 was sent to the
           accused requesting the accused to make payment
           of the above said cheque amount and on 17.8.2001
           the accused sent reply through his Advocate
           denying his liability falsely taking the plea that the
           cheque in question was lost as stolen by the
           complainant...

           6.      That the accused has taken the above said
           false pleas knowing it fully well that he does not
           intend to make payment of the said cheque
           amount, and the complainant is thus compelled to
           file this complaint.

           7.     That the issuance of the cheque by the
           accused and informing wrongly his own bankers
           about the loss/ theft of the cheque, with no
           intention to make payment thereof, rather showing
           that right from the time he issued the cheque, he
           had intention to cheat and defraud the complainant
           by making false representations and thus the
           accused has willfully committed an offence
           punishable under Sections 138 and 142 of the
           Negotiable Instruments Act read with Section 420
           IPC and is liable to be punished accordingly."

4.   It is not in dispute that the Superintendent of Police, Digras has issued

a certificate showing that FIR No. 57 of 2003 arising out of the First
                                     4


Information Report filed by the appellant before the Station House Officer,

Digras had been closed.


      It is furthermore not in dispute that the appellant in the meanwhile

filed a complaint petition under Section 380 read with Sections 34, 467, 468

and 471 as also Sections 420 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code in the

Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class and the same is pending

adjudication.


      Admittedly, the appellant had lodged a First Information Report under

Sections 369, 495, 498, 420 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code with the Police

Station Digras against the respondent No. 2 and his brother, wherein also a

closer report has been submitted.


      Appellant has filed another criminal complaint against the respondent

No. 2 under Section 409 of the Indian Penal Code which has also been

dismissed on the ground that the dispute is of civil nature.



5.    Appellant has moreover filed a suit for recovery of a sum of

Rs.31,40,131.43 in the Court of Civil Judge, Sr. Division, Darwha, Madhya

Pradesh against the respondent No. 2 and his brother.          Several other
                                     5


applications were filed by the appellant before the said court to which we

need not advert to.


6.    Appellant filed an application under Section 482 of the Code in the

High Court of Delhi praying for quashing of the proceedings under Section

138 of the Act on or about 6.09.2007 on the premise that the same was not

maintainable. By reason of the impugned judgment, the said application has

been dismissed.


7.    Mr. M.N. Krishnamani, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

the appellant, would submit that the High Court committed a serious error in

passing the impugned judgment insofar as it failed to take into consideration

that the complaint petition even if given face value and taken to be correct in

its entirety does not disclose an offence under Section 138 of the Act.



8.    Mr. Gulshan Rai Nagpal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent No. 2, on the other hand, would contend that the appellant had

lodged a false First Information Report with regard to the purported theft of

the cheques which having been found to be not true and, thus, it is evident

that he had resorted to various proceedings to pre-empt the drawee of the

cheques to obtain lawful payments due from him.
                                    6
9.   Section 138 of the Act reads as under:


           "138 - Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc.,
           of funds in the account
           Where any cheque drawn by a person on an
           account maintained by him with a banker for
           payment of any amount of money to another
           person from out of that account for the discharge,
           in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is
           returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the
           amount of money standing to the credit of that
           account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that
           it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from
           that account by an agreement made with that bank,
           such person shall be deemed to have committed an
           offence and shall, without prejudice to any other
           provisions of this Act, be punished with
           imprisonment for a term which may be extended to
           two years, or with fine which may extend to twice
           the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided
           that nothing contained in this section shall apply
           unless--
           (a) the cheque has been presented to the bank
           within a period of six months from the date on
           which it is drawn or within the period of its
           validity, whichever is earlier;
           (b) the payee or the holder in due course of       the
           cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand         for
           the payment of the said amount of money             by
           giving a notice in writing, to the drawer of       the
           cheque, within thirty days of the receipt           of
           information by hi m from the bank regarding        the
           return of the cheque as unpaid; and
           (c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the
           payment of the said amount of money to the payee
                                     7


             or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course
             of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of
             the said notice.
             Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section,
             "debt or other liability" means a legally
             enforceable debt or other liability."

10.   A bare perusal of the aforementioned provision would clearly go to

show that by reason thereof a legal fiction has been created. A legal fiction,

as is well known, although is required to be given full effect, has its own

limitations. It cannot be taken recourse to for any purpose other than the one

mentioned in the statute itself.


 In State of A.P. and Anr. v. A.P. Pensioners Association and Ors.

[(2005) 13 SCC 161], this Court held:


             "...In other words, all the consequences ordinarily
             flowing from a rule would be given effect to if the
             rule otherwise does not limit the operation thereof.
             If the rule itself provides a limitation on its
             operation, the consequences flowing from the legal
             fiction have to be understood in the light of the
             limitations prescribed. Thus, it is not possible to
             construe the legal fiction as simply as suggested by
             Mr. Lalit."

11.   Section 138 of the Act moreover provides for a penal provision. A

penal provision created by reason of a legal fiction must receive strict
                                     8


construction. [See R. Kalyani v. Janak C. Mehta and Ors. (2009) 1 SCC 516

and DCM Financial Services Ltd. v. J.N. Sareen and Anr. (2008) 8 SCC 1].

Such a penal provision, enacted in terms of the legal fiction drawn would be

attracted when a cheque is returned by the bank unpaid. Such non-payment

may either be: (i) because of the amount of money standing to the credit of

that account is insufficient to honour the cheque, or (ii) it exceeds the

amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with

that bank.


      Before a proceeding thereunder is initiated, all the legal requirements

therefor must be complied with. The court must be satisfied that all the

ingredients of commission of an offence under the said provision have been

complied with.


      The parameters for invoking the provisions of Section 138 of the Act,

thus, being limited, we are of the opinion that refusal on the part of the bank

to honour the cheque would not bring the matter within the mischief of the

provisions of Section 138 of the Act.


12.   The court while exercising its jurisdiction for taking cognizance of an

offence under Section 138 of the Act was required to consider only the

allegations made in the complaint petition and the evidence of the
                                      9


complainant and his witnesses, if any.        It could not have taken into

consideration the result of the complaint petition filed by the respondent No.

2 or the closer report filed by the Superintendent of Police in the First

Information Report lodged by the appellant against him.



13.   Before us a contention has been raised that the appellant did not have

sufficient funds in his bank account. Such an allegation has not been made

in the complaint petition. In any event, it was for the bank only to say so, as

the complainant is not supposed to have knowledge in regard to the amount

available in the account of the appellant.


14.   Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the

opinion that the complaint petition does not disclose an offence punishable

under Section 138 of the Act.


15.   For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment being

unsustainable is set aside. The appeal is allowed.




                                              ...............................J.
                                              [S.B. Sinha]
              10


                   ................................J.
                   [Dr. Mukundakam Sharma]
New Delhi;
May 5, 2009

