
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Haryana vs Rajesh Aggarwal on 20 August, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2218 OF 2011

                         State of Haryana                               ... Appellant(s)

                                                    Versus

                         Rajesh Aggarwal & Anr.                      ... Respondent(s)
                                             J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.


                         1)   This   appeal   is   filed   by   the   State   of   Haryana

                         against   the   final   judgment   and   order   dated

                         27.11.2006 passed by the High Court of Punjab &

                         Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Revision No.413

                         of 2001 whereby the High Court partly allowed the

                         petition filed by the respondents herein and altered
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.08.20
16:41:08 IST
Reason:


                                                                                             1
the   charge   framed   against   them   for   the   offence

punishable  under  Section 302 of the Indian Penal

Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”) to that

under Section 304­A IPC. 

2)    Few  facts  need to  be mentioned  infra  for  the

disposal of the appeal, which involves a short point.

3)    There is a private limited company called “M/s

Kee Pharma Private Limited” at Gurgaon (Haryana).

This   company   is   engaged   in   the   business   of

manufacture   of   chemical   drugs   in   their   factory   at

Gurgaon.

4)    The   respondents   are   said   to   be   the

shareholders/Directors   of   the   Company   and   are

responsible for the day­to­day affairs and working of

the Company and its factory.

5)    On 27.06.1996, a blast occurred in the factory

premises and as a result of which smoke spread in




                                                                  2
the   entire   factory.   When   the   blast   occurred,   45

workers were present in the factory.  They ran here

and there for their safety. This resulted in stampede

in the factory area causing death of seven workers. 

6)    This led to registration of FIR No.694 of 1996

on 27.06.1996 against the respondents in PS Sadar,

Gurgaon at the instance of some of the workers.  It

was   registered   against   the   respondents   being   the

persons   responsible for  the  affairs  and  running  of

the   Company   and   its   factory   for   commission   of

offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. 

7)    The   respondents,     questioning   the   legality   of

the   FIR   registered   against   them   for   the   offence

punishable under Section 302 IPC, filed a petition

under   Section   482   of   the   Code   of   Criminal

Procedure,   1973   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “the




                                                                 3
Cr.P.C.”) in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana

and sought its quashing. 

8)    By   impugned   order,   the   High   Court   partly

allowed the petition and altered the charge framed

against the respondents for the offence punishable

under Section 302 IPC to Section 304­A IPC. 

9)    The State felt aggrieved by the impugned order

and filed this appeal by way of special leave in this

Court.

10)   Heard Dr. Monika Gusain, learned counsel for

the   appellant­State   and   Mr.   Gopal   Singh,   learned

counsel for the respondents.

11)   The   short   question,   which   arises   for

consideration   in   this   appeal,   is   whether   the   High

Court   was   justified   in   partly   allowing   the   petition

and   thereby   was   justified   in   altering   the   charge

framed   against   the   respondents   for   the   offence




                                                                    4
punishable under Section 302 IPC to Section 304­A

IPC.

12)    Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

find no merit in the appeal.

13)    At   the   outset,   we   are   constrained   to   observe

that   the   trial   in  the   case  must  set  in   motion  and

conclude in terms of the direction of the High Court

for deciding as to whether any case under Section

304­A   IPC   has   been   made   out   against   the

respondents or not and, if so, what punishment can

be imposed on them for commission of such offence,

and if not, then why. In our opinion, the reasoning

and the conclusion arrived at by the High Court for

altering the charge for the offence from Section 302

to Section 304­A IPC at this stage cannot be faulted

with. 


                                                                    5
14)   It is really unfortunate that due to pendency of

this litigation and the stay operating, the trial in the

case   remained   stayed   for   all   these   years.   It

obviously   benefited   the   respondents   who,   despite

not   questioning   the   altering   of   the   charge   by   the

High   Court,   did   not   face   trial   even   for   altered

charge.  

15)   Without expressing any opinion on the factual

controversy on the said unfortunate incident, which

took the life of seven workers as the same is now

subject matter of trial before the Sessions Judge, we

direct the Sessions Judge, who is seized of the trial

of the respondents’ case in question, to ensure that

the   trial   is   completed   on   merits   within   one   year

from   the   date   of   this   order   strictly   in   accordance

with law.


                                                                     6
16)   Needless   to   observe,   depending   upon   the

evidence adduced by the prosecution, the Sessions

Judge   has   ample   power   to   alter/amend/add   any

charge by taking recourse to powers under Section

216 of the Cr.P.C. notwithstanding the High Court

altering the charge at this stage. 

17)   With these observations/directions, the appeal

fails   and   is   accordingly   dismissed.   The   order

granting interim stay is recalled.




                                                            7
18)     Registry is directed to send a copy of this order

forthwith   to   the   concerned   Sessions   Judge/Police

Station   for   ensuring   compliance   of   the   directions

contained in this order.


                  
                                ………...................................J.
                                  [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
                                    

                            …...……..................................J.
                              [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]

New Delhi;
August 20, 2018 




                                                                           8

