
Supreme Court of India
Surendra Mahto vs State Of Bihar on 26 July, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 211 of 2009

                                                1





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 211 OF 2009





            SURENDRA MAHTO                           .....          APPELLANT

                                             VERSUS

            STATE OF BIHAR                           .....          RESPONDENT





                                            O R D E R

         1.          This   appeal   arises   out   of   the   following   facts: 

         Ranjo   Devi   the   deceased   left   her   husband's   village   to 

         meet her parents on the 13th of December, 2001 along with 

         her   husband   the   appellant   herein.     As   the   two   reached 

         the market place in village Sakmohan at about 2:00p.m., 

         her   husband   stopped   to   rest   for   a   while.       Ranjo   Devi 

         also   met   her   mother   in   the   market   place   and   they   were 

         soon   joined   by   her   husband.     The   two   then   decided   to 

         return home and while they were on their way, they met 

         Manoj   Kumar   Pandit   a   friend   of   her   husband   in   village 

         Karak   Pethia.     Manoj   Kumar   Pandit   bought   some   kachari 

         and he along with her husband ate the same and then went 

         to   the   village   nearby   to   have   some   liquor.     At   about 


Crl.A. No. 211 of 2009

                                             2





         5:00a.m. Ranjo Devi asked her husband to move along as 

         home was some distance away but he replied that he would 

         stay   at   the   house   of   his   friend   Manoj   Kumar.     Manoj 

         Kumar, however, left for his residence followed by Ranjo 

         Devi   and   her   husband.     As   the   two   reached   near   the 

         railway   crossing   in   the   south   of   village   Karaka   the 

         appellant   asked   her   to   have   intercourse   with   him   and 

         despite   her   objections   that   they   should   not   indulge   in 

         any   such   activity   in   the   open   he   forced   himself   upon 

         her.     The   two   thereafter   proceeded   towards   village   Aka 

         Bishanpur   i.e.   the   village   of   Manoj   Kumar   Pandit   who 

         also   met   them   just   outside   the   village.     The   three, 

         accordingly,   went   on   together.     After   sometime   the 

         appellant   expressed   the   necessity   of   attending   to   the 

         call of nature.   Ranjo Devi told the appellant that she 

         would   sit   on   the   embankment   with   Manoj   but   the 

         appellant told her to come to  the river bank.  She was 

         thereafter forcibly undressed by the appellant and after 

         he   had   shut   her   mouth   he   called   out   to   Manoj   Kumar 

         Pandit to come running towards him.   She was thereafter 

         sexually   assaulted   by   the   appellant   followed   by   Manoj 

         Kumar   Pandit.     Manoj   Kumar   Pandit   thereafter   tied   her 

         hands with a plastic rope whereas the appellant took out 

         a   knife   and   gave   three   blows   on   her   neck   with   the 

         intention   of   killing   her.     She   was   thereafter   thrown 


Crl.A. No. 211 of 2009

                                              3





         into the river so that she might drown.   The appellant 

         as   well   as   Manoj   Kumar   Pandit   thereafter   moved   away 

         whereafter   Ranjo   Devi   who   was   still   alive,   managed   to 

         get out of the water to reach the toddy shop close by. 

         The   toddy   shop   owner   P.W.   2   and   her   husband   P.W.   3 

         thereafter gave her some clothes and also took her to a 

         local   doctor   and   informed   the   police   station   as   well. 

         Ranjo   Devi's   statement   was   recorded   in   village   Desai 

         Chowk at about 9:30p.m. on the 13th of December, 2001 in 

         which   she   gave   the   details   mentioned   above   and   further 

         stated that the appellant had sought to get rid of her 

         as he was having an affair with a girl in Delhi.  Ranjo 

         Devi   was   first   taken   to   the   Primary   Health   Centre   and 

         thereafter   to   the   Samastipur   District   Hospital   for 

         treatment.     She   then   returned   to   the   Primary   Health 

         Centre and then moved on to her parents' home where she 

         died   on   the   18th  of   December,   1991.     The   inquest 

         proceedings with respect to the death were subsequently 

         held   and   the   dead   body   was   sent   for   its   post   mortem 

         examination.   The doctor found that she had died due to 

         Scepticemia as a result of the injuries suffered by her. 

         The two accused i.e. the appellant before us and Manoj 

         Kumar   Pandit   were   also   arrested   and   ultimately   were 

         charged for offences punishable under Section 302/34 IPC 

         whereas   Manoj   Kumar   Pandit   was   charged   for   the   offence 


Crl.A. No. 211 of 2009

                                                4





         punishable under Section 376 IPC as well.  




         2.          The   prosecution   in   support   of   its   case   relied 

         primarily on the dying declaration of the deceased Ranjo 

         Devi   which   formed   the   basis   of   the   FIR   as   also   the 

         evidence of P.Ws. 2 and 3 who  supported the prosecution 

         case insofar as the injury suffered by her at the hands 

         of   the   two   accused   was   concerned   but   disowned   their 

         statements   under   Section   161   of   the   Code   of   Criminal 

         Procedure with respect to the allegations of rape. P.Ws. 

         7   and   9,   the   parents   of   the   deceased,   also   proved   the 

         dying   declaration   that   had   been   made   to   them   by   their 

         daughter   and   which   was   in   the   same   terms   as   the     FIR. 

         Some of the other witnesses who had been identified by 

         the   prosecution   were   also   declared   hostile.     The   trial 

         court   relying   on   the   dying   declarations,   partly   on   the 

         statements of P.Ws 2 and 3 as also on the statements of 

         P.Ws.   7   and   9   convicted   both   the   accused   for   the 

         offences under Section 302/34 and Manoj Kumar Panda for 

         the offence under Section 376 of the IPC as well.  Manoj 

         Kumar   Panda   was   awarded   two   sentences   of   life 

         imprisonment   for   the   two   offences.     The   trial   court 

         however, relying on a string of cases and in particular 

         on  Bachan Singh's case  held that the balance sheet with 

         respect   to   the   nature   of   the   incident   was   heavily 


Crl.A. No. 211 of 2009

                                              5





         weighted   against   the   accused   appellant   Surender   Mahto 

         inasmuch   that   he   had   been   instrumental   in   killing   his 

         wife   in   a   particularly   inhuman   and   gruesome   manner   and 

         had,   accordingly,   betrayed   the   trust   between   a   husband 

         and   wife   and   that   he   had   also   been   instrumental   in 

         exposing   her   to   rape   by   his   co-accused   and   that   the 

         motive   was   also   reprehensible   as   he   had   wanted   to   get 

         rid of her in order to marry his friend in Delhi.   The 

         trial   court   finally   held   that   the   murder   fell   in   the 

         rarest   of   rare   category.     A   sentence   of   death   was, 

         accordingly,   awarded   to   the   appellant.     The   matter   was 

         referred to the High Court for the confirmation of the 

         death   sentence   and   an   appeal   was   also   filed   by   the 

         appellant.   The High Court has confirmed the conviction 

         and sentence awarded by the trial court.   It appears to 

         be the conceded position that Manoj Kumar Panda, the co-

         accused, filed no appeal in the High Court.  The present 

         appeal has been filed by Surender Mahto alone.




         3.          We have gone through the evidence with the help of 

         the learned counsel.  We see that no fault can be found 

         in the conviction of the appellant in the light of the 

         dying declarations, the evidence of P.Ws. 2, 3, 7 and 9 

         as supported by the medical evidence.   The deceased had 

         made two dying declarations the first one to the police 


Crl.A. No. 211 of 2009

                                                6





         which   led   to   the   registration   of   the   First   Information 

         Report and the second to her parents.  


         4.          Much   argument   has   been   raised     by   the   learned 

         counsel for the parties as to whether the death sentence 

         in   such   a   matter   should   be   maintained   or   not.     It   is 

         true   that   the   incident   is   a   truly   reprehensible   one. 

         The   facts   have   been   set   out   above   and   need   not   be 

         reiterated,   but   we   notice   that   as   the   appellant   was   a 

         young man 30 years of age at the time of the incident, 

         there is a possibility  that he may at some stage of his 

         life have a reformation in his character.    We are also 

         told   that   the   appellant   has   a   young   daughter   from   his 

         late wife and that the child is presently being looked 

         after by her maternal grand mother.  We are cognizant of 

         the   fact   that   each   of   these   factors   taken   up 

         individually would not perhaps be sufficient to call for 

         a   commutation   of   the   sentence   awarded   but,   if 

         cumulatively taken, some extenuation in the sentence is 

         called   for.     At   the   same   time,   keeping   in   view   the 

         gravity of the offence we think that the award of a life 

         sentence simplicitor would not meet the ends of justice. 

         We, accordingly, feel that the death sentence should be 

         commuted   to   life   but   the   sentence   of   imprisonment   for 

         life   would   extend   to   the   full   life   of   the   appellant 


Crl.A. No. 211 of 2009

                                             7





         subject   to   the   statutory   and   constitutional   powers   of 

         the   State   Government   and   the   Governor   insofar   as 

         remission   and   commutation   etc.   are   concerned.     We   make 

         an order in the above terms.

                     The appeal is disposed of.


                                             .........................J
                                             [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                             .........................J
                                             [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]



         NEW DELHI
         JULY 26, 2011.



