
Supreme Court of India
Ram Singh & Ors vs Ram Niwas & Anr on 13 May, 2009Author: S Sinha
Bench: S.B. Sinha, Cyriac Joseph
                                                                      REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                  OF 2009
                  [Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.6723 of 2005]

Ram Singh & Ors.                                         .....Appellants

                                       Versus

Ram Niwas & Anr.                                         .....Respondents



                              JUDGMENT

S.B. Sinha, J.


1.    Leave granted.


2.    Scope and application of Section 319 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 (for short, `the Code') is in question in this appeal which

arises out of a judgment and order dated 16th November 2005 passed by a

learned Single Judge of the High Court of Rajasthan whereby and

whereunder the order dated 29th May 2003 passed by the learned Upper

District & Sessions Judge (Fast Track), Sikar, refusing to summon the

appellants herein as accused, was set aside.
                                       2
3.    A First Information Report (FIR) was lodged by the 1st respondent

alleging that his wife was attacked by nine persons including the five

appellants herein. His mother was also assaulted. When his father rushed to

their rescue, he was also surrounded by them and was assaulted as a result

whereof, he expired. Upon investigation, a final form was submitted in

favour of the appellants. A charge-sheet was filed only against four persons,

viz., Kishori, Jagdish, Sarjit and Sheo.


4.    Indisputably, a counter case had been filed.


5.    An application was filed on or about 01st April 1998 in terms of

Section 319 of the Code for summoning the appellants herein as accused.


      Before the learned Upper Distt. & Sessions Judge, a large number of

witnesses were examined and cross-examined on behalf of the accused

persons. By reason of an order dated 29th May 2003, the learned Upper

Distt. & Sessions Judge rejected the said application filed by the 1st

respondent herein opining that no case has been made out therefor. A

criminal miscellaneous petition filed by the 1st respondent before the High

Court against the order of the learned Upper Distt. & Sessions Judge,

however, has been allowed by reason of the impugned judgment, stating:
                          3

"The very ambit of section 319 Cr.P.C. is to
empower the trial court to take cognizance against
those persons who are alleged to have been
involved in an offence, but who have not been
arrayed as accused by the investigating agency
while filing the charge sheet. Section 319 Cr.P.C.
comes into effect once the evidence comes
trickling in during the course of trial against the
alleged offender. In case there is prima facie case
against the alleged offenders, the Court should take
cognizance against them. At the juncture of taking
cognizance, the court should not critically analyze
the evidence.        For the purpose of taking
cognizance, the existence of a prima facie case is
sufficient. It is only at a later stage that the trial
court is called upon to appreciate the evidence in
proper perspective. Moreover, the duty of the
court is not only to protect the innocent, but also to
punish the guilty. In case the jurisdiction under
section 319 Cr.P.C. is not exercised properly by
the trial Court, chances are that those who are
alleged in the offence might go scot free. The
society cannot be exposed to the dangers created
by those who take law in their own hands.

      Considering the fact that the large number of
witnesses have deposed against the respondents
No.2 to 6, a prima-facie case does not (sic) exist
against them for their involvement in the alleged
offence.    Thus, in our opinion, the learned
Magistrate should have exercised the jurisdiction
vested in him under section 319 Cr.P.C.

      We allow this petition and direct the learned
Addl. Sessions Judge to rehear the arguments of
the learned counsel for the petitioner and the
learned counsel for the State and pass the
necessary orders in accordance with section 319
Cr.P.C. within a period of two weeks from the date
                                       4

             of the receipt of the certified copy of this order and
             to expeditiously complete the trial as the trial has
             been hanging fire since 1996."


6.    Dr. Sushil Balwada, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellants would submit that the involvement of the appellants having not

been found by the learned Upper Sessions Judge, the High Court committed

a serious error in passing the impugned judgment.


7.    Mr. Sushil Kumar Jain, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

1st respondent, on the other hand, urged that although a final form was filed

in favour of the appellants, the same would not mean that the application for

summoning the accused was impermissible in law.


      It was urged that the learned Upper Sessions Judge committed a

serious error insofar as he failed to take into consideration that existence of a

prima facie case alone would subserve the requirements of the said

provision. It was urged that at that stage, the learned Upper Sessions Judge

should not have entered into the arena of appreciation of evidence.
                                     5
      In this regard, our attention has been drawn to the statements of

various witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution prior to the passing

of the order dated 29th May 2003.


8.    Before the learned Upper Sessions Judge, the respondent no.1 herein

was examined as P.W.2 on 23rd February 1998. He alleged involvement of

the appellants herein in the incident. He had also attributed certain overt

acts on their part, inter alia, contending that they had assaulted his father

with the reverse side of an axe (farsi). One Ramesh Kumar, brother of the

respondent no.1 was also examined as P.W. 7 on 22nd January 2003.

Similarly, one Kanesh, son of respondent no.1, examined himself as P.W.8

on 22nd January 2003.


9.    Mr. Naveen Kumar Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

State would submit that it was not permissible in law for the learned Upper

Sessions Judge to entertain an application under Section 319 of the Code

although they had not been charge-sheeted.


      We do not agree.


10.   Section 319 of the Code reads thus :
                                    6
            "319. Power to proceed against other persons
            appearing to be guilty of offence.-(1) Where, in
            the course of any inquiry into, or trial of, an
            offence, it appears from the evidence that any
            person not being the accused has committed any
            offence for which such person could be tried
            together with the accused, the Court may proceed
            against such person for the offence which he
            appears to have committed.

                  (2) Where such person is not attending
            the Court he may be arrested or summoned, as the
            circumstances of the case may require, for the
            purpose aforesaid.

                  (3) Any person attending the Court
            although not under arrest or upon a summons, may
            be detained by such Court for the purpose of the
            inquiry into, or trial of, the offence which he
            appears to have committed.

                  (4) Where the Court proceeds against any
            person under sub-section (1) then-

                  (a) the proceedings in respect of such
                  person shall be commenced afresh, and
                  witnesses re-heard;

                  (b) subject to the provisions of clause (a),
                  the case may proceed as if such person had
                  been an accused person when the Court took
                  cognizance of the offence upon which the
                  inquiry or trial was commenced."

11.   An application under the aforementioned provision would be

maintainable not only during pendency of an inquiry but also in the course
                                      7

of a trial. In the event, it appears from the evidence that any person, not

being an accused, has committed any offence for which he could be tried

together with the accused, the court may proceed against him for the offence

which he appears to have committed. The provision of Section 319 of the

Code confers an extraordinary power upon a court to summon a person who,

at the relevant time, was not being tried as an accused, subject, of course, to

fulfillment of the condition that it appears to the court that he had committed

an offence. A finding to that effect must be premised on the evidence that

had been brought on record.

12.   Indisputably, the court must satisfy itself about the existence of an

extraordinary situation enabling it to exercise an extraordinary jurisdiction.

It is true that the court is not denuded of its power to exercise the said

jurisdiction only because a person named as an accused in the FIR was not

charge-sheeted as a result whereof no cognizance has been taken against

him. What is necessary for the said purpose is that the person concerned

was not being tried as an accused before the Court at that stage.


13.   This Court in the case of Kailash v. State of Rajasthan [2008(3)

SCALE 338], has held that a glance of the provision would suggest that

during the trial it has to appear from the evidence that a person not being an
                                     8

accused has committed any offence for which such person could be tried

together with the accused who are also being tried. This Court has laid

emphasis on the words, `it appears from the evidence', `any person', and

`has committed any offence'. It was further held that the power under

Section 319 has to be essentially exercised only on the basis of the evidence

brought on record of the case.       The discretionary jurisdiction could,

therefore, be exercised only after the legal evidence comes on record and

from that evidence it appears that the concerned person has committed an

offence.


14.   In the case of Raj Kishore Prasad v. State of Bihar & Anr. [(1996) 4

SCC 495], this Court opined :


            "14. Learned counsel differ however on the other
            question posed in Kishun Singh case [Kishun
            Singh v. State of Bihar(1993) 2 SCC 16]. It was
            whether a Court of Session, to which a case is
            committed for trial by a Magistrate, could, without
            itself recording evidence, summon a person not
            named in the police report presented under Section
            173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, to
            stand trial along with those named therein; if not in
            exercise of power conferred by Section 319 of the
            Code, then under any other provision? The answer
            given was in the affirmative, on the basis of
            Section 193 of the Code, as it presently stands,
            providing that once the case is committed to the
            Court of Session by a Magistrate, the restriction
                                         9

                placed on the power of the Court of Session to take
                cognizance of an offence as a Court of Original
                Jurisdiction gets lifted, thereby investing the Court
                of Session unfettered jurisdiction to take
                cognizance of the offence which would include the
                summoning of the person or persons whose
                complicity in the crime can prima facie be
                gathered from the material available on the record.
                It is on this reasoning that this Court sustained the
                order of the Court of Session (though it ostensibly
                was under Section 319 CrPC terming material of
                investigation before it as `evidence') summoning
                the unnamed accused to stand trial with the named
                accused. A stage has thus been discovered, before
                the reaching of the stage for exercise of power
                under Section 319 CrPC, on the supposition and
                premise that it is pre-trial when the question of
                charge was being examined. Such power of
                summoning the new accused has been culled out
                from the power exercisable by the Court of Session
                under Sections 227 and 228 of the Code, enabling
                it to discharge under Section 227 or charge under
                Section 228 the accused persons before it and
                while so to summon another accused involved in
                the commission of the crime, prima facie
                appearing from the material available on record of
                the case. Thus at a stage posterior to the stage
                envisaged under Section 319, the Court of Session
                has been held empowered to summon an accused if
                a prima facie case is made out from the material
                available on the record."

15.   In the case of Rakesh & Anr. v. State of Haryana [(2001) 6 SCC 248],

it was held :
                                     10
            "11. In support of his contention, learned Senior
            Counsel Mr. Ranjit Kumar referred to the decision
            of this Court in Joginder Singh v. State of Punjab
            (1979) 1 SCC 345. In our view, this decision
            nowhere lays down that before a person is added
            as accused in a sessions trial case, he should be
            permitted to cross-examine the witnesses whose
            evidence is recorded. On the contrary, it lays
            down that once the Sessions Court is seized of the
            matter as a result of the committal order against
            some accused the power under Section 319(1) can
            come into play and the court can add any person,
            not an accused before it, as an accused and direct
            him to be tried along with other accused. The
            Court has further observed that the very purpose of
            enacting Section 319(1) clearly shows that even
            persons who have been dropped by the police
            during investigation but against whom evidence
            showing their involvement in the offence comes
            before the criminal court are included in the
            expression `any person not being the accused'."

16.   We must, however, at this stage also place on record that this Court, in

the case of Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ram Kishan Rohtagi & Ors.

[(1983) 1 SCC 1], opined that the power under the said provision must be

exercised very sparingly and not as a matter of course. In the case of

Joginder Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab & Anr. [(1979) 1 SCC 345], this

Court even opined that such a power can be exercised even without there

being a committal order passed against a person. [see also Lok Ram v.

Nihal Singh & Anr. [(2006) 10 SCC 192]; Shashikant Singh v. Tarkeshwar
                                     11

Singh & Anr. [(2002) 5 SCC 738]; Michael Machado & Anr. v. Central

Bureau of Investigation & Anr. [(2000) 3 SCC 262]; Palanisamy Gounder &

Anr. v. State represented by Inspector of Police [(2005) 12 SCC 327];

Kailash Dwivedi v. State of M.P. & Anr. [(2005) 11 SCC 182] and Mohd.

Shafi v. Mohd. Rafiq & Anr. [2007(5) SCALE 611].


17.   The High Court, in our opinion, however, has committed a serious

error in proceeding on the premise that mere existence of a prima facie case

would be sufficient to exercise the court's jurisdiction under Section 319 of

the Code.    We have noticed hereinbefore the importance of the word

`appears'.   What is, therefore, necessary for the court is to arrive at a

satisfaction that the evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution, if

unrebutted, would lead to conviction of the persons sought to be added as

accused in the case.


18.   The High Court furthermore committed a serious error insofar as it

failed to take into consideration that when the order dated 29th May 2003

was passed, the learned Judge was in a position to consider the evidence

brought on record including the cross-examination of the prosecution

witnesses. The High Court did not arrive at any finding that a case has been
                                      12

made out for exercise of such an extraordinary jurisdiction which, in terms

of the judgments of this Court, is required to be exercised very sparingly.


19.   For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment is set aside.

The appeal is allowed.


                                              .....................................J.
                                              [S.B. Sinha]



                                               .....................................J.
                                              [Cyriac Joseph]
New Delhi;
May 13, 2009.

