
Supreme Court of India
Boby Mathew vs State Of Karnataka on 27 August, 2009Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Aftab Alam
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.        988 OF 2004




              BOBBY MATHEW                              .....            APPELLANT

                                       VERSUS

            STATE OF KARNATAKA                          .....            RESPONDENT




                                     O R D E R

            We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.

            Several reasons have been advanced by the High Court

to indicate that the chain of circumstances against the

appellant were complete.         These circumstances are:

            (I)     close acquaintance of deceased and the accused

including visiting each others houses due to common bondage

of hobby in photograph;

            (ii)    On 19th accused had called the deceased to come

to his house on the next date;

            (iii)   The deceased leaving his house in the morning

of   20th    informing    P.W.   7   his   wife   and    P.W.   8   a   close

acquaintance that he is going to the house of the accused;
         (iv)     The dead body of Dr. Ravish being discovered

in the room of first floor of the house bearing No. 278,

Sadanandnagar, NGEF Layout of which P.W. 5 is admittedly the

owner    and    that   room    being    in   exclusive        possession    and

occupation of the accused where the dead body was found;

         (v)      On 20th and admittedly even from 15th to 21st,

it was only the accused and P.W. 4 who were in the house, as

P.W. 5 and his wife had left the house to go to Kerala;

         (vi) The dead body of Dr. Ravish was found tied to a

cot inside the room and body bearing as many as 31 injuries

all over, out of which the injuries in the head region being

ante mortem and fatal in nature.

         We have heard the learned counsel on each of these

circumstances and find that the judgment sof the trial court

as well as the High Court have considered all aspects and

arrived at a correct conclusion.               Learned counsel for the

appellant,      however,      pointed   out     that     in    view    of   the

circumstances it appears that the appellant was not mentally

sound; as for the order made by this Court from time to time

some    extenuation      ,    therefore,      was   to   be    given   to   the

appellant.      We find, however, that question of any insanity

does not arise as this was never pleaded on behalf of the

accused-appellant at any stage.               Under Section 84 of the

Indian Penal Code, 1860, in order to get the benefit of
insanity or unsoundness of mind the accused is liable to

show that on the day of the incident the accused was not in

sound condition.


      The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.             The appellant

is stated to be on bail.     It is directed that he be taken on

custody   forthwith   to   undergo   the   remaining   part   of   the

sentence.


                                              ..................J
                                              [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                              ..................J
                                              [AFTAB ALAM]

NEW DELHI
AUGUST 27, 2009.

