
Supreme Court of India
Asim Shariff vs National Investigation Agency on 1 July, 2019Author: Rastogi
                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 949 OF 2019
                                (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No(s). 1253 of 2019)




         ASIM SHARIFF                                             ….Appellant(s)


                                   VERSUS


         NATIONAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY                           …Respondent(s)




                                            JUDGMENT

         Rastogi, J.


         1.              Leave granted.

         2.              The present appeal has been preferred by the accused

         appellant against whom a criminal case bearing no. RC 04/16­

         NIA­HYD came to be registered along with four other accused

         persons for the offences punishable under Sections 120­B, 109,
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV


         150, 153A, 302, 201 read with Section 34 of IPC; Sections 3 and
Date: 2019.07.01
16:29:26 IST
Reason:


         27 of the Arms Act and Sections 15,16,17,18 & 20 of the

                                                                                   1
Unlawful    Activities(Prevention)   Act,   1967(hereinafter   being

referred to as “UAP Act”).


3.   After completion of the investigation, final report was

submitted before the trial Court against the accused persons

including appellant.    The appellant claims that there was no

material for registering the criminal case neither investigating nor

submitting the final report against him.        At this stage, the

appellant filed application under Section 227 of Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973(hereinafter being referred to as “CrPC”) seeking

his discharge from the case for the aforesaid offences.         The

application was dismissed by the trial Judge/Special Judge who

ordered for framing of charges against him for the aforesaid

offences under Order dated 2 nd January, 2018 came to be

challenged by the appellant in a writ petition filed under Article

226 and 227 of Constitution of India read with Section 482 CrPC

which was dismissed by a lucid impugned judgment dated 22 nd

November, 2018 which is a subject matter of challenge in the

instant appeal.


                                                                   2
4.    The background facts giving rise to this appeal which needs

to be noted are that a criminal case came to be registered as

Crime No. 124/2016 on 16th October, 2016 for the offences

punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC by

Commercial Street Police after a complaint was filed by one

Jayaram(CW­1), who stated that on 16 th October, 2016 at around

12.40 p.m. when he along with his friends namely Rudresh,

Harikrishna and Kumar assembled near Srinivas Medical Stores,

Shivajinagar, one person(accused) being the pillion rider of the

motorcycle hacked Rudresh with a sharp edged and lethal

machete on the right side of his neck and fled.         Rudresh was

taken to a hospital wherein he was declared brought dead.



5.    Initially, four accused persons (Accused nos. 1 to 4) were

arrested on 27th October, 2016. Accused no. 5(appellant herein)

was arrested on 2nd November, 2016. Subsequently, the task of

investigation was entrusted to National Investigating Agency(NIA)

by the Union of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi on 7 th

December, 2016. NIA registered FIR in RC No. 24/2016 against

all   five   accused   persons   including   the   appellant.   After

                                                                    3
investigation, the charge sheet was submitted against all five

accused persons on 21st April, 2017 which stated that accused

nos. 1 to 4 conspired with the accused appellant(accused no. 5)

to kill RSS members and in furtherance of their acts, they

committed offence punishable under Sections 302, 201 read with

Section 34 IPC.     The accused persons were said to be in

possession of weapons without license, thereby it attracted the

offence punishable under Sections 3 and 27 of the Arms Act.

Further, the acts of the accused persons including the accused

appellant amounted to offences punishable under Sections 120B,

109, 150, 153A, 302, 201 read with Section 34 IPC and under

Sections 16(1)(a), 18 and 20 of the UAP Act.



6.   The appellant sought discharge under Section 227 CrPC

along with other accused persons which came to be rejected vide

order dated 2nd January, 2018 and framed charges against the

accused persons including accused appellant. Special NIA Court

under its Order dated 2nd January, 2018 while deciding the

application of appellant seeking discharge under Section 227

CrPC observed that it was admitted by the defence counsel that

the appellant is the President of Bengaluru unit of Popular Front

                                                                4
of India(PFI) and the other accused persons nos. 1 to 4 are also

the members of PFI. It was also admitted by the defence counsel

that there was frequent telephonic/mobile phone conversation

among the accused persons nos. 1 to 5 prior and subsequent to

16th October, 2016(the date of the incident) which gave rise to the

Special NIA Court to arrive at a conclusion that the material

placed in the charge­sheet on record gives rise to sufficient

grounds of subjective satisfaction of prima facie case of alleged

offence of conspiracy being hatched among the accused persons.

It further observed that the accused appellant has failed to justify

the necessary ingredients of Section 227 CrPC and finally held

that the matter deserved to be proceeded with framing of charge.

The said order came to be affirmed by the High Court on

dismissal of the writ petition preferred by the unsuccessful

appellant vide its impugned judgment dated 22 nd November,

2018.


7.   Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, learned counsel for the appellant

submits that the impugned judgment has resulted in grave

miscarriage   of   justice   and   is   based   on   an   erroneous

interpretation of the factual circumstances of the case and the

                                                                   5
High Court has not taken into consideration the oral and

documentary evidence on record in the proper perspective which

has vitiated the entire proceedings and led to gross injustice.



8.   Learned counsel further submits that the bare reading of

the extract of charge sheet reveals that the prosecution has failed

to adduce evidence which was against the appellant. That CW 1

to 53, 55 to 76, 78 to 86, 86­92, 94 to 96 and 98 to 112 did not

whisper anything against the appellant and the other witnesses

relied by the prosecution to make out a case against him are the

witnesses of the Mahzar proceedings who provided some

information like bank account details and call data records,

which in no way discloses any incriminating material against the

appellant.


9.   According to the learned counsel, the charge against the

appellant is without any basis and merely on suspicion as there

is nothing to reveal that the appellant was the main conspirator

behind the alleged murder termed as a terror attack.              The

allegation that he planned the conspiracy along with other PFI

members to kill RSS members and arranged conspiracy meetings

                                                                    6
and executed the plan of striking terror among a section of people

belonging to RSS is concocted and without any substance as

nothing incriminating has been recovered from the appellant or

to support the prosecution story and in the given circumstances,

rejecting his application for discharge under Section 227 CrPC by

the trial Judge and affirmed by the High Court is not sustainable

in law.


10.   Learned counsel further submits that though the alleged

incident as per the case of prosecution has been planned and

executed on the last day of Navaratri being Vijayadashmi whereas

it is a matter of record that the Navaratri was already over on the

said date and the Vijayadashmi was on 11th October, 2016 and

the alleged incident was on 16th October, 2016.           Such a

statement was made just to prejudice the mind of the Court to

frame charge against the appellant which is unreasonable and

unjustified and this has not been looked into and appreciated by

the High Court in its impugned judgment.


11.   Learned counsel further submits that none of the accused

in this case are the member of any terrorist organisation which

                                                                  7
are banned under the schedule of UAP Act and, therefore, the

question   of   invocation   of   UAP   Act,   after   completion   of

investigation, was not attracted and at least the charge framed

against him for the offences under UAP Act was not legally

sustainable in law.


12.   Per contra, Mr. Aman Lekhi, learned ASG appearing for the

respondent with his usual vehemence submits that Section 15 of

UAP Act covers both the act of an individual and a terrorist

gang/association and as per Section 20 of the UAP Act, it is not

necessary for an association/organisation to be included in the

schedule, for punishing a terrorist act carried out by them.



13.   Learned counsel further submits that the incident occurred

on a day when the RSS workers had organised a path sanchalan,

and the deceased, who was dressed in uniform, was brutually

attacked by the accused persons whereby his throat was slit in a

single blow, resulting in his immediate death. Admittedly, there

is no animosity between the appellant and deceased. The nature

of the act including the recoveries made shows that the

consequences were intended to be beyond the physical act itself

                                                                     8
and was to create fear in the minds of the people at large and to

create insecurity and foster disharmony.



14.   Learned counsel further submits that the series of evidence

reveals the appellant’s involvement in the commission of crime:­



       i)     Appellant is the District President of the Popular
              Front of India(PFI) which has been involved in
              killings of several RSS members/Hindu leaders in
              Karnataka in the past three years.

       ii)    Seizure of banner dated 12th December, 2016
              which bore the names and photograph of all the
              accused including the accused appellant.

       iii)   Several telephone exchanges between accused no.
              1 to 4 and the accused appellant.

       iv)    Disclosure report dated 4th November, 2016 which
              reveals that a leather purse containing a letter
              written by accused no. 4 was discovered at the
              office of the appellant, wherein accused no. 4 list
              out 17 murders committed by PFI in near past
              with a note as to why the murder of deceased
              Rudresh had attracted so much attention as
              compared to other murders.

       v)     Investigation revealed that about 8­9 months prior
              to the incident, all the accused had attended
              indoctrination classes organised by accused
              appellant and other members where accused
              persons were recruited and brainwashed by the
              appellant to kill RSS members.

       vi)    Accused no. 4 confesses that accused appellant
              was the mastermind behind the killing of RSS
              members.


                                                                    9
15.     Learned counsel further submits that there is a strong

suspicion which leads the Court to think that the appellant has

committed an offence which clearly borne out from the charge­

sheet placed on record and the trial Court rightly held that the

prima facie case was made out against the appellant and after

the matter has been elaborately considered by the High Court in

revisiting the factual matrix taken note by the trial Court under

its Order dated 2nd January, 2018, no interference at least is

called for in the appeal preferred at the instance of the appellant.



16.     Before we proceed to examine the facts of the present case,

it may be apposite to take note of the ambit and scope of the

powers of the Court at the time of considering the discharge

application. This Court in Union of India Vs. Prafulla Kumar

Samal & Ors.1 had an occasion to consider the scope of Section

227 CrPC and it held in paragraph 7 as under:­

             “7. Section 227 of the Code runs thus:

                “If, upon consideration of the record of the
             case and the documents submitted therewith,
             and after hearing the submissions of the
             accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the
             Judge considers that there is not sufficient
             ground for proceeding against the accused, he

1   1979(3) SCC 4

                                                                   10
               shall discharge the accused and record his
               reasons for so doing.”

           The words “not sufficient ground for proceeding against
           the accused” clearly show that the Judge is not a mere
           post office to frame the charge at the behest of the
           prosecution, but has to exercise his judicial mind to
           the facts of the case in order to determine whether a
           case for trial has been made out by the prosecution. In
           assessing this fact, it is not necessary for the court to
           enter into the pros and cons of the matter or into a
           weighing and balancing of evidence and probabilities
           which is really his function after the trial starts. At the
           stage of Section 227, the Judge has merely to sift the
           evidence in order to find out whether or not there is
           sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
           The sufficiency of ground would take within its fold the
           nature of the evidence recorded by the police or the
           documents produced before the court which ex facie
           disclose that there are suspicious circumstances
           against the accused so as to frame a charge against
           him.”



     17.       In   Sajjan      Kumar        Vs.    Central        Bureau   of

     Investigation2, this Court had an occasion to consider the

     scope of Section 227 and 228 CrPC.                The principles which

     emerged therefrom have been taken note of in para 21 as

     under:­

           “21. On consideration of the authorities about the scope of
           Sections 227 and 228 of the Code, the following principles
           emerge:

                 (i) The Judge while considering the question of
                 framing the charges under Section 227 CrPC has
                 the undoubted power to sift and weigh the
                 evidence for the limited purpose of finding out
                 whether or not a prima facie case against the
                 accused has been made out. The test to

2   2010(9) SCC 368

                                                                            11
determine prima facie case would depend upon
the facts of each case.

(ii) Where the materials placed before the court
disclose grave suspicion against the accused
which has not been properly explained, the court
will be fully justified in framing a charge and
proceeding with the trial.

(iii) The court cannot act merely as a post office or
a mouthpiece of the prosecution but has to
consider the broad probabilities of the case, the
total effect of the evidence and the documents
produced before the court, any basic infirmities,
etc. However, at this stage, there cannot be a
roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter
and weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a
trial.

(iv) If on the basis of the material on record, the
court could form an opinion that the accused might
have committed offence, it can frame the charge,
though for conviction the conclusion is required to
be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused has committed the offence.

(v) At the time of framing of the charges, the
probative value of the material on record cannot
be gone into but before framing a charge the court
must apply its judicial mind on the material placed
on record and must be satisfied that the
commission of offence by the accused was
possible.

(vi) At the stage of Sections 227 and 228, the
court is required to evaluate the material and
documents on record with a view to find out if the
facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value
disclose the existence of all the ingredients
constituting the alleged offence. For this limited
purpose, sift the evidence as it cannot be
expected even at that initial stage to accept all that
the prosecution states as gospel truth even if it is
opposed to common sense or the broad
probabilities of the case.

(vii) If two views are possible and one of them
gives rise to suspicion only, as distinguished from


                                                         12
             grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be empowered
             to discharge the accused and at this stage, he is
             not to see whether the trial will end in conviction or
             acquittal.”




18.   The exposition of law on the subject has been further

considered by this Court in State Vs. S. Selvi and Ors.3 followed

in Vikram Johar Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.4



19.   Taking note of the exposition of law on the subject laid

down by this Court, it is settled that the Judge while considering

the question of framing charge under Section 227 CrPC in

sessions cases(which is akin to Section 239 CrPC pertaining to

warrant cases) has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the

evidence for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a

prima facie case against the accused has been made out; where

the material placed before the Court discloses grave suspicion

against the accused which has not been properly explained, the

Court will be fully justified in framing the charge; by and large if

two views are possible and one of them giving rise to suspicion

only, as distinguished from grave suspicion against the accused,


3 2018(13) SCC 455
4 2019(6) SCALE 794

                                                                      13
the trial Judge will be justified in discharging him.   It is thus

clear that while examining the discharge application filed under

Section 227 CrPC, it is expected from the trial Judge to exercise

its judicial mind to determine as to whether a case for trial has

been made out or not. It is true that in such proceedings, the

Court is not supposed to hold a mini trial by marshalling the

evidence on record.


20.   If we advert to the facts of the instant case, initially a

criminal case came to be registered in Crime No. 124/2016 on

16th October, 2016 for the offences punishable under Section

302, 34 of IPC by Commercial Street Police over the murder of

one Rudresh.    Initially, four accused persons were arrested in

connection with the crime. Subsequently, National Investigation

Agency(NIA) registered first information in R.C. No. 24/2016

including the appellant­Asim Shariff (accused no. 5) in the list of

the accused. The task of investigation was entrusted to NIA by

the Union of India, Ministry of Home Affairs(Internal Security­1

Division), North Block, New Delhi through its orders dated 7 th

December, 2016 as per Section 6(5) read with Section 8 of the

National Investigation Act.   In obedience to the said order, the

                                                                 14
NIA, Hyderabad Branch, registered the case in RC 04/16­NIA­

HYD for the offences punishable under Sections 120B, 109, 150,

153A, 302, 201 read with Section 34 IPC; Sections 3 and 27 of

the Arms Act and Sections 15, 16, 17, 18 & 20 of the UAP Act.



21.   After completion of the investigation, final report was

submitted before the trial Court against the accused persons 1 to

5 on 21st April, 2017. At this stage, the application filed by the

accused appellant under Section 227 CrPC seeking his discharge

from the charge for the aforesaid offences came to be dismissed

by the trial Court, after recording cogent reasons and order of

framing charge against him and other accused persons (accused

nos. 1 to 4) under its Order dated 12 th January, 2018.                The

extract of the order is as follows:­



      “22. It is needless to mention herein that this Court has
      already taken the cognizance of offences alleged and it is
      needless to mention herein that obtaining of sanction is
      condition precedent as on the date of taking cognizance
      of the offences alleged. That the Sanction having been
      obtained by the NIA at the time of cognizance of alleged
      offences and the cognizance having been already taken by
      this Court, this court is of the firm view that it is not good
      to pass any orders in respect of sanction for the simplest
      reason that passing of any orders with regard to
      genuineness or otherwise of sanction, the same would
      amounts to an act of usurping of appellate or revisional
      jurisdiction. That the order of taking cognizance is intact

                                                                        15
        even on this day. Therefore, for the reasons assigned in
        these paragraphs and in the preceding paragraphs of this
        order, NIA has established that material adduced by it
        are sufficient enough to proceed with the case and that
        the same do give subjective satisfaction of existence of
        prima­facie case of alleged offences. Therefore, the
        subject matter of Point No.2 deserves to be answered in
        the Negative, that of Point No.3 deserves to be answered
        in the affirmative and that of point No.4 in the Negative
        and the said points are hereby answered accordingly.
        This court proceeds to pass the following:


                                 ORDER

             The application filed under Section 227 Cr.P.C. by
        the accused No.5 is hereby dismissed. That the case on
        hand deserves to be proceeded with framing of charge in
        respect of alleged offences as mentioned in the charge
        sheet as against all the accused persons.”



22.   The unsuccessful appellant filed writ petition under Article

226 and 227 of the Constitution of India read with Section 482

CrPC.     The High Court after analysing the entire material on

record confirmed the view expressed by the trial Judge and held

as under:­

          “ No doubt the present petition is invoking writ
          jurisdiction under the Constitution of India and
          inherent powers of this Court, regard being had to the
          fact that in the earlier round of litigation, the stand of
          the petitioner was specifically negatived by the orders
          of this Court. The matter has been urged, assessed and
          adjudicated in the proceedings and again the petitioner
          has come for the next round. On facts or in law there is
          no material worth to suggest fallibility of the
          proceedings in Spl. C.C. No.181/2017 pending on the
          file of XLIX Addl. City Civil & Sessions Judge (Special
          Court of trial of NIA cases) at Bengaluru for the
          offences punishable u/S 302, 201 r/w Sec. 34 of IPC
          and Section 3 and 27 of Arms Act and under Section

                                                                       16
15, 16, 17, 18 and         20   of   Unlawful   Activities
        (Prevention) Act, 1967.”



23.   That apart, we have also gone through the relevant record

and extract of the charge­sheet placed on record for perusal, the

fact reveals that the accused appellant is the President of

Bengaluru unit of Popular Front of India(PFI) and the other

accused nos. 1 to 4 are also the members of PFI. It reveals from

the charge­sheet that there was frequent telephonic/mobile

conversation   between     appellant(accused       no.    5)   with   other

accused persons(accused nos. 1 to 4) prior and subsequent to

16th October, 2016 (the alleged date of incident) which persuaded

the Court to arrive to a conclusion that there is a prima facie

material of conspiracy among the accused persons giving rise to

sufficient grounds of subjective satisfaction of prima facie case of

alleged offences of conspiracy being hatched among the accused

persons and truth & veracity of such conspiracy is to be

examined during the course of trial.


24.   After going through the records and the judgment impugned

before us, in the present facts and circumstances, we find no

error in the judgment passed by the trial Court and confirmed by

                                                                         17
the High Court by the impugned judgment dated 22 nd November,

2018 which calls for our interference.


25.   We make it clear that what has been observed by this Court

is only for the purpose of disposal of the present appeal and any

observations made shall either way not prejudice the rights of the

parties during the course of trial and the trial Court may also not

to be influenced/inhibited by the observations made by us and

proceed with the trial independently in accordance with law.

26.   With these observations, the appeal is dismissed.

27.   Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.



                                            ………………………..J.
                                            (A.M. KHANWILKAR)


                                            ………………………..J.
                                            (AJAY RASTOGI)
New Delhi
July 01, 2019




                                                                 18

