
Supreme Court of India
Mullagiri Vajram And Ors vs State Of Andhra Pradesh on 15 October, 1992Bench: [Kuldip Singh Kasliwal, Jj.]
           PETITIONER:
MULLAGIRI VAJRAM AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/10/1992

BENCH:
[KULDIP SINGH AND N.M. KASLIWAL, JJ.]




ACT:
Criminal  Law:
Indian Penal Code, 1860:
Sections  149  and  302-Murder-Conviction  of  the  accused-
Confirmation of	 by High  Court-Whether valid-Identification
of accused-Reliance  placed on	evidence of  eye witness of-
Whether proper-name  of one  of the accused not mentioned in
Statements recorded  either under Section 164 Cr. P.C. or at
the inquest-Whether accused entitled to benefit of doubt.



HEADNOTE:
Twelve	persons,   including   the   appellants,   were
challaned for  the murder  of Sarpanch of a village. Relying
on the evidence of P.Ws. 1,2 and 7 in toto and that of P.W.3
to some extent, the Sessions Judge convicted all the accused
persons for the offences under Section 302 read with Section
149 I.P.C. and awarded sentence of imprisonment for life and
other minor terms of imprisonment for other offences.
On appeal,  the High Court set aside the conviction and
sentence of  seven accused persons, namely, A-4, A-5, A-8 to
12 and	confirmed  the	conviction  of	the  remaining	five
accused persons,  A-1, A-6  and A-7  under Section  302 read
with Section  149 I.P.C.  and sentenced them to imprisonment
for life.
These five  accused filed  an appeal, by special leave,
before this  Court. During the pendency of the appeal one of
the accused-appellants	died and as such appeal filed by him
was dismissed as having abated.
On behalf  of the accused persons it was submitted that
even if	 the statement	of P.W. 2 was taken to be correct no
offence was  made out  so far  as accused A-3 was concerned,
inasmuch as P.W.2 had admitted in the cross-examination that
he did	not state  the name of A-3 in his statement recorded
under Section  164 Cr.	P.C., and  that the  name of A-3 was
also not  found in  Exhibit  D-7,  the	statement  of  P.W.2
recorded at  the inquest,  and that  since P.W.2 had gone to
police station	seven or  eight times  after  the  incident,
there was  a possibility  of his seeing the accused, A-2 and
A-7 in	the police  lock-up  and  hence	 the  identification
parades held had no value.
Disposing of the appeal, this Court,
HELD:  1.1.  There  is	no  infirmity  at  all	in  the
reasoning and  conclusions arrived  at by  the High Court so
far as accused A-1, A-2 and A-7 are concerned.[24-B]
1.2  It is established beyond any manner of doubt that there
were two  factions and	long standing rivalry in between the
two groups  in the  village. The accused persons belonged to
the group headed by A-6, A-7 and the deceased was the leader
of  the	 other	group.	The  deceased  was  given  merciless
beatings and was done to death in the midnight. He was found
to have	 26 external  injuries as recorded in the autopsy of
his dead  body conducted  by the  Doctor. It  has also	been
found established  by the trial court as well as by the High
Court that  A-1 inflicted  injuries by	an axe	and A-2 by a
spear and  A-7 was  among the  other persons  who  inflicted
injuries buy  a stick.	It has	also come in the evidence of
P.W.19,	  Inspector of	Police, that the accused persons had
absconded  and	 after	a  few	days  of  the  incident,  on
information, he,  alongwith mediators,	visited the  village
and the	 absconded accused  were hiding in the house of A-7.
He surrounded the house with hes staff, guarded it and found
therein, the  twelve  persons  against	whom  the  case	 was
challaned. It  has also	 been proved by the prosecution that
A-7  was  the  leader  of  the	rival  faction	against	 the
deceased. [23-F-H, 24-A]
1.3. The High  Court has considered the prosecution evidence
in detail  and has  placed reliance  on	 the  statements  of
P.Ws.1 to 4 as eye-witnesses of the incident. The High Court
has placed  implicit reliance  on the  testimony of P.W.2. a
clerk in  the deceased's office, and who had accompanied the
deceased in  an autorickshaw and seen the incident. There is
no infirmity  in the  Statement of  P.W.2 and the High Court
has rightly placed reliance on his evidence. [22-D,E]
1.4. P.W.2 himself  admitted at	 the  time  of	holding	 the
identification parade that he had prior acquaintance with A-
2 and A-7. P.W.2 is a witness of sterling worth and both the
trial court  and the  High Court have placed reliance on his
testimony. He  had identified A-1, A-2 and A-7 in the Court.
Their conviction  is not  based on the identification parade
but on	the statement  of P.W.1	 and P.W.2  made during	 the
trial as eye-witness. [23-E]
1.5. A perusal	of the	statement of P.W.2 shows that he did
not make  a mention  of the  name of  A-3 in  his  statement
recorded  under	 Section  164  Cr.  P.c.  and  also  in	 his
statement, Exhibit  D-7, recorded  at the  inquest.  In	 the
circumstances, the  circumstances, the	accused A-3  is also
entitled to the benefit of doubt. [22-G]
1.6. In the  result, A-3  is acquitted	of all	the  charges
levelled against him, and the conviction and sentence of the
other appellants, A-1, A-2 and A-7 are confirmed. [24-c]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
483 of 1980.
     From the Judgment and Order dated 6.11.79 of the Andhra
     Pradesh High Court in Crl. A. No. 789 of 1979.
     T.V.S.R.  Krishna	 Sastry,  Vishnu   Mathur  and	V.B.
Saharya, Amicus curiee (NP) for the Appellants.
     G. Prabhakar for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     KASLIWAL, J.  Twelve persons  were	 challaned  for	 the
murder of  Nethala Veeraswamy,	a resident  and Sarpanch  of
village Ramaraogudem  in Eluru Taluq, West Godavari District
(A.P.) in  the night  of 31.12.1977. Learned Sessions Judge,
West Godavari  Division, Eluru tried the case and relying on
the evidence  of P.Ws. 1,2 and 7 in toto and the evidence of
P.W.3 to  some extent  convicted all the accused persons for
the offences charged under Section 302 read with Section 149
I.P.C. and awarded each one of them sentence of imprisonment
for life  and other  minor terms  of imprisonment  for other
offences. On  appeal the High Court set aside the conviction
and  sentence  of  seven  accused  persons,  namely,  Dasari
Bhaskara  Rao  (A-4),  Kali  China  Krishna  (A-5),  Namburi
Lakshmana (A-8),  Namburi Ramulu  (A-9), Namburi Prasada Rao
(A-10), Mada  Govardhana Rao  (A-11) and Kali Kamaka Rao (A-
12).  The   High  Court	 confirmed  the	 conviction  of	 the
remaining five	accused persons Mullagiri Vajram (A-1), Mada
Lakshmandas (A-6)  and Gandi Abraham (A-7) under Section 302
read  with   Section  149   I.P.C.  and	 sentenced  them  to
imprisonment for  life. The  High Court further held that as
these accused  had been sentenced for the main offence under
Section 302  read with	Section 149 I.P.C. there was no need
of separate sentence under Sections 148 and 147 I.P.C.
     The five  accused A-1,  A-2, A-3,	A-6 &  A-7 have come
before this  Court in  appeal against  the order of the High
Court by  grant of  Special Leave.  Mada  Lakshmandas  (A-6)
expired during	the pendency  of appeal before this Court as
such the  appeal filed by him was dismissed as having abated
by order dated 8.4.1992. We are now concerned in this appeal
with the four accused appellants A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-7.
     We have  gone through  the Judgment of the lower courts
and  have   perused  the  record  and  have  considered	 the
arguments advanced  by learned	counsel for the parties. The
High Court has considered the prosecution evidence in detail
and has placed reliance on the statements of P.Ws. 1,2,3 and
4 as  eye-witnesses of	the incident.  The  High  Court	 has
placed implicit	 reliance on  the testimony of P.W.2 and who
was a  clerk working in the panchayat office of Ramaraogudem
and had	 accompanied the deceased in an autorickshaw and had
seen the  incident. We find no infirmity in the statement of
P.W.2 and  the High Court has rightly placed reliance on his
evidence.
     Learned counsel  for the accused persons submitted that
even if	 the statement	of P.W.2  is taken to be correct, no
offence is  made out  so far  as accused (A-3) is concerned.
Learned counsel	 in this regard submitted that P.W.2  in the
cross examination  has admitted	 that he  did not  state the
name of	 A-3 in	 his statement	recorded under	Section	 164
Cr.P.C. It was also submitted that though P.W. 2 stated that
he had	given the  name of  A-3 in his statement recorded at
the inquest  but the  name of  A-3 does	 not find mention in
exhibit D-7,  the  statement  of  P.W.2	   recorded  at	 the
inquest. We see force in the aforesaid contention. A perusal
of the	statement of  P.W.2 shows  that he  did not  make  a
mention of  the name  of A-3 in his statement recorded under
Section 164  Cr.P.C.   and also in his statement exhibit D-7
recorded at  the inquest. In view of these circumstances the
accused A-3 is also entitled to the benefit of doubt.
     It was  next contended  by learned counsel on behalf of
the accused A-2 and A-7 that P.W.2  in the cross examination
admitted that  after the  incident he  had  gone  to  police
station seven  or eight	 times. He  had gone  to the  police
station as he was asked by the police. He also admitted that
at that	 time accused persons were in police lock up. On the
basis of  the aforesaid statement  of P.W.2 it was contended
that when  P.W.2   had gone  to the  police station scene or
eight times after the incident the possibility of his seeing
the accused  (A-2) and (A-7) in the police station cannot be
ruled out.  It was  thus contended  that any  identification
parade held on 25.1.1978 and 26.1.1978 has no value as P.W.2
had already  seen the accused persons in the police station.
We find	 no force in this contention. Exhibits P-16 and P-17
are  the   proceedings	of  identification  parade  held  on
25.1.1978 and  26.1.1978 respectively.	A perusal  of  these
documents shows	 that P.W.2   Garapati	Krishnavatharam	 had
himself stated that he had prior acquaintance with Mullagiri
Yesupadam (A-2)	 and Gandi Abraham (A-7). The High Court has
examined this  aspect of  the matter and has rightly arrived
to the	conclusion that	 P.W.2	 in his	 evidence has stated
that he	 came to  know the  names of  the accused  from	 the
children of  the deceased  and it  was not  unnatural for  a
person, who  resides in a village for a period of two months
and especially when they reside opposite to the residence of
the president(deceased)	 in whose office he was working as a
clerk to  know the  names of  the persons  residing  nearby.
P.W.2	  himself  admitted  at	 the  time  of	holding	 the
identification parade that he had prior acquaintance with A-
2 and A-7. P.W.2 is a witness of sterling worth and both the
trial court  and the  High Court have placed reliance on his
testimony. He  had identified A-1, A-2 and A-7 in the Court.
Their conviction  is not  based on the identification parade
but on	the statement  of P.W.1	 AND P.W.2   made during the
trial as eye-witness.
     It is established beyond any manner of doubt that there
were two  factions and	long standing rivalry in between the
two groups  in the  Village. The accused persons belonged to
the group headed by A-6, A-7 and the deceased was the leader
of the other group. Nethalaveeraswamy the deceased was given
merciless beatings  and was done to death in the midnight of
31.12.1977. He	was found  to have  26 external	 injuries as
recorded in  the autopsy  of his  dead body conducted by the
Doctor. It  has also  been found  established by the learned
trial court as well as by the High Court that A-1  inflicted
injuries by  and axe  and A-2  by a  spear and A-7 was Court
that A-1 inflicted injuries by an axe and A-2 by a spear and
A-7 was	 among the other persons who inflicted injuries by a
stick. It  has	also  come  in	the  evidence  of  P.W.	 19,
Inspector of  Police that  the accused persons had absconded
and on	9.1.1978 on  information by 5.00 A.M., he along with
mediators visited  Ramaraogudem and  the  absconded  accused
were hiding  in the  house of  A-7. He	surrounded the house
with his staff, guarded the house and in that house he found
the twelve  persons against  whom the case was challaned. It
has also  been proved  by the  prosecution that	 A-7 was the
leader of  the rival  faction against  the deceased. Thus we
find that  there is no infirmity at all in the reasoning and
conclusion arrived at by the High Court so far as accused A-
1, A-2 and A-7 are concerned.
     In the  result we	allow the  appeal so  far as  Dasari
Bhima Rao  (A-3) is concerned and he is acquitted of all the
charged levelled  against him  his bail	 bonds	shall  stand
discharged. The	 appeal filed  by  Mullagiri  Vajram  (A-1),
Mullagiri  Yesupadam   (A-2)  and   Gandi  Abraham(A-7)	  is
dismissed. They	 shall surrender  to their  bail  bonds	 and
serve out the sentence awarded to them by the High Court.
N.P.V.				       Appeal disposed of .




