
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P vs Alok Verma on 2 September, 2011Bench: Markandey Katju, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                       REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          S.L.P. (CRIMINAL) NO..............OF 2011 
                     (CRLMP.NO(s). 16406/2011)



STATE OF U.P.                                Petitioner(s)

                                VERSUS

ALOK VERMA                                   Respondent(s)
                                O  R  D  E  R

      Heard   Mr.   Pramod   Swarup,   learned   senior   counsel 

appearing for the petitioner-State of U.P.

      The   allegations   against   the   respondent   accused, 

which   have   been   found   true   by   the   courts   below,   are 

that the respondent murdered his wife and four children 

(three   sons   and   one   daughter)   and   caused   injuries   to 

another daughter with knife and axe taking the help of 

a   hired   person.   This   is   because   his   wife   protested 

against  his indulgence  in gambling,  taking liquor  and 

crimes   like   kidnapping.   He   had   earlier   to   undergo 

imprisonment for one year in a case of kidnapping. His 

wife tried to persuade him not to commit these illegal 

acts and get reformed, but instead he would often beat 

her,   and   ultimately   he   committed   these   ghastly   and 

brutal crimes of murdering his wife and four children,

                         :1:


who are aged about 10, 8, 5 and 2 years respectively. 

The surviving daughter Priyanka is an eye witness and 

that apart there is convincing circumstantial evidence 

also   on   the   basis   of   which   the   respondent   has   been 

convicted by the courts below.

      The injuries on the deceased Shikha, wife of the 

accused-respondent are as follows :-

         1. Multiple   incised   wounds   over   face   and 

            forehead size 1 cm x 0.5 cm to 3 cm x 0.5 cm 

            bone deep.

         2. Incised   wound   4   cm   x   1   cm   trachea   deep   on 

            front   of   neck   below   hyoid   bone.     On 

            dissection   the   underlying   large   vessels, 

            tracheas and nerves were cut.

         3. Incised wound 4 cm x 1 cm size muscle deep on 

            back of root of neck.

         4. Incised wound 4 cm x .5 cm muscle deep on top 

            of (Rt.) shoulder.

         5. Incised wound of 3 cm x 0.5 cm muscle deep on 

            back of and middle of (Rt.) upper arm.
      The injuries on the deceased Chhoutey, aged about 

5 years, son of the accused respondent are as follows:-

                                     :2:
   1. Incised wound of 3 cm x 1 cm size skull deep till 


     upper cavity of skull.  This wound was 2 cm above 

     the right eyebrow on the right side of the skull. 

     Skull   bone   was   broken.   Thereafter,   it   was   found 

     that   brain   and   brain   membrane   was   also   cut   and 

     blood   mix   fluid   was   present   in   the   cavity   of 

     skull.

  2. Incised wound 3 cm x 1 cm size bone deep which was 

     above the right eye brow on the right side of the 

     forehead.

  3. Incised   wound   2   cm   x   1   cm   size   just   above   the 

     injury No 2.

  4. Incised wound 2 cm x 1 cm size muscle deep in the 

     middle of the front of the neck.

  5. Contusion 8 cm x 6 cm size upon the skull.

The injuries on Rahul, aged about 10 years, son of the 

deceased and the accused respondent, are as follows :-

  1. Contusion of 8 cm x 3 cm size on the front of the 

     neck.

  2. Incised wound 5 cm x 1 cm breathing duct deep in 

     the front of the neck.  This injury was very close 

     to the injury No.1  On dissection, blood vessels, 

     nerves, muscles and breathing duct etc. were found 

     to be cut.

                                    :3:
  3. Incised wound 4 cm x 1 cm skull deep.  This injury 

     was 3 cm above the left eye, on the left side of 


     the skull bone of skull, brain and brain membrane 

     were found to be cut. Blood mix fluid was found to 

     present in the cavity of skull.

  4. Incised wound 3 cm x 1 cm muscle deep 12 cm above 

     the middle of forehead in the front of skull.

  5. Incised wound 2.5 cm x 1 cm muscle deep behind the 

     right ear.

     The injuries on Uttam Kumar, aged about 8 years, 

son of the deceased and the accused respondent are as 

follows :-

  1. Incised wound 3 cm x 1 cm bone deep in the upper 

     part of the body.

  2. Incised   wound   3   cm   x   1   cm   x   deep     bone   in   the 

     middle of the forehead.

  3. Incised wound 2 cm x 1 cm x skull deep outside the 

     left eye on the left side of the face.  The bone, 

     muscle,   blood   vessels,   brain   and   brain   membrane 

     were  found  to  be  cut.    The  fluid  with  blood  was 

     filled in cavity of brain.

  4. Incised  wound  3  cm  x  1  cm  bone  deep,  this  wound 

     was close to the outer sides of the right eye.

  5. Incised wound 2.5 cm x 1 cm x breathing duct deep 

     on the front of the neck.

                               :4:
  6. 12 cm x 3 cm size wound till nose contusion on the 

     neck.

     The injuries on Kumari Anjali, aged about 2 years, 


daughter of the deceased and accused respondent, are as 

follows :-

1. 4   cm   x   1.5   cm   incised   wound   x   deep   till   cavity   of 

   skull,   4   cm   above   the   right   eye   brow   on   the   right 

   side   of   the   skull.     Under   the   injury,   bone,   brain 

   and brain membrane under the injury were found to be 

   cut.   Blood mixed fluid was found in the cavity of 

   brain.

2. 2 cm x 1 cm incised wound deep till cavity of skull 

   above the left eyebrow on the left side of forehead. 

   Under   the   injury,   bone,   brain   and   brain   membrane 

   were found to be cut.

3. Incised   wound   2   cm   x   0.5   cm   muscle   deep   below   the 

   chin.

4. 2 cm x 0.5 muscle deep incised wound on the level of 

   the thyroid cartilage in the front of the neck.

Apart   from   the   deceased,   the   injuries   on   the   injured 

eye witness Priyanka, who was aged about six years when 

the incident took place, are as follows :-

   1. Towards right on the face in the front of the ear 

      contusion with red colour 6 cm x 45 cm.

   2. On right eye and lower eyelid contusion 4.5 cm x 4 

      cm.                              :5:

   3. Towards left on the face, below the eye contusion 

      with red colour 2 cm x 1.0 cm.

   4. Right ear was bleeding and blood clot was present.

These   injuries   show   the   brutal   manner   in   which   the 


deceased were killed, and injuries caused to Priyanka. 

Apparently the throats of the deceased were cut with a 

knife and their heads smashed with an axe.

      It has come in evidence that the accused had taken 

a   house   on   rent   and   his   wife   Shikha   (deceased)   along 

with   her   children   were   living   in   that   house.     On 

07.07.2005 when the brother of Shikha (the complainant) 

came   to   the   said   house   he   found   the   door   closed.   He 

opened the door and found the dead bodies and also his 

injured niece Priyanka who told him about the incident.

      A blood stained axe was found in the room, while 

the   knife   which   was   also   used   in   committing   these 

horrible crimes had been concealed by the accused.  The 

shirt   of   the   accused   was   blood   stained.     The   accused 

took  the  police  to  the  sand  where  he  had  concealed  a 

polythene bag containing the knife which was used which 

was blood stained, and some other items, including the 

blood stained shirt.  

      We cannot imagine a more ghastly act and, we are, 

prima facie, of   the   opinion   that   this   falls   in 

the  category  of  rarest  of rare cases in which death

                                     :6:




sentence should have been given.   The trial court, no 

doubt,   awarded   death   sentence   to   the   respondent,   but 

the   High   Court   reduced   it   to   life   sentence     by 

observing :-


    "...But   on   the   other   side,   it   is   to   be 
    considered   as   to   what   were   the   circumstances 
    under   which   the   said   murders   were   caused. 
    Accused   Alok   Verma   was   postgraduate   in 
    Sociology,   having   failed   in   getting   a   job.     It 
    seems   that   due   to   financial   crisis,   he   entered 
    into the criminal world, due to which he had to 
    go to jail.   He had been away from his wife and 
    children   for   a   long   time,   and   in   these 
    circumstances,   he   became   pessimistic   and   began 
    to   suspect   his   wife's   character.   Advice   of   his 
    wife   to   stay   away   from   criminal   activities   he 
    could not accept.  In absence of alternative, in 
    such   circumstances,   his   wife's   threat   to 
    disclose   all   of   his   wrong   acts   made   the 
    situation   worse   and   resulted   in   occurrence   of 
    the   incident   which   does   not   appear   to   be 
    committed under any preplan nor for any benefit, 
    but   has   been   caused   due   to   hopelessness   and 
    doubts   about   the   character   of   the   wife   wherein 
    he was doubting that the children were not his. 
    In   the   above   circumstances   considering   the 
    decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Prakash 
    Dhawal   Khairnath   (Patil)     Vs.     State   of 
    Maharashtra   and   State   of   Maharashtra   Vs. 
    Sandeep @ Babloo Prasad Khairnath (Patil)   2002 
    Supreme   Court   Cases   (Criminal)   281   the 
    conclusion   arrived   is   that   the   present   case   is 
    not fit for death penalty."
      Prima facie, we find the reasoning of the High Court 

to  be  strange.  Merely because a person is in financial 

crisis does not mean that  he  is  at liberty to  commit

                                    :7:




ghastly and gruesome murders.   It appears that the wife 

of   the   accused   was   of   a   noble   character   who   tried   to 

reform   him,   but   the   accused   rather   than   being   reformed 

committed these monstrous crimes.   We fail to understand 

how   the   High   Court   could   reduce   the   death   sentence   in 


  these circumstances.

       The   celebrated   Judge   of   the   Allahabad   High   Court 

  Justice Mehmood quoted the following Urdu couplet in one 

  of his judgments while deciding a murder appeal :-


              "Jo Chup Rahegi Zuban-e-khanjar,

              Lahu pukarega asteen ka"
       Issue notice to the respondent as to why the life 

   sentence awarded to him by the High Court should not be 

   enhanced to death sentence.

       Issue   notice   also   on   the   application   for 

   condonation of delay.



   .................................J.
                        (MARKANDEY KATJU)



NEW DELHI;               ................................J.
SEPTEMBER 02, 2011     (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)



