
Supreme Court of India
Shalu Ojha vs Prashant Ojha on 23 July, 2018Author: A Sikri
Bench: A Bhushan, A Sikri
                                                                                NON-REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                               SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 3935 OF 2016


                         SHALU OJHA                                             .....PETITIONER(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         PRASHANT OJHA                                        .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                        JUDGMENT
                         A.K. SIKRI, J.

                                        On an earlier occasion, after hearing the petitioner who

                                appeared in person, and the learned counsel for the respondent,

                                we had passed order dated September 4, 2017, thereby

                                disposing of this petition with the following directions:

                                (a)     insofar as domestic violence proceedings before the Family

                                        Court are concerned, necessary documents shall be filed by

                                        both the parties within four weeks from today and evidence

                                        led pursuant thereto.   The trial court shall endeavour to

                                        decide the case finally, within a period of eight months from
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.07.23
18:09:24 IST


                                        today, on the basis of evidence and fix the rate of
Reason:


                                        maintenance finally; and

                         SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                        Page 1 of 15
       (b)     Crl.MC. No. 850 of 2015, pending before the High Court,

               shall be taken up for hearing immediately and the High

               Court shall endeavour to dispose of the same as

               expeditiously as possible and determine at what rate interim

               maintenance is to be given, i.e. whether order dated

               February 13, 2015 passed by the learned ASJ need any

               modification or not.


2)     Thereafter, review petition was filed by the petitioner pointing out

       that there was apparent error in passing the aforesaid directions

       inasmuch as matter was remitted to the High Court for

       presumption that proceedings were pending but the fact is that no

       such proceedings are pending under the Protection of Women

       from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (for short the ‘DV Act’).

       Realising this error, the review petition was allowed and the

       Special Leave Petition was restored which has been heard

       afresh.


3)     Notwithstanding the aforesaid factual error which had crept in the

       order dated September 4, 2017, the other factual details recorded

       in the said order are a matter of record. Therefore, it would be in

       the fitness of things to reproduce the same:

               Though this case has a chequered history, only those facts


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                      Page 2 of 15
       which are very material are taken note of, eschewing other

       unnecessary details, in order to avoid burdening this judgment

       with the facts which may not be relevant.

               The petitioner is the respondent’s wife. It is unfortunate that

       after their marriage on April 20, 2007 in Delhi, they stayed

       together hardly for four months. Thus, for almost ten years they

       have parted company and are living separately.               It is not

       necessary to go into the reasons which led to the matrimonial

       discord as in the present petition this Court is concerned only with

       the dispute regarding the rate of maintenance.

               The petitioner had filed an application sometime in June

       2009 claiming maintenance under the provisions of Section 12 of

       the DV Act. In that application, apart from other reliefs, she has

       claimed maintenance as well. Order dated July 05, 2012 was

       passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate granting interim

       maintenance @ Rs.2,50,000/- per month with effect from the date

       of filing of the complaint as well as compensation of

       Rs.1,00,000/-.         Since the respondent did not honour the said

       order, the petitioner filed the execution petition for recovery of the

       arrears of maintenance.           In the meantime, the respondent

       challenged the order of the Metropolitan Magistrate granting

       maintenance, by filing appeal under Section 29 of the DV Act, in


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                         Page 3 of 15
       the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi (for short, the

       ‘ASJ’).      In the said appeal, the learned ASJ issued interim

       directions dated January 10, 2013 for depositing of the entire

       arrears of maintenance within two months. As this order was not

       complied with, the appeal filed by the respondent was dismissed

       on May 07, 2013. This order of dismissal was challenged by the

       respondent before the High Court. In those proceedings, order

       dated July 23, 2013 was passed allowing the appellant herein to

       file the reply, etc. As no stay was granted, order dated July 23,

       2013 was challenged by the respondent in this Court by filing a

       special leave petition. This Court, however, did not entertain the

       same. At the same time, while disposing of the special leave

       petition, observations were made to the effect that if the parties

       apply for mediation, the matter shall be referred to the Delhi High

       Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre at the earliest. Keeping

       in view these observations, the High Court referred the dispute to

       the Mediation Centre at the Delhi High Court and also stayed the

       execution proceedings in the meantime. Mediation proceedings

       failed. As a result, the High Court took up the matter on merits

       and passed orders dated September 10, 2013 directing the

       respondent to pay Rs.5,00,000/- on or before September 30,

       2013 and another sum of Rs.5,00,000/- on or before October 31,


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                     Page 4 of 15
       2013. The petitioner filed an application seeking modification of

       these orders and prayed for the directions to the respondent to

       pay entire arrears of maintenance as per the order of the Family

       Court in domestic violence proceedings.          In the said application

       only notice was issued and since interim stay on the execution

       proceedings continued, the petitioner filed special leave petition in

       this Court for vacation of the interim order passed by the High

       Court in the execution proceedings.          This special leave petition

       was converted into appeal on grant of leave, in which judgment

       was delivered on September 18, 2014 allowing the said appeal.

       Operative portion of the said judgment reads as under:

                   “31. The issue before the High Court in Crl.MC. No.
                   1975 of 2013 is limited i.e. whether the sessions court
                   could have dismissed the respondent’s appeal only on
                   the ground that respondent did not discharge the
                   obligation arising out of the conditional interim order
                   passed by the sessions court. Necessarily the High
                   Court will have to go into the question whether the
                   sessions court has the power to grant interim stay of
                   the execution of the order under appeal before it.

                   32. In a matter arising under a legislation meant for
                   protecting the rights of the women, the High Court
                   should have been slow in granting interim orders,
                   interfering with the orders by which maintenance is
                   granted to the appellant. No doubt, such interim
                   orders are now vacated. In the process the appellant
                   is still awaiting the fruits of maintenance order even
                   after 2 years of the order.
                   33. We find it difficult to accept that in a highly
                   contested matter like this the appellant would have
                   instructed her counsel not to press her claim for
                   maintenance. In our view, the High Court ought not to

SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                           Page 5 of 15
                   have accepted the statement of the counsel without
                   verification. The impugned order is set aside.

                   34. We are of the opinion that the conduct of the
                   respondent is a gross abuse of the judicial process.
                   We do not see any reason why the respondent’s
                   petition Crl.MC No. 1975 of 2013 should be kept
                   pending. Whatever be the decision of the High Court,
                   one of the parties will (we are sure) approach this
                   Court again thereby delaying the conclusion of the
                   litigation. The interests of justice would be better
                   served if the respondent’s appeal before the Sessions
                   Court is heard and disposed of on merits instead of
                   going into the residuary questions of the authority of
                   the appellate Court to grant interim orders or the
                   legality of the decision of the Sessions Court to
                   dismiss the appeal only on the ground of the non-
                   compliance by the respondent with the conditions of
                   the interim order. The Criminal Appeal No. 23/2012
                   stands restored to the file of the Sessions Court.

                   35. We also direct that the maintenance order passed
                   by the magistrate be executed forthwith in accordance
                   with law. The executing court should complete the
                   process within 8 weeks and report compliance in the
                   High Court. We make it clear that such hearing of the
                   Sessions Court should only be after the execution of
                   the order of maintenance passed by the Magistrate.

                   36. In the event of the respondent’s success in the
                   appeal, either in full or part, the Sessions Court can
                   make appropriate orders regarding the payments due
                   to be made by the respondent in the execution
                   proceedings.”

               Notwithstanding the aforesaid judgment, as the respondent

       did not clear the entire arrears of maintenance, he was sent to

       judicial custody, where he remained till December 22, 2014. A

       miscellaneous application was filed by the respondent in this

       Court in the afore-mentioned disposed of appeal stating that he

       was in judicial custody due to his inability to pay the entire

SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                          Page 6 of 15
       maintenance and requested that his matter be heard by the

       Sessions Court on merits. In this application this Court passed

       orders dated December 18, 2014 directing the Sessions Court to

       decide the appeal of the respondent within six weeks.            He

       remained in judicial custody till December 22, 2014, on which

       date he was released. During this period, though the respondent

       had paid certain amounts towards maintenance, but he did not

       clear the entire outstanding dues.

               Thereafter, on February 13, 2015, the learned ASJ decided

       the appeal of the respondent reducing the maintenance from

       Rs.2,50,000/-, as fixed by the Family Court, to Rs.50,000/- per

       month, from the date of filing of the petition under Section 12 of

       the DV Act. This order was challenged by the appellant by filing

       a petition (Crl.MC. No. 850 of 2015) before the High Court under

       Section 482 read with Section 482 of the Code of Criminal

       Procedure, 1973 (for short, ‘Cr.P.C.’).

               It will also be of interest to note that the maintenance of

       Rs.50,000/-, as fixed by the learned ASJ, even when reduced

       significantly from Rs.2,50,000/-, was still not acceptable to the

       respondent either. Seeking further reduction in the maintenance,

       the respondent also challenged this order before the High Court

       by filing petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. However, his petition


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                     Page 7 of 15
       was dismissed by the High Court vide order dated April 06, 2015.

       The special leave petition filed by the respondent there against

       was also dismissed by this Court on May 11, 2015.             In this

       manner, insofar as maintenance granted by the learned ASJ @

       Rs.50,000/- per month is concerned, this order has attained

       finality qua the respondent.     The question, therefore, is as to

       whether the petitioner is entitled to enhancement and whether the

       learned ASJ rightly reduced the amount of maintenance.

               Though, the petitioner has filed a petition under Section 482

       Cr.P.C., which is registered as Crl.MC. No. 850 of 2015, as

       pointed out above, and the same is still pending. Notwithstanding,

       the petitioner has chosen to file the instant special leave petition

       challenging the order dated February 13, 2015 passed by the

       ASJ.

               Normally, when the proceedings are still pending before the

       High Court, where same order dated February 13, 2015 passed

       by the ASJ is challenged, this Court should not have entertained

       the instant petition from the very beginning. However, notice was

       issued in this petition, keeping in mind the consideration as to

       whether the dispute can be resolved amicably, suitably and

       appropriately by this Court. For this purpose, matter was taken

       up from time to time. Attempts were even made that the parties


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                       Page 8 of 15
       settle all their disputes amicably. We even called the parties to

       the Chambers and had discussions with them.                However,

       amicable solution to the problem, acceptable to both the parties,

       could not be achieved.

               The petitioner, who appears in person, has submitted that

       there were no valid reasons for the learned ASJ to reduce the

       maintenance. In order to prove that the respondent is a man of

       means who is running number of businesses either as the

       proprietor or partner of firm(s) or shareholder/director in certain

       companies and possesses various assets and is also enjoying

       the life of affluence, she has produced plethora of documents in

       support.       The respondent has refuted the authenticity or the

       relevance of those documents and his submission is that his

       stakes in all these businesses are no longer there. According to

       him, some of the companies/firms mentioned by the petitioner

       never took off and started any business and in some other

       companies he no longer enjoys any stakes. Picture painted by

       the respondent is that he is undergoing very hard times and his

       financial condition is pathetic. It is also stated that he had to even

       go behind bars and remain in custody for more than fifty days

       because of his inability to pay the arrears.


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                       Page 9 of 15
4)     We may point out that during arguments, it was contended by

       learned counsel for the respondent that apart from the monthly

       maintenance amount which the respondent was giving to the

       petitioner every month, the petitioner had some other source of

       income as well. This submission was based on the premise that

       the amount of maintenance so far received by the petitioner,

       which was to the tune of Rs.49 lakhs, was kept by the petitioner

       in the fixed deposits accounts in the banks. According to him, it

       proves that the petitioner had other source of income and she

       was employed/self-employed and from that income, she was

       meeting her day to day needs. We accordingly passed order

       dated January 29, 2018 directing the petitioner to file an affidavit

       of her income which would be in the fomat as prescribed in the

       judgment of Delhi High Court in the case of Kusum Sharma v.

       Mahinder Kumar Sharma decided on January 14, 2015 (FAO

       No. 309/1996). Respondent was also given opportunity to file

       additional documents along with affidavit. Such an affidavit of

       income was, therefore, filed by the petitioner. Respondent also

       filed reply to the said income affidavit to which petitioner filed her

       rejoinder.


5)     In the income affidavit filed by the petitioner in the prescribed



SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                       Page 10 of 15
       format, she has, inter alia, mentioned that she is staying with her

       parents in their house in Mansarovar Garden. The petitioner has

       also mentioned about monthly expenditure. Col. 11 and Col. 16

       of Part I being relevant are reproduced below:

        Sl. No.    Description                    Particulars
        11.         Monthly expenditure       (as Rs. 1.5 lac approx. spent jointly
                    mentioned in S. No. 60)       by parents and self. My share in
                                                  the above expenditure is around
                                                  Rs. 1 lac per month.
        16.         If not staying at Matrimonial Staying with my parents in House
                    home,      relationship  and in which my brother has a sizable
                    income of the person with share. Income Rs. 1.5 lac p.m.
                    whom you are staying?


6)     It is not understood as to how petitioner’s share of expenditure is

       Rs. 1 lakh per month out of Rs.1.5 lakhs monthly expenditure.

       Likewise, it is not explained in Col. 16 as to in what form, income

       of Rs. 1.5 lakhs per month is generated and who is earning that

       income. Of course, the petitioner has otherwise maintained that

       she is not having any other source of income except the amount

       of maintenance given to her by the respondent. The petitioner

       has also stated that she is compelled to live in her parents house

       as the maintenance amount is not sufficient even to pay monthly

       rent of an aparment.


7)     In Part II of the affidavit, the petitioner has made averments

       relating to respondent. The petitioner says that respondent is


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                            Page 11 of 15
       earning about Rs.20 lakhs per month. She has given the details

       of    certain      business   ventures/restaurants    owned     by     the

       respondent in which he is having his share. The petitioner has

       also given particulars of assets allegedly owned by the

       respondent. The petitioner has annexed photocopies of various

       documents in support of her assertions.


8)     In the reply affidavit filed by the respondent, it is averred that the

       petitioner is maintaining four bank accounts and the total amount

       lying in these accounts is Rs.8,36,610/-. It is also stated that the

       petitioner is having fixed deposits in the banks for a total sum of

       Rs. 35,75,000/-. In this manner, the total bank balance of the

       petitioner is Rs.44,11,610/-. As against this, the respondent has

       paid to the petitioner a sum of Rs.49 lakhs from June 4, 2009 to

       July, 2017. Thus, in the last eight years, against a sum of Rs.49

       lakhs paid by the respondent to the petitioner, the petitioner is still

       having bank balance of Rs.44 lakhs.                  According to the

       respondent, it would be inconceivable that petitioner has spent

       only Rs.5 lakhs of rupees (or little more if interest earned by the

       petitioner on the aforesaid Rs.49 lakhs is added) in eight years

       and that shows that she has other sources of income as well.

       Other averments in the petitioner’s affidavit was also denied



SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                          Page 12 of 15
       including her share of expenditure in the neighbourhood of Rs.1

       lakh per month or that respondent is earning Rs.20 lakhs per

       month. In respect of the particulars given by the petitioner about

       the businesses of the respondent, the respondent has denied the

       same and submits that, at present, there is no Restaurant or Bar

       anywhere in India in which respondent has any share or interest.

       He has his own explanation and has given alleged circumstances

       in which he had to give up his share in certain businesses. The

       petitioner has controverted his averments in her rejoinder

       affidavit.       During arguments, the petitioner also tried to

       demonstrate, by referring to certain documents filed by her, that

       the respondent was indulging in falsehood.


9)     We have given a glimpse of the respective cases set up by both

       the parties, without giving details thereof, as asserted by the

       petitioner and the manner in which the respondent has refuted

       the same.


10)    After giving conscious and objective consideration to the

       documents placed on record by both the sides, we are of the view

       that it is only after the evidence is led by both the parties, the

       veracity and evidential value of such material can be finally

       adjudged, more particularly, when the said material and


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                   Page 13 of 15
       assertions of the parties would be tested with their cross-

       examination.


11)    The present proceedings arise out of the petition which was filed

       by the petitioner under Section 12 of the DV Act. The trial court

       had arrived at a figure of maintenance on the basis of affidavits

       filed by both the parties along with their respective documents.

       Same exercise is undertaken by the learned ASJ in the impugned

       order while adjudging the correctness of the order passed by the

       trial court and, in the process, reducing the maintenance from

       Rs.2.50 lakhs to Rs.50,000/- per month.            This obviously

       happened as the proceedings under the DV Act are of summary

       nature.


12)    In these circumstances, the appropriate course of action would be

       to allow the petitioner to file an application for maintenance under

       the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 or under Section

       125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 so that in these

       proceedings, both the parties lead their documentary and oral

       evidence and on the basis of such material, appropriate view is

       taken by the said Court.


13)    We accordingly dispose of this petition by granting liberty to the



SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                     Page 14 of 15
       petitioner to move appropriate application for maintenance, as

       indicated above. Once such application is moved, same shall be

       decided by the concerned Court most expeditiously having regard

       to the fact that the petitioner is fighting for her maintenance for

       last number of years and these proceedings should attain finality

       at the earliest. We also make it clear that any maintenance fixed

       shall not, in any case, be less than Rs.50,000/- per month which

       figure of maintenance has already attained finality.


14)    As a sequel, the respondent shall continue to pay Rs.50,000/- per

       month to the petitioner in the meanwhile. The present petition

       stands disposed of accordingly.


                                            .............................................J.
                                                                        (A.K. SIKRI)


                                            .............................................J.
                                                          (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 23, 2018.


SLP (Crl.) No. 3935 of 2016                                               Page 15 of 15

