
Supreme Court of India
Tgn Kumar vs State Of Kerala & Ors on 9 April, 2009Author: ....................J.
Bench: D.K. Jain, R.M. Lodha
               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          CRIMINAL APPEAL No.688 of 2009
(Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl) No.3156 of 2008)

TGN Kumar                                                       .....Appellant(s)



                            Versus

State of Kerala & Ors.                                          .....Respondent(s)

           ORDER
            Leave granted.

               This appeal by the complainant is directed against the order passed by

   the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam, dated 24th March, 2008, whereby the

   order passed by the Sessions Judge, Ernakulam, transferring the trial in the

   complaint filed by him under Section 420 IPC from the Court of Additional Chief

   Judicial Magistrate Ernakulam to Judicial First Class Magistrate-II has been

   affirmed.


               The Order had been passed by the Sessions Judge on an application

   filed by the accused-third respondent herein, expressing apprehension about his

   getting justice from the Presiding Judge in the Court of Additional Chief Judicial

   Magistrate on the ground that he was prejudiced against him.



               On a mention being made on 9th April, 2008, the operation of the

   impugned order was stayed. The order continues to be in force till date.

                                                       ..2/-


                                   :2:

               At the outset, it is pointed out by learned counsel for the appellant that
      the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, against whom the accused had some

      grievance, has since been transferred to some other place and, therefore, the

      question of his influencing the trial or the final verdict does not arise. Learned

      counsel, thus, submits that the order passed by the Sessions Judge may be set

      aside and the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate should be directed to dispose

      of the matter expeditiously as the said transfer order has resulted in a long delay

      in the disposal of the case.


                Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that

      since the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate against whose conduct the accused

      had reservations, has been transferred, the cause for any apprehension in the

      mind of the accused-respondent does not survive. Therefore, in the light of the

      said subsequent event, we feel that there is no point in giving effect to the order

      of transfer passed by the Sessions Judge.


                Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the impugned orders are set

      aside. The learned Additional

                                                               ..3/-


                                 :3:

      Chief Judicial Magistrate shall now proceed with the case and conclude the trial

      expeditiously.


                                               ....................J.
                                          [ D.K. JAIN ]


                 ....................J.                                                     [ R.M.
LODHA ]
NEW DELHI,
APRIL 09, 2009.

