
Supreme Court of India
Tukaram & Ors vs State Of Karnataka on 13 March, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  482 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Tukaram & Ors

RESPONDENT:
State of Karnataka

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 13/03/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT & P. SATHASIVAM

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
REPORTABLE

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 482 OF 2008
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 5581 of 2007)


Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Leave granted.

2.	Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a learned 
Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court upholding the 
conviction of the appellant for offence punishable under 
Section 304(II) of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short the 
'IPC') and sentence of imprisonment for five years was 
imposed. The appellants preferred an appeal before the 
Karnataka High Court.

3.	As noted above, the learned Single Judge of the High 
Court upheld the conviction, but reduced the sentence. 

4.	In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the 
appellants submitted that originally there were six accused 
persons.  A3 was acquitted by the trial court whereas 
appellant Tukaram was found guilty of offence punishable 
under Section 304 (II).  However the sentence of seven years as 
was imposed by the trial court was reduced to five years.

5.	It was further submitted that evidence of PWs 1,2 & 5 
should not have been accepted as they were related to the 
deceased.

6.	Learned counsel for the respondent-State on the other 
hand submitted that there is no legal bar in accepting the 
evidence of a relative.  A relative would normally not protect 
person who is guilty and would shield the actual assailant.

7.	So far as the appellant is concerned, the trial court and 
the High Court have analysed the evidence in great detail and 
have concluded that the appellant was the author of the crime.  
Stand that PWs. 1,2 & 5 were related to the deceased is really 
of no consequence.

8.	Relationship is not a factor to affect credibility of a 
witness.  It is more often than not that a relation would not 
conceal actual culprit and make allegations against an 
innocent person.  Foundation has to be laid if plea of false 
implication is made.  In such cases, the court has to adopt a 
careful approach and analyse evidence to find out whether it is 
cogent and credible.

9.	In Dalip Singh and Ors.  v. The State of Punjab (AIR 1953 
SC 364) it has been laid down as under:-

"A witness is normally to be considered 
independent unless he or she springs from 
sources which are likely to be tainted and that 
usually means unless the witness has cause, 
such as enmity against the accused, to wish to 
implicate him falsely.  Ordinarily a close 
relation would be the last to screen the real 
culprit and falsely implicate an innocent 
person.  It is true, when feelings run high and 
there is personal cause for enmity, that there 
is a tendency to drag in an innocent person 
against whom a witness has a grudge along 
with the guilty, but foundation must be laid 
for such a criticism and the mere fact of 
relationship far from being a foundation is 
often a sure guarantee of truth.  However, we 
are not attempting any sweeping 
generalization.  Each case must be judged on 
its own facts.  Our observations are only made 
to combat what is so often put forward in 
cases before us as a general rule of prudence.  
There is no such general rule. Each case must 
be limited to and be governed by its own 
facts."

10.	The above decision has since been followed in Guli 
Chand and Ors. v. State of Rajasthan (1974 (3) SCC 698) in 
which Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras (AIR 1957 SC 614) 
was also relied upon.

11.	We may also observe that the ground that the witness 
being a close relative and consequently being a partisan 
witness, should not be relied upon, has no substance.  This 
theory was repelled by this Court as early as in Dalip Singh's 
case (supra) in which surprise was expressed over the 
impression which prevailed in the minds of the Members of the 
Bar that relatives were not independent witnesses. Speaking 
through Vivian Bose, J. it was observed: 

"We are unable to agree with the learned 
Judges of the High Court that the testimony of 
the two eyewitnesses requires corroboration.  
If the foundation for such an observation is 
based on the fact that the witnesses are 
women and that the fate of seven men hangs 
on their testimony, we know of no such rule.  
If it is grounded on the reason that they are 
closely related to the deceased we are unable 
to concur.  This is a fallacy common to many 
criminal cases and one which another Bench 
of this Court endeavoured to dispel in  
'Rameshwar v. State of Rajasthan' (AIR 1952 
SC 54 at p.59).  We find, however, that it 
unfortunately still persists, if not in the 
judgments of the Courts, at any rate in the 
arguments of counsel."

12.	Again in Masalti and Ors.   v.  State of U.P.  (AIR 1965 SC 
202) this Court observed: (p. 209-210 para 14):

"But it would, we think, be unreasonable to 
contend that evidence given by witnesses 
should be discarded only on the ground that it 
is evidence of partisan or interested 
witnesses.......The mechanical rejection of 
such evidence on the sole ground that it is 
partisan would invariably lead to failure of 
justice.  No hard and fast rule can be laid 
down as to how much evidence should be 
appreciated.  Judicial approach has to be 
cautious in dealing with such evidence; but 
the plea that such evidence should be rejected 
because it is partisan cannot be accepted as 
correct."

13.	To the same effect is the decision in State of Punjab v. 
Jagir Singh (AIR 1973 SC 2407), Lehna v. State of Haryana 
(2002 (3) SCC 76) and Gangadhar Behera and Ors. v. State of 
Orissa (2002 (8) SCC 381). 

14.	The above position was highlighted in  Babulal Bhagwan 
Khandare and Anr. V. State of Maharashtra [2005(10) SCC 
404] and in Salim Saheb v. State of M.P.  (2007(1) SCC 699).

15.	In any case PWs. 6 & 10 were independent witnesses and 
it has not been shown as to why they would depose falsely 
against the appellants. The evidence on record clearly 
establishes that the appellants have been rightly held guilty.  

16.	The appeal is dismissed. 

