
Supreme Court of India
Pooja Rana vs State Of Haryana And Ors on 27 August, 2012Author: ……………………………J.
Bench: B.S. Chauhan, Jagdish Singh Khehar
                                                                             REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                       CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                     WRIT PETITION (CRL.) NO.109 OF 2012




    Pooja Rana                                        …  Petitioner


                                   Versus


    State of Haryana & Ors.                                       …
    Respondents






                                  O R D E R

    1.      This petition has been filed for quashing the First Information
    Report No. 609 of 2012 under Sections 363, 366, 328 and 504  of  Indian
    Penal Code,  1860  (hereinafter  called  ‘IPC’)  registered  at  Police
    Station Hissar, (City) Haryana and for further direction to  the  State
    Authorities to register the  criminal  case  against  the  petitioner’s
    father, mother and maternal uncle.

    2.      The writ petition has been filed alleging that  the  petitioner
    was born on 2.9.1993, thus she was major and has a right  to  choose  a
    person with whom she wants to settle in her life.   Petitioner  married
    one Sachin Kumar Rana, resident of Sambhal, Moradabad,  (U.P.)  of  her
    free will. However, her parents and maternal  uncle  had  registered  a
    criminal case against her husband and they are  harassing  him.   Thus,
    the petition has been filed for the aforesaid reliefs.

    3.      The matter was heard at length  on  24.8.2012  and  Mr.  Gaurav
    Kumar Bansal, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner   was  asked
    to explain as under what circumstances such  a  writ  petition  can  be
    entertained as it suffers from following basic defects:
    (i)     The FIR sought to be quashed has not been placed on record.
    (ii)    The person who is to be granted  protection  i.e.  Shri  Sachin
    Kumar Rana is not a party  as either petitioner or the respondent.
    (iii)    The complainant-persons who  are  harassing  the  petitioner’s
    husband Sachin Kumar Rana, namely Ashok Bansal-father,  Sunita  Bansal-
    mother and Subhash Gupta-maternal  uncle are not the parties before us.

    4.      As learned counsel for the petitioner was not able  to  provide
    proper assistance, we adjourned the case for today and  also  requested
    the learned Advocate-on-record  who has signed the petition  to  remain
    present in the court so that he  can  explain  as  to  whether  such  a
    petition is maintainable or ought to have been filed.
    5.      In Surinder Singh v. Central Government &  Ors.,  AIR  1986  SC
    2166, this Court dealt with an issue  for quashing of order  which  had
    not been made part of the record and observed as under:
                 “…..In the absence of the impugned order it would  not  be
           possible to ascertain the reasons which may  have  impelled  the
           authority to pass the order. It is therefore improper  to  quash
           an order which is not  produced  before  the  High  Court  in  a
           proceeding under Art. 226 of the Constitution. The order of  the
           High Court could be set aside for this reason…”


    6.      It is not the case of the petitioner  that  she  had  made  any
    attempt to get the copy of the FIR and it was  not  made  available  to
    her. Nor there is any statement in her petition that she tried to lodge
    the FIR against her parents and uncle but it was not accepted.  Learned
    counsel for the petitioner failed  to  explain  as  why  the  necessary
    parties, i.e. the complainants as well  as  the  person  for  whom  the
    protection is sought have not been impleaded.
    7.      While dealing with a  similar  situation,  this  Court  in  Re:
    Sanjiv Datta, (1995) 3 SCC 619, held as under:

           “…..Some  members  of  the   profession   have   been   adopting
           perceptibly casual approach to the practice of the profession as
           is evident from their absence when the matters are  called  out,
           the filing of incomplete and inaccurate pleadings —  many  times
           even illegible and without personal check and verification,  the
           non-payment of court fees  and  process  fees,  the  failure  to
           remove office objections, the failure to take steps to serve the
           parties, et al. They do not realise  the  seriousness  of  these
           acts and omissions. They not only amount to the contempt of  the
           court but do positive disservice to  the  litigants  and  create
           embarrassing  situation  in  the  court  leading  to   avoidable
           unpleasantness and delay in the disposal of matters. This augurs
           ill for the health of  our  judicial  system……The  lawyers  took
           their  profession  seriously  and  practised  it  with  dignity,
           deference and devotion. If the profession  is  to  survive,  the
           judicial system has to be vitalised.  No  service  will  be  too
           small in making the system efficient, effective and  credible….”
           (Emphasis added)


    8.      In view of the above,  we  are  of  the  opinion  that  such  a
    petition  does  not  deserve  to  be  entertained.  It  is  accordingly
    dismissed. However, in the facts and circumstances  of  the  case,  the
    petitioner, if so advised, may move  the  High  Court  for  appropriate
    relief by filing appropriate petition.

                                        ……………………………J.
                                        (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)



                                  …………………………...J.
                                        (JAGDISH SINGH KHEHAR)
    New Delhi,
    August 27, 2012






