
Supreme Court of India
Mangu And Anr vs State Of Rajasthan on 6 November, 1975Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR  176, 1976 SCR  (2) 324
Author: P Goswami
Bench: Goswami, P.K.
           PETITIONER:
MANGU AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF RAJASTHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/11/1975

BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
BENCH:
GOSWAMI, P.K.
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH

CITATION:
 1976 AIR  176		  1976 SCR  (2) 324
 1976 SCC  (1) 410


ACT:
     Supreme Court  Rules, 1950-0.21,  r.2-0.47,  v.1.-Scope
of.



HEADNOTE:
     Rule 2  of Order  21 of  the Supreme Court Rules states
that where  an	appeal	lies  to  the  Supreme	Court  on  a
certificate issued  by the High Court, no application to the
Court for  special leave  to  appeal  shall  be	 entertained
unless the  High Court concerned has first been moved and it
has refused  to grant  the certificate.	 Rule 1 of Order 47,
however, confers powers on the Court to dispense with any of
the requirements of the Rules and to pass appropriate orders
in exercise of its inherent powers.
     The appellants  moved the	High Court for a certificate
under Art.  134(1)(c) of the Constitution but later withdrew
it. The	 High Court  rejected the  application as withdrawn.
The appellants	then moved  this Court stating that the High
Court rejected	their application  on "merits"	but not	 "as
being out of time" and obtained ex parte special leave.
     Dismissing the appeal and revoking the leave to appeal,
^
     HELD : (1) The requirement of r. 2 of O.21 has not been
complied  with.	  Withdrawal  of   the	application  by	 the
appellants showed that they abandoned the idea of moving the
Supreme Court. [325D]
     (2) Rule 2 of Order 21 is by itself mandatory. The fact
that  its   compliance	may  be	 excused  by  the  Court  in
appropriate cases does not affect the mandatory character of
the Rule.  This is  a case which does not merit invoking the
inherent  powers  of  the  Court  for  dispensing  with	 the
requirements  of   the	Rules,	 particularly  so  when	 the
appellants had	made a	definitely wrong  statement  in	 the
special leave  application  with  regard  to  their  earlier
application for leave in the High Court. [325G; 326A]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION :	 Criminal Appeal No.
135 of 1971.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  Order
dated the  25th March  1971 of	the Rajasthan  High Court at
Jodhpur in S. B. Criminal Appeal No. 159 of 1970.
     B. R. L. Iyengar for E. C. Agarwala for the appellants.
     S. M. Jain for Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     GOSWAMI, J.  The two  appellants along with four others
were  convicted	 by  the  Sessions  Judge,  Bhilwara,  under
sections 147,  452/149 and  325/149 I.P.C.  and sentenced to
imprisonment and  fine. The  High Court	 on appeal acquitted
four of	 them and  maintained the conviction and sentence of
the two appellants who were involved withseveral others. The
appellants moved  an application  for a	 certificate praying
for leave to appeal to this Court under article 134(1)(c) of
325
the  Constitution.   Later  on	the  leave  application	 was
withdrawn and  on May  12, 1971, the High Court rejected the
application as	withdrawn. The appellants later obtained ex-
parte special  leave on	 May 25,  1971. It  was mentioned in
para 5	of the special leave petition that their application
for leave in the High Court was rejected "on merits, but not
as being out of time".
     A preliminary  objection has  been raised	on behalf of
the respondent	that the  special leave granted in this case
should be  revoked as  the appellants  failed to comply with
the requirements  of rule 2 of order 21 of the Supreme Court
Rules inasmuch	as there  was no  order of  the	 High  Court
refusing to grant the certificate.
     Under order  21, rule  2 "where  an appeal	 lies to the
Court  on   a  certificate  issued  by	the  High  Court  no
application to	the Court  for special leave to appeal shall
be entertained	unless the  High Court	concerned has  first
been moved  and it  has refused	 to grant  the certificate."
Since  the  application	 for  leave  was  withdrawn  by	 the
appellants it  could not  be said that the High Court at all
considered  the	  matter  and  then  refused  to  grant	 the
certificate. Withdrawal of the application by the appellants
would go  to show  that they  had abandoned  the idea  of to
moving	the   supreme  Court   against	the   judgment.	 The
requirement of	rule 2	has not,  therefore,  been  complied
with.
     It is,  however, submitted by Mr. Iyengar that order 47
of the	Supreme Court  Rules confers  power on this Court to
dispense with  any of the requirements of these Rules and to
pass appropriate orders in exercise of inherent powers. Rule
1 of order 47 provides that-
	  "the Court may, for sufficient cause shown, excuse
     the  parties   from  compliance   with   any   of	 the
     requirements  of	these  rules,	and  may  give	such
     directions in  matters of	practice and procedure as it
     may consider just and expedient".
Rule 6 says that-
	  "nothing in  these rules  shall be deemed to limit
     or otherwise affect the inherent powers of the Court to
     make such	orders as  may be  necessary for the ends of
     justice or	 to prevent  abuse of  the  process  of	 the
     Court."
Rule 2	of order  47, however, requires an application to be
made in the manner provided therein.
     Rule 2  of order  21 is, by itself, mandatory. The fact
that  its   compliance	may  be	 excused  by  the  Court  in
appropriate cases does not affect the mandatory character of
the rule.
     There is  no  application	by  the	 appellants  showing
sufficient cause for exempting them from compliance with the
requirement of the rule. We are informed that an opportunity
had  been   earlier  given   by	 the  Court  for  making  an
appropriate  application  even	at  this  stage.  Even	this
opportunity was not availed of by the appellants.
326
     We are,  therefore, of  the opinion that this is a case
which does  not merit  invoking of  our inherent  powers for
dispensing with	 the requirements  of the Rules particularly
so when the appellants had made a definitely wrong statement
in the	special	 leave	application  with  regard  to  their
earlier application for leave in the High Court.
     Mr. Iyengar then submits that a perusal of the judgment
of the High Court would clearly show that this is a fit case
where we  should intervene in the interest of justice by suo
motu  excusing	 the  technical	  lapse	 of  any  procedure.
Reluctantly enough we allowed counsel to take us through the
judgment of  the High Court and we find that it is an appeal
only for  reappreciating the  evidence and does not disclose
any manifest grave error of law or miscarriage of justice.
     This is, therefore, a fit case in which the preliminary
objection should prevail. We order that the special leave to
appeal which  was granted  to the appellants be revoked. The
appellants shall now surrender to their bail bonds and serve
the remaining period of their sentence.
P.B.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
327




