
Supreme Court of India
State Of Andhra Pradesh vs P.V. Pavithran on 1 March, 1990Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 1266, 1990 SCR  (1) 746
Author: S Pandian
Bench: Pandian, S.R. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
P.V. PAVITHRAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/03/1990

BENCH:
PANDIAN, S.R. (J)
BENCH:
PANDIAN, S.R. (J)
REDDY, K. JAYACHANDRA (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR 1266		  1990 SCR  (1) 746
 1990 SCC  (2) 340	  JT 1990 (2)	 43
 1990 SCALE  (1)418
 CITATOR INFO :
 E	    1992 SC1701	 (39)


ACT:
    Code  of  Criminal Procedure,  1973:  Sections  173	 and
Investigation--Inordinate delay--Whether ipso facto a ground
quashing of F.I.R.--Factors to be considered for determining
delay-Speed.,v investigation and trial--Necessity for.
    Constitution  of  India,  1950.'  Article  21--Right  to
speed), investigation and fair trial--Delayed or  protracted
investigation--Whether	causes grave prejudice or  disadvan-
tage to accused.



HEADNOTE:
    A case was registered against the respondent, an officer
of  the Indian Police Service, under Section 5(2) read	with
Section	 5(1)(e) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,  1947,
on  8.3.1984 but the investigation report was  submitted  to
the Government on 17.9.1987. In November, 1987, the respond-
ent filed a criminal petition for quashing further  proceed-
ings  pursuant to the registration of the First	 Information
Report	contending that there had been inordinate  delay  in
the investigation and that the prosecution had not filed the
report	as contemplated under Section 173 Cr. P.C.  till  he
filed  the petition. The appellant contended that the  delay
was occasioned on account of dilatory tactics adopted by the
respondent  and	 that the case was a complicated  and  time-
consuming one. The High Court quashed the First	 Information
Report	and observed that wherever there was  an  inordinate
delay on the part of the investigating agency in  completing
investigation, the case merited quashing of the First Infor-
mation Report even.
    The	 State preferred an appeal in this Court  contending
that the High Court's observation was too wide a proposition
and  it	 would be detrimental to the prosecution  in  future
under all circumstances, regardless of reasons therefor.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD: 1.1 No general and wide proposition of law can  be
formulated  that wherever there is inordinate delay  on	 the
part of the
747
investigating  agency in completing the investigation,	such
delay,	ipso  facto, would provide ground for  quashing	 the
First  Information Report or the proceedings arising  there-
from. [750H, 751A]
    1.2	 A lethargic and lackadaisical manner of  investiga-
tion over a prolonged period makes an accused in a  criminal
proceeding to live every moment under extreme emotional	 and
mental	stress and strain and to remain always under a	fear
psychosis. Therefore, it is imperative that if investigation
of a criminal proceeding staggers on with tardy pace due  to
the  indolence and inefficiency of the investigating  agency
causing	 unreasonable  and substantial	delay  resulting  in
grave prejudice or disadvantage to the accused, the Court as
the  protector	of  the right and personal  liberty  of	 the
citizen	 will  step in and resort to the drastic  remedy  of
quashing further proceedings in such investigation. However,
there are offences of grave magnitude which would necessari-
ly  involve considerable time for unearthing the crimes	 and
bringing the culprits to book. Therefore, it is not possible
to  formulate inflexible guidelines or rigid  principles  of
uniform application for speedy investigation or to stipulate
any  arbitrary period of limitation within which  investiga-
tion in a criminal case should be completed. [750B-F]
    1.3	 The determination of the question whether  the	 ac-
cused  has been deprived of a fair trial on account  of	 de-
layed  or  protracted investigation would  also,  therefore,
depend	on various factors including whether such delay	 was
unreasonably long or caused deliberately or intentionally to
hamper	the defence of the accused or whether it was due  to
the  dilatory tactics adopted by the accused. The Court,  in
addition, has to consider whether such delay on the part  of
the  investigating  agency  has caused	grave  prejudice  or
disadvantage to the accused. The assessment of these factors
necessarily vary from case to case. [750G-H]
Raghubir  Singh v. State of Bihar, [1986] 4 SCC 481,  relied
on.
    Bell  v. Director of Public Prosecutions of Jamaica	 and
another, [1985] 2 All England Law Reports 585, referred to.
    The Power of the Courts to stay a Criminal Prosecution,'
1985 Criminal Law Review 175, referred to.
    In	the  instant case, the respondent was  placed  under
suspension  pending enquiry but was reinstated on the  basis
of  enquiry report and further action was stopped.  However,
by a subsequent order dated 5th July, 1985 the earlier order
was cancelled and a show cause notice for
748
his  compulsory reitrement was issued. The Central  Adminis-
trative	 Tribunal held that the order dated 5th	 July,	1985
was illegal and beyond the powers of State Government.	This
Court  dismissed  State's  Special Leave  Petition.  In	 the
meantime,  the	respondent was allowed by the  appellant  to
retire	peacefully  from  service on attaining	the  age  of
superannuation	and the First Information Report and  conse-
quent  proceedings were quashed by the High Court. In  these
circumstances,	this  is not a fit  case  for  interference.
[751D, E, G, 752A, C-E]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 359
of 1989.
    From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  29.7.1988  of	 the
Andhra Pradesh High Court in Crl. Petition No. 1023 of 1987.
K. Madhava Reddy and G. Prabhakar for the Appellant.
    H.S. Gururaj Rao, Subodh Markandeya, Mrs. C. Markandeya,
W.A. Nomani and G. Seshagiri Rao for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    S.	RATNAVEL  PANDIAN, J. The State	 of  Andhra  Pradesh
represented by the Director, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Hydera-
bad has filed this criminal appeal challenging the  correct-
ness  of  the  Order dated 29.7.1988 of the  High  Court  of
Andhra	Pradesh in Crime No. 7/ACB/Cr. II/84 dated  8.3.1984
on the file of the Special Judge for ACB & SPE quashing	 the
First Information Report in exercise of its inherent  powers
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
A few facts relevant to decide this case may be stated:
    The respondent was selected to the Indian Police Service
in  the	 year 1953 and he worked in  various  capacities  at
different  places. While he was working as  Commissioner  of
Weights	 &  Measures,  Government of Andhra  Pradesh,  on  a
report dated 7.3. 1984 submitted by the Deputy	Superintend-
ent of Police, Anti-Corruption Bureau, a case was registered
against him on 8.3. 1984 in Crime No. 7/ACB/Cr. II/84  under
Section 5(2) read with Section 5(1)(e) of the prevention  of
Corruption Act, 1947 on the allegations that while function-
ing as Commissioner of Police and later as Vice-Chairman  of
Andhra	Pradesh Housing Board during the years	1978-82,  he
ingulged in corrupt practices and acquired immovable  assets
either in his name or
749
in  the name of his wife. The Anti-Corruption  Bureau  after
completing   its  investigation	 submitted  its	 report	  on
22.4.1987  to its DirectorGeneral who in turn sent the	same
to the Government on 17.9. 1987. The Government accorded the
necessary  sanction for prosecution in G.O.Ms. Nos. 525	 and
526 dated 16.9. 1988. In the meantime, the respondent  filed
the  criminal  petition	 for  quashing	further	 proceedings
pursuant  to the registration of the First  Information	 Re-
port, inter alia, contending that there had been lull in the
investigation for fairly long spell causing inordinate delay
and  that the prosecution had not filed its  report  contem-
plated under Section 173 Cr.P.C. till he filed the  petition
for  quashing  the proceedings in November 1987	 though	 the
case was registered even in March 1984.
    The	 plea of the respondent was stoutly resisted by	 the
appellant  stating that the delay was occasioned on  account
of  the dilatory tactics adopted by the respondent  and	 the
case was a complicated and timeconsuming one.
    The High Court has quashed the First Information  Report
on the ground that there was inordinate delay in the  inves-
tigation.  Aggrieved  by that judgment, the State  has	pre-
ferred this Criminal appeal.
    Mr.	 Madhava Reddy, learned senior counsel appearing  on
behalf of the appellant took an exception to the observation
of the learned Single Judge of the High Court reading:
"   ..........	I hold that wherever there is an  inordinate
delay on the part of the investigating agency in  completing
investigation, the case merits quashing of the First  Infor-
mation Report even  ................  Generally. this  Court
will not quash the F.I.R. because it amounts to stopping  of
investigation,	but where there is an inordinate delay,	 the
same is a ground to quash even the F.I.R."
and  contended	that  the above observation is	too  wide  a
proposition and it will be detrimental to the prosecution in
future	under all circumstances, regardless of	the  reasons
therefor.
    Though we have decided to dispose of this appeal on some
other  ground,	the submission of Mr. Madhava Reddy  on	 the
above  extracted  observation  of the High  Court  makes  it
necessary to examine the ques-
750
tion whether a mere delay in the investigation of a criminal
proceeding  will by itself serve as a sufficient ground	 for
quashing the proceedings in pursuance of the registration of
the case notwithstanding whatever may be the reasons for the
delay.	This  question has come up for	determination  in  a
number of cases wherein this Court has examined the right of
an accused for a speedy investigation and trial in a  crimi-
nal  case in the light of Article 21 of the Constitution  of
India.
    There is no denying the fact that a lethargic and lacka-
daisical  manner  of investigation over a  prolonged  period
makes  an  accused in a criminal proceeding  to	 live  every
moment under extreme emotional and mental stress and  strain
and  to remain always under a fear psychosis. Therefore,  it
is imperative that if investigation of a criminal proceeding
staggers on with tardy pace due to the indolence or  ineffi-
ciency of the investigating agency causing unreasonable	 and
substantial delay resulting in grave prejudice or  disadvan-
tage to the accused, the Court as the protector of the right
and personal liberty of the citizen will step in and  resort
to  the	 drastic remedy of quashing further  proceedings  in
such investigation.
    While so, there are offences of grave magnitude such  as
diabolical  crimes of conspiracy or clandestine crimes	com-
mitted	by  members of the underworld with  their  tentacles
spread over various parts of the country or even abroad. The
very  nature  of  such offences	 would	necessarily  involve
considerable time for unearthing the crimes and bringing the
culprits to book. Therefore, it is not possible to formulate
inflexible guidelines or rigid principles of uniform  appli-
cation	for speedy investigation or to stipulate  any  arbi-
trary  period of limitation within which investigation in  a
criminal case should be completed.
    The	 determination of the question whether	the  accused
has  been deprived of a fair trial on account of delayed  or
protracted  investigation would also, therefore,  depend  on
various factors including whether such delay was  unreasona-
bly  long or caused deliberately or intentionally to  hamper
the defence of the accused or whether such delay was  inevi-
table  in the nature of things or-whether it was due to	 the
dilatory  tactics  adopted  by the accused.  The  Court,  in
addition, has to consider whether such delay on the part  of
the  investigating  agency  has caused	grave  prejudice  or
disadvantage to the accused.
    The	 assessment  of the above factors  necessarily	vary
from  case  to	case. It would, therefore,  follow  that  no
general and wide proposition
751
of  law can be formulated that wherever there is  inordinate
delay on the part of the investigating agency in  completing
the  investigation,  such delay, ipso facto,  would  provide
ground	for  quashing the First Information  Report  or	 the
proceedings arising therefrom.
    Our above view is supported by a decision of this  Court
in  Raghubir  Singh  v. State of Bihar, [1986]	4  SCC	481.
Reference  may	also be had to Bell v.	Director  of  Public
Prosecutions  of Jamaica and another, [1985] 2	All  England
Law Reports 585 and the article in 1985 Criminal Law  Review
175  captioned 'The Power of the Courts to stay	 a  Criminal
Prosecution.'
    It	follows from the above observations that no  general
and wide proposition of law can be formulated that  wherever
there is any inordinate delay on the part of the investigat-
ing agency in completing the investigation, such delay is  a
ground to quash the F.I.R.
    Reverting to the present case, the respondent was placed
under suspension pending enquiry into certain irregularities
in  the purchase of land as pointed out in the earlier	part
of  this judgment. The State Government on the basis of	 the
enquiry report passed orders for stopping further action and
directed re-instatement of the respondent into service	with
immediate effect by Order dated 5th September 1984.  Accord-
ingly,	he was re-instated and allowed to function  as	Con-
troller,  Weights  & Measures, Andhra Pradesh.	However,  by
subsequent  order dated 5th July 1985, the appellant  (State
Government) cancelled the aforesaid order dated 5th  Septem-
ber 1984 and directed the respondent to show cause as to why
the  penalty of compulsory retirement should not be  imposed
on  him. Thereupon, the respondent filed Writ  Petition	 No.
10670  of  1985	 before the High Court	of  Andhra  Pradesh,
seeking	 a  writ  of mandamus declaring the  orders  of	 the
appellant contained in G.O. Rt. No. 2930, GA (SC. C) Depart-
ment dated 5th July 1985 as arbitrary and  unconstitutional,
and  consequently to set aside the same by holding that	 the
appellant  was bound to give effect to the Orders  contained
in  G.O. Rt. No. 4572, GA (SC. C) Department dated 5th	Sep-
tember	1984.  This  writ petition was	transferred  to	 the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Hyderabad Bench. The Tribu-
nal allowed the petition holding that the impugned order  in
G.O.Rt.	 No. 2930 dated 5th July 1985 is illegal and  beyond
the powers of the State Government.
    Aggrieved by the judgment of the Tribunal, the State  of
Andhra	Pradesh preferred a Special Leave  Petition  (Civil)
No. 405 of 1987
752
before	this  Court,  and  this Court  by  its	Order  dated
16.11.1988  dismissed  the  same. The said  order  reads  as
follows:
"Having	 regard to the facts and circumstances of  the	case
and  specialty in view of the facts that the respondent	 has
retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation,
we  do	not consider it a fit case for-interference.  It  is
accordingly dismissed."
    Admittedly,	 the appellant notified the date of  retire-
ment of the respondent w.e.f. 30th April 1988 by G.O.Rt. No.
866  dated 10th March 1988. Accordingly, the respondent	 was
allowed	 to retire peacefully from service on  attaimng	 the
age of superannuation. The First Information Report and	 the
consequent proceedings on the registration of the case	were
quashed	 by the High Court on 29.7.1988.  Surprisingly,	 the
appellant accorded sanction for prosecution in G.O.Ms.	Nos.
525  & 526 dated 16.9.1988 i.e. after nearly 50 days of	 the
quashing of the First Information Report.
    In	view  of the above facts and circumstances  and	 the
various	 events following the suspension of  the  respondent
culminating in his being allowed to retire on attaining	 the
age  of superannuation, we are of the view that it is not  a
fit case for interference.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
N.P.V.						Appeal	dis-
missed.
753




