
Supreme Court of India
Surat Singh vs State Of Uttaranchal & Anr on 10 December, 2012Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  2022      OF 2012
              (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.7070 OF 2012)

SURAT SINGH                                              APPELLANT
                                   VERSUS

STATE OF UTTARANCHAL (NOW UTTARAKHAND)     RESPONDENTS
& ANR.

                                  O R D E R

      1.          Leave granted.

      2.          This appeal,  by  special  leave,  is  filed  against  the
      judgment  and  order  passed  by  the  High  Court  of  Judicature  of
      Uttarakhand at Nanital in Criminal Revision No.  161  of  2004,  dated
      23.03.2012. The accused person, revisionist therein, is before  us  in
      this appeal.

      3.          In the instant case, Respondent no. 2, Km. Purni Devi  had
      filed an F.I.R. against the appellant for outraging her modesty. After
      due investigation, charge-sheet was filed against  the  appellant  for
      offences punishable under Sections 323, 354  and  506  of  the  Indian
      Penal Code, 1860 (the “IPC” for short).

      4.          The learned Chief Judicial  Magistrate,  Tehri-Garhwal  in
      Criminal  Case  No.  921  of  2002,  vide  judgment  and  order  dated
      07.04.2003, has convicted the appellant under Sections 354 and 506  of
      the IPC and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment of  one  year  with
      fine and rigorous imprisonment of six months, respectively.  Aggrieved
      by the aforesaid order,  the  appellant  had  unsuccessfully  appealed
      before the learned Sessions Judge, Tehri Garhwal, in  Criminal  Appeal
      No. 5 of 2003. The said appeal was rejected and the judgment and order
      passed by the learned Magistrate was upheld, vide judgment  and  order
      dated 14.09.2003. The  appellant,  against  the  aforesaid  order  and
      judgment, preferred Revision Petition No. 161 of 2004 before the  High
      Court, wherein the High Court, vide the impugned  judgment  and  order
      dated 23.03.2012,  has  dismissed  it.  The  appellant  questions  the
      correctness or otherwise of the impugned judgment and  order  in  this
      appeal.

      5.          During the pendency of this appeal, we are informed by the
      learned counsel appearing for the parties that  the  parties,  namely,
      the appellant-accused  and  respondent  no.  2  have  entered  into  a
      compromise and, accordingly, respondent no. 2 has filed  an  affidavit
      before this Court. The contents and terms of the said  compromise  are
      reproduced hereinbelow:

         “I, Km. Purni Devi, daughter of  Shri  Dhir  Singh,  R/o.  Village
         Rampur  Patti  Kunjani,  P.S.  Chamba,   District   Tihri-Garhwal,
         presently at New Delhi, do hereby solemnly affirms under  oath  as
         following :

         1.      That I am the informant in FIR  No.31/98,  dated  29.10.98
         U/s.354, 323, 506 IPC  P.S.Chamba,  Distt.  Tihri-Garhwal,  lodged
         against Surat Singh, S/o. Kamand Singh, R/o. Village Rampur, Patti-
         Kunjani,   Tehsil   Narendra   Nagar,   District    Tehri-Garhwal,
         Uttarakhand.

         2.      That on the basis of aforesaid FIR dated  29.10.98  lodged
         by me against the aforesaid Surat Singh, S/o.Kamand Singh, who  is
         my neighbour was put in trial and was convicted by Chief  Judicial
         Magistrate Tihri Garhwal, New Tihri for the offences U/ss.354, 506
         IPC and was awarded maximum sentence of  1  year  R.I.,  Rs.1000/-
         fine by judgment and order dated 7.4.2003 passed in Criminal  Case
         No.921/02. Appeal filed against the same was also dismissed by the
         Sessions Court and the High Court  by  judgment  and  order  dated
         23.3.2012 has dismissed the Revision filed by the aforesaid  Surat
         Singh and affirmed the order of conviction  passed  by  the  trial
         Court.

         3.      That the aforesaid Surat Singh, S/o. Kamand  Singh  is  my
         neighbour and his house is just adjacent to my house  and  we  are
         living in the same village.   Earlier  there  was  old  enmity  of
         aforesaid Surat  Singh  with  my  father  Shri  Dhir  Singh.   The
         incident in relation to which I lodged FIR against  the  aforesaid
         Surat Singh is of the year 1998 and is quite old and  continuation
         of dispute on the basis of said old incident, will  only  increase
         bitterness in my life.  Hence myself and my family has decided  to
         resolve all our dispute  with  the  aforesaid  Surat  Singh,  S/o.
         Kamand Singh so that no bitterness can be left in the  environment
         of our village and we can set an example  to  live  in  peace  and
         harmony by resolving all our disputes.

         4.      That I have entered into compromise with  aforesaid  Surat
         Singh and resolved all my disputes with him in a harmonious manner
         so that people of our village can live in peace  and  harmony  and
         bitterness be left between us and our families.

         5.      That the family members of aforesaid Surat Singh  informed
         me that he is in jail pursuant to the order of conviction affirmed
         by the High Court and observing the sentence awarded.  I wish that
         in the present matter our dispute may be settled  in  an  amicable
         manner and we should set example for other persons of our  village
         to resolve the dispute in a peaceful manner.  I hereby affirm that
         I have no grievance left against the aforesaid Surat  Singh,  S/o.
         Kamand Singh and want to the controversy involved between  me  and
         aforesaid Surat Singh, to come to an end so that we  can  live  in
         peace and harmony as good neighbours.”


      6.          We have heard learned counsel  for  the  parties  and,  in
      particular, the learned counsel appearing for respondent  no.  2.   He
      submits that he has compromised the lis with the appellant at her  own
      will. In view of the above, while disposing of this appeal, we  accord
      permission to compound the offences and the effect of  this  would  be
      the acquittal of the accused with the offences he is charged with.

                  Ordered accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)




                                                   .......................J.
                                                   (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)


      NEW DELHI;
      DECEMBER 10, 2012.

