
Supreme Court of India
Chhotelal vs State Of M.P on 14 July, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 664 of 2006                                                                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                                                      1





                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 664 OF 2006




                          CHHOTE LAL                                                          .....                              APPELLANT

                                                                              VERSUS

                     STATE OF M.P.                                                          .....                               RESPONDENT




                                                                                                                                       O R D E R

         1.          The   appellant   Chhote   Lal   stands   convicted   under 

         Section   376(2)   and   302   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   for 

         having   committed   rape   and   murder   of   a   young   girl   10 

         years of age and has been sentenced by the trial court 

         to   imprisonment   for   life   under   both   the   provisions   by 

         the Sessions Court and it was further clarified that the 

         sentence would continue for the remaining period of the 


Crl.A. No. 664 of 2006                                                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                                                                  2





         entire   life   of   the   accused.     An   appeal   was   thereafter 

         taken   to   the   High   Court   of   Madhya   Pradesh   which   has 

         confirmed the order of the Sessions Judge.   This appeal 

         has been filed in this Court as a jail petition.  




         2.          Mr.   Harbans   Lal   Bajaj,   the   learned   Amicus 

         appointed earlier did not put in appearance on the last 

         several   dates   and   even   yesterday   when   the   matter   was 





         called   out.     We   had,   accordingly,   requested   Ms. 

         Aishwarya Bhati, learned counsel  who was present in the 

         Court to assist us in the matter and appointed her as an 

         Amicus   in   place   of   Mr.   Harbans   Lal   Bajaj.     We   have, 

         accordingly, heard   her as well as the State Counsel on 

         the merits of the case.  


         3.          We   have   gone   through   the   evidence   with   the 


Crl.A. No. 664 of 2006                                                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                                                                       3





         assistance of the learned counsel and find no cause for 

         interference   on   the   facts   of   the   case   as   the   evidence 

         against the appellant appears to be fully credible.  We, 

         however,  feel that in the light of the judgment of this 

         Court in  Mulla  v.  State of U.P.  (2010) 3 SCC 508, some 

         modification   has   to   be   made   in   the   sentencing   part   of 

         the impugned judgments.  In the cited case, it has been 

         observed that though it was open to the courts to award 





         a   sentence   prescribing   the   length   of   incarceration   but 

         the power to commute the sentence or to grant remissions 

         which   rested   with   the   Government   had   to   be   respected. 

         Paragraphs 85 and 86 of the judgment read as under:-




                                 "85.     We   are   in   complete   agreement 
                          with the above dictum of this Court.   It is 
                          open   to   the   sentencing   court   to   prescribe 
                          the   length   of   incarceration.     This   is 
                          especially   true   in   cases   where   death 


Crl.A. No. 664 of 2006                                                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                                                                       4





                          sentence   has   been   replaced   by   life 
                          imprisonment.     The   court   should   be   free   to 
                          determine   the   length   of   imprisonment   which 
                          will suffice the offence committed.  Thus we 
                          hold   that   despite   the   nature   of   the   crime, 
                          the mitigating circumstances can allow us to 
                          substitute   the   death   penalty   with   life 
                          sentence.
                                  86.                Here we would like to note that 
                          the punishment of life sentence in this case 
                          must   extend   to   their   full   life,   subject   to 
                          any   remission   by   the   Government   for   good 
                          reasons."

         4.          We, accordingly, dismiss the appeal but direct (in 

         the   light   of   the   aforesaid   observations)   that   the 

         appellant   would   serve   out   the   sentence   of   imprisonment 

         upto   the   end   of   his   life   but   this   direction   would   be 

         subject   to   any   remissions   which   the   Government   may 

         choose to give under the circumstances to the appellant. 

         In this background, we issue a further direction to the 


Crl.A. No. 664 of 2006                                                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                                                                 5





         State   Government   that   (as   the   appellant   has   been   in 

         custody since the 10th  January, 1989) to take a decision 

         on   the   appellant's     continued   detention   or   release   in 

         accordance with law within a period of six months from 

         today.

         5.          Fee of the Amicus is fixed at `7,000/-.





                                                                                       ......................J
                                                                                       [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                                                       .....................J
                                                                                       [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]

         NEW DELHI
         JULY 14, 2011.



