
Supreme Court of India
T. Jayaraman vs State Of Tamil Nadu on 6 May, 2009Author: ......................J.
Bench: B.N. Agrawal, G.S. Singhvi
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1047 OF 2002


T. Jayaraman                                            ...Appellant(s)

                                       Versus

State of Tamil Nadu                           ...Respondent(s)



                                    O R D E R

          The appellant in this appeal was convicted by the trial court under Section
7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, [for short, `the Act'] and sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of six months and to pay fine of rupees
five hundred; in default, to undergo further imprisonment for a period of three
months. He was also convicted under Section 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the
Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year and to
pay fine of rupees five hundred; in default, to undergo further imprisonment for a
period of three months. The appellant was then convicted under Section 12 of the Act
and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of six months and to
pay fine of rupees five hundred; in default to undergo further imprisonment for a
period of three months.       All the sentences, however, were ordered to run
concurrently. The appeal preferred by the appellant was dismissed by the High
Court. Hence, this appeal by special leave.
                                          -2-
            We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the records.
The trial court convicted the appellant upon threadbare evaluation of evidence. The
High Court independently scrutinized the evidence and expressed its unequivocal
agreement with the trial court. The findings recorded by the trial court and High
Court do not suffer from any perversity warranting interference by this Court.
            The appeal, accordingly, fails and the same is dismissed.
            The bail bonds of the appellant, who is on bail, are cancelled and is
directed to be taken into custody forthwith to serve out the remaining period of
sentence.

                                                                        ......................J.
                                                [B.N. AGRAWAL]



                                                                        ......................J.
                                                [G.S. SINGHVI]
New Delhi,
May 06, 2009.

