
Supreme Court of India
Jagjit Singh vs State Of Punjab on 26 September, 2018Author: K Joseph
                                                                                           1


                                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.408 OF 2017

  JAGJIT SINGH                                                            ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                    VERSUS

  STATE OF PUNJAB                                                     ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT

  K.M. JOSEPH, J.

  1.                        The      appeal     after    granting   special      leave    to

  appeal is filed by the appellant against the judgment of

  the                    High    court     of   Punjab   and   Haryana     affirming     the

  judgment                      of   the   trial    Court    convicting    the    appellant

  under Section 304-B IPC but reducing the sentence from 8

  years rigorous imprisonment to a period of 7 years under

  the aforesaid section.                           The appellant who was tried along

  with his parents and two brothers was acquitted of the
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2018.09.26

  charge under Section 406 of the Indian Penal Code by the
16:49:49 IST
Reason:




  trial Court.                         In view of his conviction under Section
                                                                           2
304-B IPC, the trial Court did not find it necessary to

record a separate conviction under Section 498-A IPC.

2.         We heard Dr. J.P. Dhanda, learned counsel for

the appellant and Ms. Jaspreet Gogia, learned counsel for

the respondent-State.

3.         There is no dispute that the marriage between

the appellant and his deceased wife took place on 24 th

January,    1998.        It    is     also   not    in    the   region    of

controversy that she died well within seven years of her

marriage.    It     is    undisputed         that   the    death   of    the

appellant’s wife was unnatural and she died along with

her child by way of drowning in a river. In fact, PW8 -

ASI in his deposition stated that both the dead bodies

were secured together with one chunni.                   The only question

is   whether      the         death     is    to    be     attributed     to

cruelty/harassment on the part of the appellant arising

out of demand for dowry as contemplated under Section

304-B of the IPC.

4.         Learned counsel for the appellant pointed out

that the Court did not consider the evidence given by the

appellant and that neither cruelty nor any demand for
                                                                           3

dowry is made out. It is contended that the appellant’s

wife apparently took her life along with that of her

daughter on account of the fact that she was consistently

taunted by PW3 – the sister of the appellant’s wife who

was   married     to     an    industrialist.          The   appellant   was

earning      a    sum     of     Rs.3000/-       per     month.    However,

notwithstanding the same, the appellant had taken care of

her by fulfilling the desire of the deceased wife to

pursue education and she was, in fact, doing her Post-

Graduation       at    the     time   of   her    untimely     death.    The

appellant’s father (we note that the appellant along with

his two brothers and mother were tried by the trial Court

and   the    trial      Court    convicted   the       appellant   and   his

mother under Section 304-B but appellant’s mother stood

acquitted by the High Court) had in fact financed the

education of the deceased wife.

5.          Learned counsel for the State pointed out that

no reliance is to be placed on the evidence of the DW6

and DW8. They were neighbours. Their evidence supporting

the case of the appellant should be perceived as born out

of their need to maintain cordial relationship with their
                                                         4

neighbours.   As to what happened within the four walls of

the house, she would question as to how could they depose

before the Court.    She sought support from the evidence

of PW1 and PW3.     The evidence would indicate that there

is a proximity in a point of time between the acts, as

complained of, against the appellant and the untimely

death of the deceased.

6.      Before we embark on the examination of the case

it becomes necessary to remind ourselves of the contours

of the jurisdiction of this Court in an appeal which is

maintained after grant of special leave under Article 136

of the Constitution of India.     Does the Court have the

duty as a regular court to consider an appeal or is its

jurisdiction circumscribed by the consideration that this

Court is dealing with the appeal on the basis of grant of

special leave.

7.      We may profitably advert to the views of the

majority expressed in Saravanabhavan and Govindaswamy Vs.

State of Madras AIR 1966 SC 1273, which is as under:-

         “7. This is an appeal under Article 136 of
     the Constitution and we shall first state what
     this Court will ordinarily consider in such an
     appeal.  It is not to be forgotten that this
                                                 5

Court’s ordinary appellate jurisdiction in
criminal cases is to the extent laid down in
Article 134 of the Constitution. Some of the
appeals in that article are available as of
right and others lie if a special certificate
is granted by the High Court. This appeal
belongs to neither class. It is not as of
right and no special certificate has been
granted by the High Court. There is in our
jurisdiction no “sacred right of appeal” as
the French Canadian law assumes(See Mayor etc.
of Montreal v. Brown, (1876) 2 AC 168 (184).
Once a decision is given by the High Court,
that is final unless an appeal is allowed by
special leave of this Court. No doubt this
Court has granted special leave to the
appellants but the question is one of the
principles which this Court will ordinarily
follow in such an appeal. It has been ruled in
many cases before that this Court will not
reassess the evidence at large, particularly,
when it has been concurrently accepted by the
High Court and the court or courts below. In
other words this Court does not form a fresh
opinion as to the innocence or the guilt of
the accused. It accepts the appraisal of the
evidence in the High Court and the court or
courts below. Therefore, before this Court
interferes something more must be shown, such
as, that there has been in the trial a
violation of the principles of natural justice
or a deprivation of the rights of the accused
or a misreading of vital evidence or an
improper reception or rejection of evidence
which, if discarded or received, would leave
the conviction unsupportable, or that the
court or courts have committed an error of law
or of the forms of legal process or procedure
by which justice itself has failed. We have,
in   approaching   this  case,   borne   these
principles in mind. They are the principles
for the exercise of jurisdiction in criminal
                                                                   6

     cases, which this Court brings before itself
     by a grant of special leave.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)


8.      In   Mst.   Dalbir   Kaur    and   Others   Vs.   State   of

Punjab 1976 (4) SCC 158, the        Bench of two learned Judges

laid down as follows:-

         “3. As to the principles on which special
     leave is granted by this Court, the same have
     been clearly and explicitly enunciated in a
     large number of decisions of this Court. It
     has been pointed out that the Supreme Court is
     not an ordinary court of criminal appeal and
     does not interfere on pure question of fact.
     It is only in very special cases where the
     court is satisfied that the High Court has
     committed an error of law or procedure as a
     result of which there has been a serious
     miscarriage of justice that the court would
     interfere with the concurrent findings of the
     High Court and the trial Court. It has also
     been pointed out by this Court more than once
     that it is not in the province of this Court
     to reappraise the evidence and to go into the
     question of credibility of the witnesses
     examined by the parties, particularly when the
     courts   below  have   after   considering   the
     evidence, given their findings thereon. In
     other words, the assessment of the evidence by
     the High Court would be taken by this Court as
     final, unless it is vitiated by any error of
     law or procedure, by the principles of natural
     justice, by errors of record or misreading of
     evidence,    non-consideration     of    glaring
     inconsistencies in the evidence which demolish
     the prosecution case or where the conclusion
     of the High Court is manifestly perverse and
     unsupportable and the like. As early as 1950
                                                 7

this Court in Pritam Singh v. State, 1950 SCR
453: AIR 1950 SC 169: 51 Cri LJ 1270,
speaking through Fazl Ali, J. (as he then was)
observed as follows:
     The   obvious  reply   to   all  these
 arguments advanced by the learned Counsel
 for the appellant, is that this Court is
 not an ordinary court of criminal appeal
 and will not, generally speaking, allow
 facts to be reopened, especially when two
 courts agree in their conclusion in regard
 to them and when the conclusions of fact
 which are challenged are dependent on the
 credibility of witnesses who have been
 believed by the trial Court which had the
 advantage of seeing them and hearing their
 evidence.
     In   arguing  the   appeal,  Mr.   Sethi
 proceeded on the assumption that once an
 appeal had been admitted by special leave,
 the entire case was at large and the
 appellant was free to contest all the
 findings of fact and raise every point which
 could be raised in the High Court or the
 trial Court. This assumption is, in our
 opinion, entirely unwarranted.
     The rule laid down by the Privy Council
 is based on sound principle, and, in our
 opinion, only those points can be urged at
 the final hearing of the appeal which are
 fit to be urged at the preliminary stage
 when leave to appeal is asked for, and it
 would be illogical to adopt different
 standards at two different stages of the
 same case.
     On a careful examination of Article 136
 along with the preceding article, it seems
 clear that the wide discretionary power
 with which this Court is invested under it
 is to be exercised sparingly and in
 exceptional cases only,....
                                                 8

     Generally speaking, this Court will not
 grant special leave, unless it is shown
 that exceptional and special circumstances
 exist, that substantial and grave injustice
 has been done and that the case in question
 presents features of sufficient gravity to
 warrant a review of the decision appealed
 against.


Analysing this decision, two principles appear
to have been clearly laid down by this Court:


 “(1) that in appeals by special leave
 against the concurrent findings of the
 courts below, this Court would not go into
 the credibility of the evidence and would
 interfere only when exceptional and special
 circumstances   exist    which  result   in
 substantial and grave injustice having been
 done to the accused; and
 (2) that even after special leave has been
 granted the appellant is not free to
 contest all the findings of fact, but his
 arguments would be limited only to those
 points, even at the final hearing, which
 could be urged at the stage when the
 special leave to appeal is asked for.”


    8.    Thus   the   principles  governing
interference by this Court in a criminal
appeal by special leave may be summarised as
follows:
 “(1) that this Court would not interfere
 with the concurrent finding of fact based
 on pure appreciation of evidence even if it
 were to take a different view on the
 evidence;
 (2) that the Court will not normally enter
 into a reappraisement or review of the
                                                 9

 evidence, unless the assessment of the High
 Court is vitiated by an error of law or
 procedure or is based on error of record,
 misreading of evidence or is inconsistent
 with the evidence, for instance, where the
 ocular evidence is totally inconsistent
 with the medical evidence and so on;
 (3) that the Court would not enter into
 credibility of the evidence with a view to
 substitute its own opinion for that of the
 High Court;
 (4) that the Court would interfere where
 the High Court has arrived at a finding of
 fact in disregard of a judicial process,
 principles of natural justice or a fair
 hearing or has acted in violation of a
 mandatory provision of law or procedure
 resulting in serious prejudice or injustice
 to the accused;
 (5) this Court might also interfere where
 on the proved facts wrong inferences of law
 have been drawn or where the conclusions of
 the High Court are manifestly perverse and
 based on no evidence.


It is very difficult to lay down a rule of
universal application, but the principles
mentioned above and those adumbrated in the
authorities of this Court cited supra provide
sufficient guidelines for this Court to decide
criminal appeals by special leave. Thus in a
criminal appeal by special leave, this Court
at the hearing examines the evidence and the
judgment of the High Court with the limited
purpose of determining whether or not the High
Court has followed the principles enunciated
above. Where the Court finds that the High
Court has committed no violation of the
various principles laid down by this Court and
has made a correct approach and has not
ignored or overlooked striking features in the
                                                               10

      evidence which demolish the prosecution case,
      the findings of fact arrived at by the High
      Court on an appreciation of the evidence in
      the circumstances of the case would not be
      disturbed.”
                                    (Emphasis supplied)


9.       We may also notice the judgment rendered by this

Court in Sushil Ansal v. State Through Central Bureau of

Investigation   2014   (6)   SCC   173.     Therein,     in   the

judgment rendered by the T.S. Thakur,J. as His Lordship

then was, it is inter alia held in para 55 as follows:

      “55.   ....Perversity    in   the  findings,
      illegality or irregularity in the trial that
      results in injustice or failure to take into
      consideration an important piece of evidence
      are some of the situations in which this
      Court may reappraise the evidence adduced at
      the trial but not otherwise...."
                                   (Emphasis supplied)


10.      We lastly notice a recent judgment of this Court

in the case of Mohd. Ali alias Guddu v. State of Uttar

Pradesh 2015 (7) SCC 272 wherein the Court inter alia

held as follows:

       “17. In Ganga Kumar Srivastava v. State of
      Bihar, (2005)6 SCC 211 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 1424,
      the Court after referring to a series of
      decisions on exercise of the power of this
      Court under Article 136 of the Constitution,
                                                11

culled out the following principles: (SCC p.
217, para 10)
     “(i) The powers of this Court under
   Article 136 of the Constitution are very
   wide but in criminal appeals this Court
   does not interfere with the concurrent
   findings of fact save in exceptional
   circumstances.
     (ii) It is open to this Court to
   interfere with the findings of fact given
   by the High Court, if the High Court has
   acted perversely or otherwise improperly.
    (iii) It is open to this Court to invoke
   the power under Article 136 only in very
   exceptional circumstances as and when a
   question   of   law   of  general   public
   importance arises or a decision shocks the
   conscience of the Court.
     (iv) When the evidence adduced by the
   prosecution fell short of     the test of
   reliability and acceptability and as such
   it is highly unsafe to act upon it.
   (v) Where the appreciation of evidence
   and finding is vitiated by any error of
   law of procedure or found contrary to the
   principles of natural justice, errors of
   record and misreading of the evidence, or
   where the conclusions of the High Court
   are manifestly perverse and unsupportable
   from the evidence on record.”
                          (Emphasis supplied)
                                                                              12
11.          Learned    counsel         for   the   appellant        drew    our

attention to the recent judgment of this Court in the

case    of    Major    Singh      and    Another    v.   State       of   Punjab

reported      in    2015    (5)    SCC    201.      It   was     a    case    of

unnatural death.           Therein the prosecution witnesses, the

complainant-father and brother of the deceased deposed

that they saw the accused dragging the deceased towards

the room inside the house and that she was trembling and

on seeing the witnesses, all the four accused ran away

and the deceased breathed her last.                       The father had

spoken about the information he had given to the village

panchayat.         The Court proceeded inter alia as follows:

           “10. To sustain the conviction under
       Section 304-B IPC, the following essential
       ingredients are to be established:

             (i) the death of a woman should be
             caused by burns or bodily injury or
             otherwise   than  under  a   'normal
             circumstance';

             (ii) such a death should have occurred
             within seven years of her marriage;

             (iii)    she must have been subjected
             to   cruelty  or  harassment by   her
             husband   or  any   relative of   her
             husband;
                                                                 13
          (iv) such cruelty or harassment should
          be for or in connection with demand of
          dowry; and

          (v) such cruelty or harassment is
          shown to have been meted out to the
          woman soon before her death.”


      The Court also proceeded to hold as follows:

          “14.   The prosecution has not examined
      any independent witness or the panchayatdars
      to prove that there was demand of dowry and
      that the deceased was subjected to ill-
      treatment.   Ordinarily,    offences   against
      married woman are being committed within the
      four corners of a house and normally direct
      evidence regarding cruelty or harassment on
      the woman by her husband or relatives of the
      husband is not available. But when PW-3 has
      specifically stated that the demand of dowry
      by   the   accused   was   informed   to   the
      panchayatdars and that panchayat was taken to
      Village Badiala, the alleged ill-treatment or
      cruelty of Karamjit Kaur by her husband or
      relatives could have been proved by the
      examination of the panchayatdars. The fact
      that the deceased was subjected to harassment
      or cruelty in connection with demand of dowry
      is not proved by the prosecution. It is also
      pertinent to note that both the courts below
      have acquitted all the accused for the
      offence punishable under Section 498-A IPC.”


12.       We noticed that it was a case where the courts

had   acquitted   all   the   accused   for   the   offence   under

Section 498-A of the IPC.       The Court noted that the case
                                                                           14

of the prosecution is that there is a demand for scooter

and proceeded to hold inter alia as follows:

      “18. Applying these principles to the instant
      case, we find that there is no evidence as to
      the demand of dowry or cruelty and that
      deceased Karamjit Kaur was subjected to dowry
      harassment “soon before her death”. Except
      the demand of scooter, there is nothing on
      record to substantiate the allegation of
      dowry demand. Assuming that there was demand
      of dowry, in our view, it can only be
      attributed to the husband Jagsir Singh who in
      all probability could have demanded the same
      for his use. In the absence of any evidence
      that the deceased was treated with cruelty or
      harassment in connection with the demand of
      dowry   “soon  before   her  death”   by   the
      appellants, the conviction of the appellants
      under Section 304-B IPC cannot be sustained.
      The trial court and the High Court have not
      analysed the evidence in the light of the
      essential ingredients of Section 304-B IPC
      and the conviction of the appellants under
      Section 304-B IPC is liable to be set aside.”

                                            (Emphasis supplied)


13.      In this connection it is to be noticed that the

appellants in the said case was not the husband, but

they were the parents-in-law of the deceased.

14.      We    have    already        noticed       that   the     essential

ingredients     of    Section       304-B    IPC    as   noticed    by   this

Court   in    Major   Singh     &    Another       vs.   State   of   Punjab
                                                                    15

(supra). Parliament has inserted Section 113-B in the

Evidence Act.     In order that the presumption therein has

to be applied it must be established that soon before

her death, such woman must have been subjected by such

person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection

with    any    demand   of   dowry.      Upon    this   fact     being

established,     undoubtedly,      the   court    is    mandated    to

assume that the person has indeed caused the dowry death

as contemplated in Section 304-B IPC. Therefore, the

presumption cannot apply unless it is established that

soon before her death, a woman has been subjected to

cruelty   or   harassment    for   or    in   connection   with    any

demand for dowry.       The words “soon before” her death has

also been considered in a large number of cases.

15.       We need only to advert to a recent judgment

rendered by a Bench consisting of three learned Judges

in Rajinder Singh v. State of Punjab reported in 2015(6)

SCC 477 only for the purpose of appreciating the words

“soon before” occurring in Section 304-B IPC.                  This is

what the Court has to see

           “24. We endorse what has been said by
       these two decisions. Days or months are not
                                                                      16

      what is to be seen.    What must be borne in
      mind is that the word “soon” does not mean
      “immediate”.       A   fair   and   pragmatic
      construction keeping in mind the great social
      evil that has led to the enactment of Section
      304-B would make it clear that the expression
      is a relative expression. Time-lags may
      differ from case to case. All that is
      necessary is that the demand for dowry should
      not be stale but should be the continuing
      cause for the death of the married woman
      under Section 304-B.”



16.        Having regard to the aforesaid statements of the

law, we embark on a consideration of the appeal.                     The

prosecution case as projected through PW1 complainant –

Mohinder    Singh,    the    father      of   the   deceased    is    as

follows:-     the deceased was married on 24th January, 1998

and   he   had   given   dowry     beyond     his   capacity    in   the

marriage. After some time of the marriage, all the five

accused     started   beating      the    deceased.    They     started

taunting her that she had brought meagre dowry and that

her parents had not given a Maruti car in the marriage

due   to    which     they   had      felt    belittled    in    their

neighbourhood. The deceased conveyed this fact to the

complainant on telephone. The daughter was aged about

1½ years at the time of her death. In December 2000, the
                                                                                   17

deceased     accompanied          by    her    sister       went     to    see    her

parents     at    Amao       Farm,     PS   Khatima.        She    informed       the

complainant that she was being subjected to harassment

by her in-laws. She also told him that the accused had

threatened her that she could return to her matrimonial

home only if she brought a sum of Rs.2 lacs from her

parents     for        the      purchase       of    a      Maruti        car.    The

complainant then got prepared a fixed deposit receipt

for   Rs.30,000/- and handed it over to the deceased. The

complainant has also informed at that time to accused

Jagjit Singh on phone that he would visit Ludhiana after

the sale of the crops and would pay the accused the sum

of Rs.2 lacs demanded by them. He also requested him not

to harass the deceased. However, even then the accused

gave beatings to the deceased and turned her out of

their house. The deceased wife then went to the house of

Avtar Singh (nephew of the complainant), and he took her

to    the   house          of   the    accused       and     also     paid       them

Rs.2000/-        and    requested        him    to       treat     the     deceased

nicely. On February 16, 2001 at about                            11:30 a.m. the

deceased    made       a     telephone      call     from    the     PCO    to    the

complainant that all the five accused were subjecting
                                                                          18

her to extensive harassment and that she was feeling

depressed also informed him that on that date also the

accused had given her beatings and turned her and her

daughter out of the matrimonial home. She also told him

that she was making this telephone call from the PCO.

The complainant consoled the deceased and told her that

he was coming to Ludhiana and advised her to return to

her matrimonial home. It is also stated that his nephew

on being contacted told them that the accused and his

mother    approached    the     house     of    Avtar     Singh    in    the

evening and enquired about the deceased from him and

from his other relations. It is alleged that Avtar Singh

told    that   they   had    not    visited     him     nor   he   had   any

information     about       them.    It   is     the      case     of    the

prosecution      that       complainant        lodged     the      FIR    on

17.02.2001.

17.        PW1, father of the deceased inter alia states as

follows:

       The marriage between the appellant and his daughter

(deceased) took place on 24.1.1998.               After a good period

of marriage all the accused persons in the home started
                                                                           19

beating the deceased for not bringing sufficient dowry.

He states that they also used to taunt his daughter for

bringing insufficient dowry. The appellant also demanded

a Maruti car.          This fact was brought to the notice by

his    daughter   on    telephone.     A    female   child    was       born.

Thereafter,      he    states   that   the    deceased      went    to   her

house, two months before the untimely death took place

namely in December 2000.             He states that his daughter

alongwith PW3(another daughter) came to his farm.                          He

states that his daughter told him all the accused were

harassing and demanding Maruti car or Rupees two lacs

for purchasing the car.          The deceased daughter told him

that the accused misbehaved with her and she will not go

to    her    in-laws   house    as   they    used    to    beat    her    and

further (it may be noted that there is no allegation

that the accused appellant used to beat her) he deposed

that she told him that they would kill her.                       He states

that    his    brother    Ram    Singh      and   daughter        PW3    were

present.      He further states that he send his daughter to

her in-laws house after consoling her.                    Also a FDR for

Rs.30,000/- (Rupees Thirty Thousand only) was given to

her.        He phoned up the accused not to maltreat his
                                                                     20

daughter and he promised to give Rupees two lacs after

selling the crop.         He next says that all the accused re-

started giving the beatings and sent away his daughter

to the house of his nephew Avtar Singh.               Avtar Singh, it

is alleged brought this to his notice                 and gave Rupees

two   lacs   to     the    accused.       PW1    states     that    the

maltreatment,      however,     continued.            Thereafter,    he

relates    about    one    event   that   is    on     16.2.2001    the

deceased daughter phoned him up from a PCO. She informed

that all the accused were maltreating and she was very

much upset and the accused threw her out from the house

and that the accused told her that the accused shall not

allow her without Maruti car.         In cross examination, PW1

stated    that    the   deceased   daughter     was    preparing    for

examination B.A. Part-I which she was doing as a private

candidate and that she did graduation after the marriage

by studying in her matrimonial home.                  He also states

that at the time of her death, she was preparing for the

M.A examination.          He claims to have made payment of

Rs.935/- as the admission fee, which according to the

accused-appellant, was paid by his father but he does

admit that bank draft of Rs.935/- was got prepared by
                                                                         21

the father of the appellant.              He says that he does not

know whether the appellant was working as turner.                        He

says he might be working but he does not know that he is

earning Rs.2000/- or Rs.2500/- per month.                   He admits the

photograph    of     his    deceased      daughter      apparently       in

connection    with    the    marriage     of     the   ‘Devar’    of    the

daughter of Iqbal Singh (father of the appellant).                       He

admits that his other daughter (PW3) is married to a

person having his own industry which is being run by his

son-in-law,    his    brother    and      father.      He    admits    that

neither his brother who is lawyer nor the sister’s son

who appears to be a Superintendent in the BPO Office,

Ludhiana    made     any    report   to    the    police      station    or

elsewhere about the harassment.             He further states that

he did not convene any panchayat in this regard.                  He has

denied the suggestion that he used to tell his deceased

daughter to separate from the parents-in-law.                   He denies

the suggestion (apparently that his daughter took her

life) on the basis of the FIR lodged by him.

18.        We may also advert to what PW3 has actually

said.   Sometime after the marriage, the accused started
                                                                                 22

taunting her deceased sister by saying that she brought

insufficient dowry and that there is a demand for dowry.

She says that this is disclosed about 5 or 6 months

after the marriage.           Thereafter, she repeatedly told her

about the harassment at the hands of the accused on

account of dowry.           Thereafter, she refers to meeting her

parents in December 2000 along with the deceased.                               She

speaks     along     the     same     lines       as     her     father.         On

16.2.2001, it is alleged that the deceased came to her

house and wept bitterly.                   She told her that in the

preceding day, her husband (appellant) has hurled abuses

at   her   father      on    phone     and       at     that   time     she     was

accompanied     by     her    daughter.          That    all     the   five     (5)

accused used to beat her and she told her that when she

prevented      her   husband        from    abusing        her    father,       the

appellant gave her more beating.                      She specifically says

that when the appellant went to take meal, her daughter

also     started     sharing        meal     with       her    and     then     the

appellant slapped her.              The deceased also told her that

when     she   protested,      Balwant           Singh    (brother       of     the

appellant)      also    beat    her        and     abused      her.        It    is

thereafter she goes to a PCO and makes the call which
                                                                              23

PW1 has spoken about.            She does say that the appellant's

mother    came    to     her   house     to    make    enquiry      about    the

deceased and she told her that the deceased was under

depression and has gone to make a call at the PCO and

she should take her home. The appellant's mother told

her that she would herself return home.

19.        In    her     cross    examination         she    does    state    as

follows:

       Her husband and father-in-law are running their own

industry.       More importantly, she says it is correct that

the status of the accused was lower than that of her in-

laws.     They had represented that they had applied for

industrial       connection        and        would    start        their    own

industry.        She admits that the deceased continued with

her studies and was preparing for M.A. Examination at

the time of her death so as to become self-reliant.                          She

denies the suggestion made to the effect that it is on

account of his financial status that the appellant used

to shun the company of her husband.                         She also states

that    her     uncle,    an     Advocate      was    informed      about    the

harassment but he never lodged any complaint or FIR with
                                                                           24

a   view    to   ensure     settlement    of    the   deceased      in    her

matrimonial home.           She states that on 16.2.2001, the

deceased spent about 5 – 7 minutes with her.                     She denies

the allegation that she also taunted the deceased that

the   birth      of   her   daughter   has     further     increased     the

liability and therefore, the deceased committed suicide.

20.         No doubt we notice that PW5 is examined to show

that he was at the PCO from where the deceased made a

call on 16.2.2001 that he just saw but did not hear her

talk.       She was weeping, the witness deposed.                    Though

there is a definite role for the nephew namely, Av tar

Singh, which is referred to in the deposition of both

PW1   and    PW3,     the   prosecution      has   given    up    the    said

witness as being won over by the accused.

21.         Having adverted to the evidence which is the

basis for imputing the charge against the appellant, we

may now examine what is the defence evidence.                       DW5 is

the father-in-law of the appellant's brother (Sarabjit

Singh).       Be it noted that Sarabjit Singh was also an

accused in the trial. He says that after 6 years of

marriage, his daughter and son-in-law separated from the
                                                                      25

parents.     He states that his daughter always remained

happy in the house of her husband.              He states that PW3

is married into an affluent family.               PW3 used to tell

that   she   has   been    married   in    a    poor    family.      The

deceased     had   told    her   that     she    would    get     higher

education and bring herself to the level of PW3.                  Upon a

daughter being born, again PW3 reminded her of the fact

that she is married in a poor family and asked her to

get rid of the appellant.            This is how the deceased

started remaining under depression.             He     says   that   the

accused never demanded dowry from the deceased-wife of

the appellant. In cross examination he would say that he

used to visit the house of the appellant after about a

fortnight.

22.        DW6 is a neighbour. His house is just opposite

the house of the Iqbal-appellant's father. He has stated

that family of the accused is a nice family.                  He never

heard or saw the accused harassing the deceased with the

demand of dowry.          He denies the allegation that being

neighbour he tried to depose in favour of the accused.
                                                                   26

He says Sarabjit Singh is also a joint resident with the

present accused.

23.        Finally, DW8 is examined.      He says that he knows

the family of the accused Iqbal (appellant's father)

very well.       He states that the deceased-wife of the

appellant used to visit his house and used to address as

Mausaji.      His house is opposite to the house of the

accused.      He says that the deceased never complained to

him against the accused.         He says that PW1 used to visit

his   house    sometimes   and    that   PW3   is   married   at   a

distance of 4th streets from his house.             The family of

PW3 is well off whereas the family of the accused is an

average family.     The deceased intended to open a private

school in the house after completing her study.                    He

deposed that once in his presence PW3 told the deceased

that while she was married in an affluent family, the

deceased was married in a poor family.              He states that

PW1 visited the matrimonial home of the deceased once or

twice after the marriage but thereafter he never visited

their house.      PW3 is alleged to have taken the deceased

away from the matrimonial home on the morning of the day
                                                                            27

by telling her that father had come to visit his sister

in    village    Rampur.           He    states    that       the    deceased

absolutely      had     no     problem    while     staying         with   the

accused.       In cross examination he would depose that the

deceased used to meet him sometime.                  He is not able to

remember the date of marriage of the deceased.                        He did

not attend the marriage either from this side of the

deceased or from the side of the complainant.                        He also

did not attend the marriage of PW3 from either side (In

this regard PW3 is the elder sister of the deceased).

He deposed that PW1 did not visit the house of the

appellant as they were poor.

24.        A reading of Section 304-B of the IPC along with

Section 113-B of the Evidence Act would establish that

once the prosecution shows that soon before the death of

the    wife,     she     has      been   subjected       to    cruelty      or

harassment      for    or    in   connection      with   any    demand     for

dowry, the court shall presume that such person caused

the dowry death within the meaning of Section 304-B IPC.

The   words     'shall       presume'    in   Section     113-B       of   the

Evidence Act, while it mandates that the Court is duty
                                                               28

bound to proceed on the basis that the person has caused

the dowry death, the presumption is rebuttable and it is

open to the relative to prove that the ingredients of

Section    304-B   IPC   are   not   satisfied.   See   in   this

regard, the following statement of law contained in the

case of G.V. Siddaramesh v. State of Karnataka 2010 (3)

SCC 152:

    “26. Section 113-B of the Evidence Act raises
    a presumption against the accused and reads:

           “113-B. Presumption as to dowry death -
           When the question is whether a person has
           committed the dowry death of a woman and
           it is shown that soon before her death
           such woman had been subjected by such
           person to cruelty or harassment for, or
           in connection with, any demand for dowry,
           the court shall presume that such person
           had caused the dowry death.
           Explanation. - For the purposes of this
           section, ‘dowry death’ shall have the
           same meaning as in Section 304-B of the
           Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).”

    A reading of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act
    shows that there must be material to show that
    soon before the death of woman, such woman was
    subjected to cruelty or harassment for or in
    connection with demand of dowry, then only a
    presumption can be drawn that a person has
    committed the dowry death of a woman. It is
    then up to the appellant to discharge this
    presumption.”
                                                                    29
25.      We   may   also   notice    the   statement   of    law

contained in the decision of this Court in the case

of Ashok Kumar v. State of Haryana reported in 2010

(12)SCC 350 which reads as under:

      “24. Of course, deemed fiction would introduce
      a rebuttable presumption and the husband and
      his relatives may, by leading their defence and
      proving that the ingredients of Section 304-B
      were not satisfied, rebut the same. While
      referring to raising of presumption under
      Section 304-B of the Code, this Court, in
      Kaliyaperumal v. State of T.N.;(2004) 9 SCC
      157: 2004 SCC (Cri) 1417, stated the following
      ingredients which should be satisfied: (SCC p.
      162, para 4)

        “(1) The question before the court must be
        whether the accused has committed the dowry
        death of a woman. (This means that the
        presumption can be raised only if the
        accused is being tried for the offence
        under Section 304-B IPC).

        (2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or
        harassment by her husband or his relatives.

        (3) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or
        in connection with any demand for dowry.

        (4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon
        before her death.”

26.      In   the   perspective     of   aforesaid   state   of    the

law, two issues would arise. Whether there is material

within the meaning of Section 113-B of the Evidence Act
                                                       30

for the Court to have come to the conclusion that soon

before the death, the deceased was treated with cruelty

or harassed for or in connection with demand for dowry.

In this regard we have noticed that there is a material

in the form of testimony of PW1 and PW3.    The marriage

between the accused-appellant and the deceased took place

on 24.1.1998 and it survived only for a little over three

(3) years.   It is on 16.2.2001 that the deceased goes to

the house of PW3, her elder sister, spent 5 to 7 minutes,

according to the said witness, complained of cruelty or

harassment by the accused and her own daughter was with

her.   On the same day, she goes to the PCO, phones her

father PW1 and tells him about the harassment.   PW4 the

person working at the PCO has also stated that she was

weeping and the she made a call.    PW1 has spoken about

the contents of the telephonic conversation namely, all

the accused were maltreating and taunting her and that

she was very much upset and the accused had thrown her

out from their house with the daughter and that she will

not be allowed to come back without a Maruti car or

Rupees two lakhs.   If he is to be believed (In fact, two

courts have), this would amount to cruelty/harassment in
                                                                                   31

connection with demand for dowry.                             Therefore, the law

enjoins under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act drawing

of the presumption that the accused has committed the

dowry death.

27.        Undoubtedly,             the    presumption         is    rebuttable    at

the     hands        of     the    accused       by     adducing     evidence     and

discharging           the     reverse          burden.         Whether   any     such

evidence        in        discharge    with       reverse       burden   has     been

successfully adduced and whether it has been considered,

is the next question.                 The judgment of the trial Court

would    show        that     there       is    indeed    a    reference    to    the

contents of the deposition of PW5, PW6 and PW8.

28.        Power           under   Article        136    seemingly,      transcends

all limitations in regard to matters save where it is

expressly       excluded.          However,        by    way    of   self   imposed

intrusions into such power, as also by way of deference

to the scheme of the Constitution, the principles we have

alluded to stand culled out. Apposite to the facts of

this appeal, the following principles must inform us:

      1. Credibility of witnesses as commended to Courts

      below is not ordinarily reappraised.
                                                                         32
      2. Is there misreading of evidence?

      3.     Is    there    any     non-consideration    of    glaring

      inconsistency in the evidence which demolishes the

      prosecution’s case?

      4. Are the findings inconsistent with the evidence?

      5. Have the courts overlooked striking features in

      the    evidence       or    is   their   failure   to   consider

      important piece of evidence?

      6. Whether the evidence adduced by the prosecution

      fall        short    of    the    test   of   reliability    and

      acceptability and it is therefore unsafe to act

      upon it?

29.           The marriage took place on 24.1.1998.             According

to PW3 about 6 months after the marriage, demands were

raised for dowry.               Either a Maruti car or Rs.2 lakhs was

the demand.          There was physical cruelty according to PW1

father, and PW3 sister.                In December, 2000 the deceased,

meet both PW1 along with PW3 and complained about threats

and beatings. The death took place in February, 2001.
                                                             33
30. The Troubling features -        There is evidence, which

establishes that the father of the appellant contributed

to the continued higher education of the deceased.           Is

that compatible with treating his daughter-in-law with

cruelty.    The father-in-law stands acquitted by the trial

Court.     The mother-in-law even according to PW3 met her

on 16.2.2001 and enquired about her daughter-in-law.        PW3

told her that her sister was depressed and asked        her to

take her home.      PW3 states that the deceased told her

that on the night previous to 16.2.2001, the appellant

had hurled abuse on her father and when she prevented the

appellant from abusing her father, she was beaten even

more.    If this be true, indeed, it is cruelty       near, in

point of time and bearing a link proximate to the time of

her     death   immediately   thereafter.   (The   doctor   has

conducted post mortem on 28.2.2001.         He has opined that

the probable time which elapsed between death and post-

mortem was about 12 days).        This mean that the tragic

death took place on the 16th or 17th of February, 2001. But

PW1 does not depose a word about the telephone call made

on the eve of 16.2.2001. There is evidence of PW3 that in

their estimation the status of the appellant was lower
                                                                             34

and that they had represented that they had applied for

an    industrial        connection    and    would     start      their     own

industry.        That apart, Avtar Singh, the nephew of PW1,

who is referred to by PW1, as having direct knowledge of

certain aspects is not examined.

31.        The trial Court has carefully discussed the two

versions    canvassed.       The     questions      which    we     posed    as

troubling, most of them, was present in its mind.                           The

High Court has also referred to the defence evidence

including DW6 and DW8.


32.        The    trial     Court,      however,      finds       solace     in

rejecting the defence version on the score that it cannot

be squared with the deceased visiting the home of PW3 on

16-02-2001, and it takes the view that she would have

been the last person for her to visit. It is also found

that the deceased did not go on being called by PW3. The

trial Court had the advantage of watching the demeanor of

the witnesses.          We cannot hold that the view taken by the

trial   Court      as     affirmed    by    the     High    Court    is     not

warranted as such by the materials on record.                      We cannot

possibly    hold    that     the     view   taken    by     the   courts     is
                                                        35

manifestly perverse or that it is based on no evidence.

Even if we are persuaded to take a different view as

canvassed by the appellant we would not be justified in

interfering.    See the observations in Mst. Dalbir Kaur's

case (supra).

33.     The upshot of the above discussion is that we

are not persuaded to interfere.    The appeal shall stand

dismissed.


                                    …………………………….J.
                                     (Ranjan Gogoi)


                                    …………………………….J.
                                     (Navin Sinha)


                                     ……………………………J.
                                      (K.M. Joseph)

New Delhi;
September  26, 2018

