
Supreme Court of India
Vishnu & Ors vs State Of Rajasthan on 15 September, 2009Author: J Panchal
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, J.M. Panchal
                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 891 OF 2006


 Vishnu & Ors.                      ... Appellants

                        Versus

 State of Rajasthan & Anr.          ... Respondents




                    JUDGMENT

 J.M. Panchal, J.


          The instant appeal by Special Leave is

directed against Judgment dated August 3, 2005

rendered by Division Bench of High Court of Judicature

of Rajasthan at Jaipur Bench, Jaipur in D.B. Criminal

Appeal No. 359 of 1998 by which Judgment dated April

17, 1998 passed by Learned Sessions Judge, Karauli, in
                                                       2

Sessions Case No. 9 of 1996 convicting the five

appellants under Sections 302 r/w 149, 325 r/w 149,

323 r/w 149 as well as convicting the appellant Nos. 1

and 4 under Section 147 and 148 IPC as well as

sentences imposed therefore, are confirmed.


2.   The facts emerging from the record of the case are

     as under:

           There is a piece of land admeasuring about

five Bighas situated in village Golara, Distt. Sawai

Madhopur     now Distt. Karauli in Rajasthan.        The

Government allotted the said land to the father and

brother of the first informant Babu Lal but the

appellants and others who are Brahmins by caste were

not permitting them to cultivate the same, as a result of

which disputes relating to the said land were going on

between Brahmins and Jatavas of village Golara. The

incident in question took place at about 7.00 P.M. on

August 28, 1995. Babulal who was the first informant

had gone to place of one Babu Maharaj Devta for

performing religious ceremonies along with his father

Harmukh, Roshan S/o. Cheta, Prahlad S/o. Sualal and
                                                       3

others. On the said day sports such as long jump etc.

were also being played near the House of Babu Maharaj

Devta and Babulal and others were watching the game

of long jump.   When the game was being played, one

Kanhaiya Lal Sharma, resident of village Golara sent

Lata daughter of Bhanwar Lal who is appellant no. 5

herein, to inform Bhanwar Lal and his brothers that

Jatavas were tilling the disputed land with a tractor. At

the time when the information was conveyed Kanhaiya

Lal father of the appellant No. 5 as well as, the

appellants and others were present near the house of

Babu Maharaj Devta.       Kanhaiya Lal father of the

appellant No. 5    on learning about the information

conveyed by Lata loudly shouted that where all their

people had gone. On hearing this exhortion, Babu

Devta, Mahesh, Brahmanand, Kanta, Vishnu, Dindayal,

Kailash, Bhagwan Lal, Bhanwar Lal and Lata all

residents of village Golara along with Suresh, Rajendra

and Guddu S/o. Babulal who are residents of village

Masalpur, armed with axes and lathis proceeded

towards the land which was being cultivated by Ram
                                                       4

Khiladi who is brother of the first informant. As Kanta,

Vishnu etc. were menacingly proceeding towards the

land in dispute, the first informant got scared and

started running towards his house to inform other

members of his family because his brother Ram Khiladi

with another relative Devi Charan was cultivating the

field. In fact, there was no tractor deployed on the land

at all. Brahmanand, Kanta etc. gathered together at the

disputed place. On seeing these people coming towards

the field, Ram Khiladi started running away. However,

with a view to saving Ram Khiladi, the first informant

and his other relatives including his father Harmukh,

his mother Sua Bai, his wife Birma Bai, his brother

Sukh Lal and Raj Bai wife of Sukh Lal came to the

rescue of Ram Khiladi. On the way near the field of one

Kanhayia Gujar, the first informant was belaboured by

Brahmanand by giving a lathi blow on his left shoulder.

Bhanwar Lal, Vishnu, Kanta and Mahesh also assaulted

him by means of lathi, on different parts of his person.

The first informant fell down on the ground on receipt of

injuries but the appellants and others did not spare him
                                                      5

and continued to beat him with sticks and fists blows

when he was lying on the ground. Noticing that the first

informant was surrounded by the appellants and

others, his wife Birma Bai came to his rescue and fell

upon him. This is how the complainant could be saved.

The wife of the first informant was also not spared and

beaten by sticks.    When the appellants and others

turned towards the father of the first informant, he

pleaded with the appellants to spare him and his

relatives but of no avail and he was also assaulted and

injured. It was noticed by the first informant that his

brother Sukh Lal and his wife were running towards the

house to save themselves, but they were being chased

by the appellants and others. Sukh Lal was overtaken

and assaulted by Bhanwar Lal the appellant no. 5

herein, Bhagwan Lal, Din Dayal, Brahmanand who is

appellant no. 3 herein, Vishnu who is appellant no. 1

herein, Mahesh who is appellant no. 2 herein and Kanta

Prasad who is appellant no. 4 herein. All the appellants

had mounted attack on Sukh Lal with an intention to

kill him. Thereafter the appellants chased Raj Bai. She
                                                       6

was also overtaken and injured by means of lathi blows.

Sua Bai who was mother of the first informant was also

assaulted by means of lathis as a result of which she

sustained injuries. The appellants had left the mother

of the first informant who had become unconscious,

thinking that she was dead. The first informant and his

relatives were saved by Bharosi, Bhairu Gujjar, Ummed,

Radhey Shyam and others of village Golara.


3.     Because of the injuries sustained by him, Sukh

Lal died on the spot and as it was late in the night, the

body was kept in the house itself. On the date of

incident itself, the first informant had got scribed

complaint against the appellants and others and date

mentioned in the complaint was August 28, 1995. In

the morning of August 29, 1995 the first informant went

to the Police Station and handed over his written FIR

which was prepared on previous night.            As the

complaint was presented before the police on August 29,

1995, the first informant was asked to change the date

of the complaint to August 29, 1995. Accordingly, the

date mentioned in the complaint was changed by the
                                                       7

first informant from August 28, 1995 to August 29,

1995.   On the basis of the complaint lodged by Babu

Lal, offences punishable under Sections 147, 148, 302,

307, 326, 325, 323, 341 r/w 149 IPC and Section 3(1) of

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of

Atrocities Act) 1985 were registered. The dead body of

Sukh Lal was sent for autopsy on August 29, 1995.

During the course of investigation, the Investigating

Officer recorded statements of those persons who were

found to be conversant with the facts of the case.

Certain incriminating articles were seized from the place

of incident which were sent for analysis. On completion

of investigation, the appellants and others were charge

sheeted in the Court of Learned Judicial Magistrate

First Class for the commission of offences punishable

Sections 147, 148, 302, 307, 326, 325, 323, 341 r/w

149 IPC and Section 3(1) of Scheduled Castes and

Scheduled Tribes ((Prevention of Atrocities Act) 1985.

As the offences punishable under Sections 302 and 307

are exclusively triable by a Court of Sessions and as

offence punishable under Section 3(1) Scheduled Castes
                                                            8

and Scheduled Tribes ((Prevention of Atrocities Act)

1985 is triable by Special Judge, the case was

committed to the Court of Learned Sessions Judge,

Karauli for trial.


4.   Necessary       charges    were    framed   against   the

appellants and others. The charges were read over and

explained to them. The appellants and others did not

plead guilty to the charges. Therefore, several witnesses

were examined by the prosecution and documents were

also produced in support of its case against the

appellants and others.         After recording of evidence of

prosecution witnesses was over, the Learned Judge

explained    to      the   appellants    and     others,   the

circumstances appearing against them in the evidence

of the prosecution witnesses and recorded their further

statements as required by Section 313 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure 1973. In the further statements the

case of the appellants was that they had not committed

the offences alleged but were falsely implicated in the

case, because of enmity between the parties relating to

the land. The appellant No. 4 herein i.e. Kanta Prasad
                                                           9

pleaded alibi and claimed that on the date of the

incident, he was in college at Karauli. The appellant No.

3 herein i.e. Brahma Nand also pleaded alibi by stating

that on the date of incident, he was on his duty,

whereas accused Kanhaiya Lal stated that he was

unable to move and did not participate in the incident.

On behalf of the appellants, witness Horilal was

examined as D.W. No. 1.


5.   On appreciation of evidence adduced by the

parties, the Learned Sessions Judge concluded that it

was proved by the prosecution beyond pale of doubt

that deceased Sukh Lal died a homicidal death.           The

Learned      Judge    thereafter   noticed    the   testimony

tendered by the injured eye witnesses and held that the

appellants    with    others   had   formed    an   unlawful

assembly, common intention of which was to commit

murder of Sukh Lal and to cause injuries to Babu Lal

i.e. first informant, his father Harmukh, Raj Bai, Birma

Bai and in furtherance of the said common intention

had armed themselves with deadly weapons like axes

etc. and sticks.     The Learned Judge concluded that it
                                                                10

was proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellants

and others had assaulted Sukh Lal and committed his

murder in furtherance of their common intention.                 It

was further held that the appellants and another had

assaulted Harmukh, Babu Lal, Raj Bai, Birma Bai and

caused grievous as well as simple injuries on them in

furtherance of their common intention.               The learned

Judge concluded that neither the presence of accused

Kanhaiya Lal, at the place of occurrence nor his

participation   in    the   incident    was   proved     by    the

prosecution.         In   view   of    the   above    mentioned

conclusions, the Learned Sessions Judge convicted the

appellants and Lata under Sections 302 r/w 149, 325

r/w 149, 323 r/w 149 and 147 IPC but acquitted

accused Kanhaiya Lal.            The Learned Judge also

convicted the appellant Vishnu and appellant Kanta

under Section 148 and 147 IPC respectively.                   After

hearing the appellants and Lata , the Learned Judge

sentenced them to life imprisonment for commission of

offence punishable under Section 302 r/w 149 as well

as fine of Rs. 200 in default simple imprisonment for a
                                                          11

period    of two months, rigorous imprisonment for one

year and fine of Rs. 200 in default simple imprisonment

for two months for offence under Section 325 r/w 149,

rigorous imprisonment for three months for the offence

punishable under Section 323 r/w 149 and rigorous

imprisonment for six months for commission of offence

u/s. 147 I.P.C.     The appellant Vishnu and appellant

Kanta     were   also   sentenced   to   undergo    Rigorous

Imprisonment for one year for commission of the offence

punishable under Section 148.


6.   Feeling     aggrieved,   the   appellants     and   Lata

preferred D.B. Criminal Appeal No. 359 of 1998 before

High Court of Judicature of Rajasthan at Jaipur Bench,

Jaipur.     The Division Bench of the High Court has

dismissed the appeal filed by the appellants but allowed

that of Lata Bai i.e. original accused No.6 by Judgment

dated August 3, 2005 giving rise to the instant appeal.


7.   This Court has heard the Learned Counsel for the

parties at length and in great detail.     This Court had

also considered the testimony tendered by the witnesses
                                                      12

as well as documents produced on the record of the

case.


8.      The fact that deceased Sukh Lal died a homicidal

death is not disputed by the appellants before this

Court at all.    The injuries sustained by Sukh Lal are

noted in the inquest report. The autopsy on the dead

body of the deceased was performed by Dr. Hari Mohan

Meena who was examined as prosecution witness No.

19.     In his substantive evidence before the Court, the

Medical Officer has enumerated the injuries noticed by

him on the dead body of the deceased while performing

post mortem. The injuries stated by the Medical Officer

have also been mentioned in the contemporaneous

record namely post mortem notes produced at exhibit P-

38.     It is nobody's case that deceased Sukh Lal died

either because of self inflicted injuries or because of

accidental injuries or he died a natural death. On the

facts and in the circumstances of the case, this Court is

of the view that the Sessions Court and High Court were

justified in concluding that it was proved by the
                                                           13

prosecution beyond reasonable doubt that deceased

Sukh Lal died a homicidal death.


9.    The evidence of Dr. Hari Mohan Meena further

shows that on August 29, 1995 he had examined first

informant Babu Lal at about 10.00 P.M. and found that

he had sustained six injuries. On the same day he had

also examined Har Mukh who is father of the informant

at 7.30 P.M. and found that he had sustained five

injuries out of which one was found to be grievous. The

evidence of the said Medical Officer would disclose that

he had also examined Smt. Sua Bai and found that she

had    sustained     two    injuries     whereas      medical

examination of Birma Bai revealed that she had

sustained four injuries.    The evidence of the Medical

Officer also shows that he had examined Raj Bai and

found four injuries on her person. The testimony of Dr.

Nandlal Sharma P.W. 18, shows that on the request of

Deputy Superintendent of Police, a Medical Board was

constituted   by   Chief   Medical     and   Health   Officer,

Karauli.   His evidence further indicates that he was

heading the Board so constituted whereas Dr. Makkhan
                                                       14

Lal Kawat and Dr. Hukam Chand Gard were its other

members. His evidence establishes that The Members

of the Board had examined injured and Smt. Birma Bai

at 12.10 P.M. and injured Sua Bai at 12.30 P.M. On the

same day, X-ray of Sua Bai was also taken but it was

found that she had not sustained any grievous injury.

The evidence of Dr. Sharma further shows that on the

same day, Raj Bai was examined at 11.00 A.M. by the

Members of the Board and she was found to have

sustained six injuries which were caused by blunt

weapons and were caused within the duration of three

to four days. Her X-ray was also taken but the same

did not indicate that she had sustained grievous injury.

On the same day at about 1.00 in the after noon, the

Members of the Board had examined Har Mukh who

was found to have sustained five injuries caused by

blunt weapon and were of the duration of three to four

days. On examination of his X-ray, it was found that 7th

to 10th ribs on the right side of his body were fractured.

On the same day the Members of the Board had also

examined the first informant Babu Lal and found that
                                                      15

he had sustained five injuries on his person. However,

it was also noticed that he had not received any

grievous injury.     During the cross-examination of Dr.

Sharma it was brought by the defence on the record of

the case that the injuries sustained by first informant

Babu Lal could have been received by him on August

28, 1995. The Medical Officer opined that the injuries

could have been caused to the injured witnesses

examined by the Board within three to four days. Thus,

the testimony of Dr. Hari Mohan Meena stands amply

corroborated by the testimony of Dr. Nand Lal Sharma

regarding injuries sustained by the deceased and the

injured witnesses.


10.   The contention that several complaints were given

which were conflicting with each other regarding time

and place of occurrence and as the prosecution story

was manipulated the appellants should be acquitted

has no substance.       In the present case, the reliable

evidence of first informant Babu Lal makes it more than

clear that the incident in question had taken place on

August 28, 1995. Though the evidence of complainant
                                                       16

Babu Lal shows that his brother Ram Khiladi who had

managed to escape from the village had reached house

of his uncle and scribed one FIR, the record does not

indicate that any endeavour whatsoever was made by

Ram Khiladi to lodge the same with the Police Station.

It may be mentioned that village Golara is a small village

and incident relating to the death of one person of

village and injuries to several must have caused

sensation as well as anxiety in the minds of villagers

residing in the village. Therefore, some of the villagers

had also given vague information relating to the incident

in question. However, having regard to the facts of the

case this Court is of the firm opinion that Babu Lal had

got his FIR scribed from witness Prahlad who is

examined as PW-13 on August 28, 1995 but the same

was lodged on August 29, 1995 because the incident

had taken place at about 7.30 P.M. on August 28, 1995

and it was too late to go to the Police Station for the

purpose   of   lodging   complaint.    Witness    Prahlad

examined as PW-13 fully supports the claim of the first

informant Babu Lal.      He has in no uncertain terms
                                                      17

mentioned before the Court that at the instance of Babu

Lal, he had reduced the FIR into writing. The evidence

of first informant Babu Lal read with that of witness

Prahlad would show that Babu Lal was scared because

of the incident in question and he could not muster

courage to lodge the complaint on the date of incident.

Mangati Ram examined as prosecution witness No. 22

has stated that on August 29, 1995 he was serving as

Constable at Masalpur Police Station and that four

persons had come to the Police Station and told S.H.O.

that one person had been killed and others were injured

in village Golara. The testimony of said witness further

shows that on the said information being conveyed, he

alongwith S.H.O. and three to four persons had reached

the spot and had recorded certain proceedings. He has

further stated that written report about the incident in

question was handed over to him for registration in the

Police Station and that he had handed over the same to

the Office-In-Charge of Masalpur Police Station for

registration of the offences. Thus the testimony of first

informant Babu Lal and that of witness Prahlad gets
                                                      18

complete corroboration from the testimony of Constable

Mangati Ram, examined as prosecution witness No.22.

It is wholly irrelevant whether the FIR got prepared by

first informant Babu Lal was lodged at the Police Station

when Babu Lal is stated to have gone there or the report

already written on August 28, 1995 was handed over to

the Police on its arrival at the place of incident. What

cannot be ignored by the Court is that this is a case

wherein at least five persons were injured. Those five

injured persons are closely related to the deceased.

When a person receives injuries in the course of

occurrence, there can be hardly any doubt regarding his

presence at the spot. Further, injured witnesses would

not spare the real assailants and falsely involve

innocent persons.   The testimony of injured witnesses

which has inspired confidence of Learned Sessions

Judge who had advantage of observing the demeanor of

the witnesses and accepted by the High Court on re-

appreciation of evidence, unerringly proves that the

incident in question had taken place on August 28,

1995, wherein Sukh Lal lost his life and at least five of
                                                          19

his close relatives were injured.    Merely because the

incident had taken place on August 28, 1995, but FIR

was handed over to the Police on the next day, would

not in any manner go to show that no incident had

taken place at all and that because of manipulations the

appellants were falsely involved in the case.


11.   The argument that those who were injured had got

admitted in the hospital on August 29, 1995 but none of

them had reported the incident to the Police Station

during the night of August 28, 1995, and therefore the

prosecution case should be disbelieved is devoid of

merits. The very examination of the injuries sustained

by the injured witnesses almost after 24 hours would

not indicate in any manner as suggested by the defence

that as a matter of fact the occurrence had taken place

somewhere between 8.00 and 9.00 A.M. in the morning

of August 29, 1995. It is for this precise reason that Dr.

Meena    who    had   initially   examined      the   injured

witnesses, stated that the duration of the injuries

sustained by the injured was between 7 to 17 hours.

The information given by Medical Board, specially
                                                       20

constituted   to     examine   the     injured   perfectly

synchronizes with the time of injuries mentioned by the

injured witnesses.   It is true that none of the injured

had gone to the Police Station in the night of August 28,

1995 to lodge the complaint.         However, as noticed

earlier, the dead body of deceased Sukh Lal was lying in

the house and therefore it is but natural that the

injured would like to be by the side of the dead body of

the deceased. Therefore, non filing of complaint on the

same day, by any of them would not exhibit unnatural

conduct on their part so as to give benefit of doubt to

the appellants.      This Court further     notices that

deceased Sukh Lal had expired on August 28, 1995

itself and the post mortem on his dead body was

conducted at 12.45 P.M. on August 29, 1995. As per

the post mortem report his death had occurred within

18 hours which supports the claim made by the first

informant and others that Sukh Lal had expired on

August 28, 1995 in the incident which took place at

about 7.00 P.M.      The medical evidence on record is

absolutely in tune with the prosecution version in so far
                                                        21

as time and date of occurrence is concerned. There is

no dispute that Sukh Lal was not taken to the hospital

immediately on receipt of injuries by him because he

was   dead   and   the   other   injured   witnesses   were

examined medically only on August 29, 1995.            The

injured witnesses were subjected to searching cross-

examination by the defence but this Court finds that not

a single question was put to any of the injured

witnesses as to why he had not taken medical treatment

immediately or shortly after receipt of injuries by him.

Only Birma Bai stated in her evidence that the injured

had gone to the hospital in jeep.      However, in cross-

examination she made herself very clear by stating that

they had gone to the hospital next day after cremation

of Sukh Lal was over.


12.   Based on age of injuries mentioned in injury

certificate produced at Exhibit P-8 relating to the

injuries sustained by first informant Babu Lal and age

of injuries mentioned in injury certificate produced at

Exhibit P-13 which relates to the injuries sustained by

Harmukh, it was argued that the incident in question
                                                       22

did not take place at the time stated by the witnesses

and therefore, prosecution case ought to have been

disbelieved. It is true that, Dr. Hari Mohan Meena had

stated that he had examined injured Babu Lal on

August 29, 1995 at 8.10 P.M. and in the injury

certificate Exhibit P-8, the age of injuries was mentioned

to be 12 hours. It was further stated by him that on

August 29, 1995, he had examined injured Harmukh at

7.30 P.M. and in his injury certificate produced at

Exhibit P-13, it was mentioned that the age of injuries

was 7 hours. However, an explanation was sought from

the said witness during his cross-examination regarding

age of the injuries and it was explained by him that he

could not mention correct opinion about the age of

injuries in the certificates because he was all alone and

there was no light. According to him, he was also not

well and confused and therefore correct opinion about

the age of injuries could not be mentioned and on

realizing the mistake committed by him, on the next day

i.e. on August 30, 1995 he had informed S.H.O. as well

as C.M. and H.O. of the hospital after making correction
                                                          23

about the age of the injuries in the office copies of the

injury certificates.   The testimony of this witness is

accepted by the Learned Judge of the Trial Court who

had obvious advantage of observing demeanor of the

witnesses   and   also    by   the   High   Court,   on   re-

appreciation of evidence. No convincing reason could be

pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellants as

to why explanation offered by Dr. Meena regarding

mention of incorrect age of injuries in the injury

certificates should not be accepted by this Court.

Therefore, the argument based on age of injuries stated

in injury certificates, has no substance and is rejected.

As observed earlier, in the present case Medical Board

consisting of three doctors, on re-examination of the

injuries of the witnesses, unanimously gave opinion

about the age of the injuries sustained by the witnesses

which is not even disputed. What is relevant to notice is

that no question was put to any of the two doctors

examined from the panel of the Medical Board specially

constituted,   relating   to   the   duration   of   injuries

mentioned by them. There is nothing on the record to
                                                     24

disbelieve the testimony of the two doctors and come to

the conclusion that the duration of injuries mentioned

by them was not correct.    It is well to remember that

except one of the injured witnesses, others had received

simple injuries and therefore there was nothing wrong if

the injured witnesses had got themselves admitted in

the hospital on August 29, 1995 after cremation of

Sukh Lal. The plea based on incorrect age of injuries

mentioned in the two certificates has no merits and is

therefore, rejected.


13.   The plea that the provisions of Section 149 would

not be attracted to the facts of the case and therefore

the appellants who had not played overt act in causing

injury to deceased Sukh Lal could not have been

convicted under Section 302 with the aid of Section 149

has no substance.      Section 149 of the Penal Code

provides for vicarious liability.    If an offence is

committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in

prosecution of a common object thereof or such as the

members of that assembly knew that the offence to be

likely to be committed in prosecution of that object,
                                                       25

every person who at the time of committing that offence

was member would be guilty of the offence committed.

The common object my be commission of one offence

while there may be likelihood of commission of yet

another offence, the knowledge whereof is capable of

being safely attributable to the members of the unlawful

assembly.    Whether a member of such unlawful

assembly    was   aware   as   regards   likelihood    of

commission of another offence or not would depend

upon the facts and circumstances of each case.

Background of the incident, the motive, the nature of

the assembly, the nature of the arms carried by the

members of the assembly, their common object and the

behavior of the members soon before, at or after the

actual commission of the crime would be relevant

factors for drawing an inference in that behalf.      The

record unmistakenly indicates that accused Lata who is

now acquitted by the High Court, had gone to the place

where the first informant and his relatives were

watching sport event, to inform appellant Bhanwar Lal

and others that Jatavas were plying tractor in the
                                                       26

disputed land. The evidence of complainant shows that

moment the said information was conveyed by Lata,

Kanhaiya Lal i.e. father of appellant Bhanwar Lal had

loudly shouted that where all their people had gone,

upon which Babu Devta, Mahesh, Brahma Nand, Kanta,

Vishnu, Din Dayal, Kailash, Bhagwan Lal, Bhanwar Lal,

Lata etc. had armed themselves with different weapons

including axes and started proceeding towards the

disputed land. The appellants were knowing fully well

that the land was allotted to Jatavas and they were

entitled to cultivate the same, but with a view to

preventing   them   from   cultivating   the   land,   the

appellants with others had gone to the disputed land

with weapons and started attacking the first informant

and his relatives. Having regard to the definition of the

word `unlawful assembly' as given in Section 141 I.P.C.

there is no manner of doubt that the appellants were

members of unlawful assembly, common intention of

which was to mount attack and cause injuries to

Jatavas. The evidence of the informant proves that first

of all he was assaulted after which his wife was
                                                     27

assaulted and thereafter his brother Ram Khiladi was

assaulted.   His evidence further establishes that his

father Harmukh, his mother Sua Bai, his wife Birma Bai

were also assaulted by the appellants and others. His

evidence further shows that deceased Sukh Lal with his

wife was running towards house to save himself but the

appellants had chased him and after overtaking him,

delivered blows with dangerous weapons and sticks as a

result of which he lost his life on the spot.       The

appellants and others who had come in a group had left

the place of incident together. The cumulative effect of

the circumstances proved by the prosecution is such is

that the intention of the unlawful assembly was to

cause death of Sukh Lal and to cause injuries to the

injured witnesses. Thus the conviction of the appellants

under Section 302 r/w 149 cannot be said to be

erroneous at all and no ground is made out to interfere

with the same in the instant appeal. For the foregoing

reasons the appeal fails and is dismissed.
                                                                   28
14.   As the appeal is dismissed, the two applications for

      bail do not survive. Hence they stand accordingly

      disposed of.


                               ......................................J.
                                     (Harjit Singh Bedi)



                               ......................................J.
                                (J.M. Panchal)
New Delhi;
September 15, 2009

