
Supreme Court of India
M/S Prime Impex Ltd.& Ors vs M/S P.E.C.Ltd.& Anr on 18 March, 2013Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Jagdish Singh Khehar
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  480      OF 2013
             (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(CRIMINAL)NO.6102 OF 2012)


M/S. PRIME IMPEX LTD. & ORS.                   APPELLANTS

                                   VERSUS

M/S. P.E.C. LTD. & ANR.                   RESPONDENTS


                                  O R D E R

1.          Leave granted.

2.          This appeal is directed against the judgment and  order  passed
by the High Court at Delhi in Criminal Revision Petition  No.456  of  2011,
dated 13.10.2011.

3.          By the impugned judgment and order, the High  Court  has  taken
exception to the findings and conclusions  reached  by  the  learned  Addl.
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate in  Complaint  Case  No.  4060  of  2011  and
accordingly, has allowed the petition.

4.          Shri L. Nageswara Rao, learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellants would submit that the High Court, while  passing  the  order  in
Revision Petition filed under Section 401 of the Criminal  Procedure  Code,
1973, had not afforded the opportunity of hearing to the appellants  herein
and submits that the same is opposed to the principles laid  down  by  this
Court in  the  case  of  Manharibhai  Muljibhai  Kakadia  and  Another  vs.
Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel and Others, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 517.  In
the said decision, this Court has stated as under:
         “48. In  case  where  the  complaint  has  been  dismissed  by  the
         Magistrate under Section 203 of the Code either  at  the  stage  of
         Section 200 itself or on completion of inquiry  by  the  Magistrate
         under Section 202 or on receipt of the report from  the  police  or
         from any person to whom the direction was issued by the  Magistrate
         to investigate into the allegations in the complaint, the effect of
         such dismissal is termination of complaint proceedings.  On a plain
         reading of sub-section (2) of Section 401, it cannot be  said  that
         the person against whom the allegations  of  having  committed  the
         offence have been made in the complaint and the complaint has  been
         dismissed by the Magistrate under Section 203, has no right  to  be
         heard  because  no  process  has  been  issued.  The  dismissal  of
         complaint by the Magistrate under Section 203 – although it  is  at
         preliminary  stage  –  nevertheless  results  in   termination   of
         proceedings in a complaint against the persons who are  alleged  to
         have committed the crime.  Once a challenge is laid to  such  order
         at the instance of the complainant in a  revision  petition  before
         the High Court or the Sessions Judge, by virtue of  Section  401(2)
         of the Code, the suspects get  the  right  of  hearing  before  the
         Revisional Court although  such  order  was  passed  without  their
         participation. The right given to “accused” or “the  other  person”
         under Section 401(2) of being heard before the Revisional Court  to
         defend an order which operates in his favour should not be confused
         with the proceedings before a Magistrate under Sections  200,  202,
         203 and 204.  In the revision petition before the High Court or the
         Sessions Judge at the instance of the complainant  challenging  the
         order of dismissal of complaint,  one  of  the  things  that  could
         happen is reversal of the order of the Magistrate  and  revival  of
         the complaint. It is in this view of the matter that the accused or
         other person cannot be deprived of  hearing  on  the  face  of  the
         express provision contained in Section  401(2)  of  the  Code.  The
         stage is not important whether it is  pre-process  stage  or  post-
         process stage.”


5.          In view of the dictum laid down by this Court in the  aforesaid
decision, we are of the opinion that the High Court was  not  justified  in
passing  the  order  without  affording  opportunity  of  hearing  to   the
appellants.
6.          In the result, we allow this appeal, set aside the judgment and
order passed by the High Court and remand the matter back to the High Court
for fresh disposal in accordance with law, after affording  opportunity  of
hearing to the appellants.

7.          All the contentions raised by both the parties are left open.

            Ordered accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)




                                                   .......................J.
                                                      (JAGDISH SINGH KHEHAR)

NEW DELHI;
MARCH 18, 2013.
-----------------------
3
