
Supreme Court of India
Mithu Kalita vs State Of Assam on 28 July, 2010Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.843 OF 2006




      BADRILAL & ORS.                                     .... APPELLANTS


                                  VERSUS


      STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                          ..... RESPONDENT





                                 O R D E R

1.      Altogether   seven   persons   were   put   on   trial   for   offences 



under   Sections   148,   323   and   302/149   of   the   Indian   Penal 



Code.     The   trial   court   by   its   judgment   and   order   dated   20th 



January,   1997   acquitted   all   the   accused   persons       Aggrieved 



by their acquittal, the State preferred an appeal and the High 



Court  by the impugned  judgment  maintained the  acquittal of 



the three accused persons but convicted the appellants under 



Sections   302/34   and   323/34   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   and 



sentenced them to undergo imprisonment for life and rigorous 



imprisonment for one year respectively.

                                       2
2.    Appellants   have   preferred   this   appeal   against   the 



aforesaid judgment of conviction and sentence.

3.    According to the prosecution, on 29th January, 1994, the 



informant   Madanlal   (P.W.6)   and   his   father   Dhulji,   the 



deceased, were sleeping in a room adjoining their field and his 



nephew P.W.1 Rameshwar was sleeping outside. According to 



the   prosecution,   at   12:15   in   the   night   the   appellants   herein 



came   on   a   motor   cycle   and   threatened   Rameshwar   who   was 



sleeping   outside.   Appellant   no.2   also   named   Rameshwar   was 



armed   with   knife,   whereas   other   appellants   were   armed   with 



lathis. P.W.1 Rameshwar raised an alarm and on hearing the 



same,   the   informant   P.W.6   Madan   Lal   and   deceased   Dhulji 



came   out   of   the   room   and   all   the   appellants   started   beating 



them.     Madan   Lal   got   knife   injury   on   the   head   and   lathi 



injuries on hands and legs.   It is the specific allegation of the 



prosecution   that   appellant   No.2   Rameshwar     stabbed   Dhulji 



with   knife   which   hit   him  in  the   chest   and   lathi   injuries  were 



inflicted   on   the   head.     In   the   occurrence,   according   to   the 



prosecution,   P.W.1     Rameshwar     got   injuries   in   his   left   arm 


                                      3



and knee and Dhulji died on account of the injuries sustained 



by him. 

4.    After   usual   investigation,   charge-sheet   was   submitted 



and the appellants committed to the Court of Sessions to face 



trial.     Appellants   denied   to   have   committed   any   offence   and 



claimed to be tried.

5.    Prosecution,   in   order   to   bring   home   the   charge,   had 



mainly relied on the evidence of P.W.1 Rameshwar and  P.W.6 



Madan   Lal   who   claimed   to   be   the   eye   witness   to   the 



occurrence.     Prosecution   had   also   examined   P.W.7   Dr.   M.K. 

Pancholi, who had conducted the post mortem examination on 



the dead body of the deceased.   He had found four injuries on 



the   person   of   the   deceased   and   in   his   opinion   the   injuries 



caused  on  the   head  and  injury   No.4   caused  on  right  parietal 



region were by hard and blunt substance, whereas injury nos. 

2   and   3   by   sharp   cutting   weapon.     On   appreciation   of 



evidence, the trial     court held   that the deceased Dhulji died 



homicidal   death.     However,   it   found     that     the   evidence   of 



P.W.6   Madan     Lal     is     not     reliable   on   account     of 



contradictions   in vital particulars, omissions and further his 


                                     4



evidence is not corroborated by the medical evidence.   In this 



connection the trial court has observed as follows:

           "The   version   of   P.W.1   Rameshwar   is   that 

     accused Rameshwar stabbed knife in the chest and 

     stomach   and   Ramesh,   Badri   and   Shankar   beat 

     Dhulji with stick which was hit in the knees of both 

     legs.     Whereas  PW  -  6  Madan   states   that  Ramesh, 

     Badri   and   Shankar   beat   Dhulji   with   lathis.     He 

     states   further   that   Ramesh   hit   lathi   in   the   head 

     which   he   saw.     But   the   said   statement   of   Madan 

     (PW-6) is corroborated neither by PW-1 Rameshwar 

     nor First Information Report Ex. P-21 and his police 

     statement   Ex.   D-1.     He   does   not   mention   any 

     reason as to why this was not got written by him in 

     his   report   and   police   statement.     PW-6   Madan   Lal 

     states that he is telling this in the Court for the first 

     time.  Thus, the said statement of Madan Lal which 

     is not corroborated by any other evidence cannot be 

     considered   to   be   trust   worthy   beyond   doubt   and 

     this   probability   cannot   be   denied   that   since   the 

     report   of   Dr.   M.K.   Pancholi   (PW-7)   is   mentioning 

     death   of   Dhulji   due   to   the   head   injury,   therefore, 

     Madan   Lal   (PW-6)   improving   his   statement 

     according to the said medical report and is trying to 

     give   his  statement   according   to  the   medical   report. 

     In   such   situation,   giving   respect   to   the   policy 

     instances of "Ran Chhod Singh Versus State of M.P. 

     1983 JLJ 186" and "Ram Narayan and Jagar Singh 

     & Others versus State of Punjab AIR 1975 SC 1727'. 

     I arrive at this conclusion that the said statement of 

     PW -6 Madan Lal cannot be considered trustworthy 

     beyond   doubt   and   except   Madan   Lal   any   other 

     witness   does not make such statement that at the 

     time of the incident, accused Ramesh inflicted some 

     injury   by   lathi   on   the   head   of   Dhulji   from   which 

     also, this   conclusion comes out that no injury had 

     come   in   the   head   of   Dhulji   at   the   time   of   the 

     incident."


                                        5
6.    Identification of the accused persons was also doubted by 



the   trial   court   and   it   found   that   the   claim   made   by   the 



witnesses that they identified the accused persons is not fit to 



be   relied.     In   this   connection,   trial   court   had   observed   as 



follows:

             "I   arrive   at   this   conclusion   that   the 

      prosecution   had   been  unsuccessful   in   proving   that 

      the night of the incident was bright night or witness 

      Madan   Lal   was   having   torch   at   that   time   and   he 

      recognized   the   accused   in   torch   light.     In   such   a 

      situation,   this   probability   cannot   be   denied   that  at 

      12   o'clock   night,   this   encounter   might   have   been 

      made by some other persons  whom witnesses could 

      not   recognize   but   as   there   was   animosity   with   the 

      accused,   therefore,   due   to   suspicion   their   names 

      might have been got written in the report."




Non-compliance   of   Section   157   of   the   Code   of   Criminal 



Procedure  was also considered to  give  benefit of doubt  to the 



accused persons.  Relevant portion of the judgment of the trial 



court in this regard reads as follows:

             "As   far   as   the   question   of   complying   with   the 

      provisions   of   Section   157   of   Criminal   Procedure 

      Code,   in   this   regard,   it   is   the   responsibility   of   the 

      prosecution to prove beyond doubt that the copy of 

      the   First   Information   Report   was   sent   to   the 

      concerned Magistrate at once.   The purpose of this 

      provision   is   only   this   that   later   on   any   change   of 

      any   nature   could   not   be   done   in   the   First 

      Information Report.   The first Information Report is 


                                      6



      an important  document on  which  foundation stone 

      of the prosecution story rests.  Mandatory provision 

      of   Section   157   of   Criminal   Procedure   Code   is   in 

      respect   of   such   document   which   if   not   complied 

      with, then the state of suspicion is created.   In this 

      case,   such   is   not   the   clear   statement   of   PW-9 

      Chandra   Pal   Singh   that   he   sent   the   copy   of   First 

      Information Report to the concerned Magistrate and 

      nor has produced any document in connection with 

      sending   the   copy.     In   such   situation,   only   this 

      conclusion comes out that provisions of Section 157 

      Criminal Procedure Code were not complied with."




Cumulative effect of the aforesaid infirmities and various other 



infirmities pointed out by the trial court led it to conclude that 



the prosecution has not been able to prove its case beyond all 



reasonable   doubt,   and   accordingly,   acquitted   all   the   accused 



persons of the charges levelled against them.

7.    However,   the   High   Court   in   appeal   maintained   the 



acquittal   of   three   accused   persons   but   convicted   the 



appellants   herein   as   above   and   while   doing   so,   observed   a 



follows:

            "Learned   trial   court,   while   discussing   the 

      prosecution evidence, came to the conclusion that it 

      appears   to   be   doubtful   with   regard   to   the 

      involvement of the respondents in this incident.   In 

      the case where the eye witnesses Rameshwar (PW-1) 

      and Madanlal (PW-6) were also sustained injuries in 

      the same incident, their presence on the spot could 

      not be disputed and one Dhulji died due to grievous 


                                       7



      injuries   sustained   to   him   by   the   respondents/ 

      accused persons.  In such a situation, the approach 

      of   the   learned   trial   court   appears   to   be   erroneous 

      and   there   cannot   be   two   opinions   that   it   is   the 

      respondents/accused   who   caused   grievous   injuries 

      in   furtherance   with   the   common   intention   to   the 

      deceased   which   resulted   in   his   death   also   caused 

      simple injuries to witnesses Rameshwar  (PW-1) and 

      Madanlal (PW.6)."


8.    Mr.   Mandeep   Singh   Vinaik,   learned   Counsel   appearing 



on behalf of the appellants submits that the view taken by the 



trial court was one of the possible views and that ought not to 



have   been   interfered   with   by   the   High   Court   in   appeal.     He 



submits   that   the   trial   court   rightly   discarded   the   evidence   of 



P.W.1   Rameshwar   and   P.W.   6  Madanlal,  notwithstanding   the 



fact   that   they   were   injured   witnesses.     Ms.   Aishwarya   Bhati, 



learned  counsel  appearing for  the  respondent-State,   however, 



contends that the High Court while hearing the appeal against 



the   judgment   of   the   acquittal   is   not   precluded   from 



appreciating the evidence and come to its own conclusion. She 



points out that the trial court ought not to have discarded the 



evidence of P.W.1 Rameshwar and P.W.6 Madan Lal, who are 



injured witnesses.

                                         8
9.     It is trite that the High Court in an appeal from judgment 



of acquittal does not interfere with the same when it is found 



that   the   view   taken   by   the   lower   court   is   one   of   the   possible 



views.   It is further trite that the High Court in appeal from a 



judgment   of   acquittal   can   appraise   evidence   and   come   to   its 



own conclusion.  However, while coming to its own conclusion, 



it is expected to give due weight to the reasoning given by the 



trial   court   for   acquittal.   High   Court   interferes   with   the   same 



only when it is found that the view taken is not possible to be 



taken in the state of evidence.

10.    Bearing in mind the aforesaid principle when we proceed 



to examine the facts of the present case, we find that the view 



taken by the trial court is a possible view. While granting the 



benefit   of   doubt   to   the   accused   persons,   it   took   into 



consideration   the   contradictions   and   omissions   in   the 



evidence   of   prosecution   witnesses   namely   P.W.   1   Rameshwar 



and   P.W.   6   Madan   Lal.       Not   only   this,   it   found   total   non-

compliance   of   the   provisions   of   Section   157   of   the   Code   of 



Criminal   Procedure.     Not   only   that   the   witnesses   claim   of 



identification of the accused persons was also doubted.   If all 


                                         9



these considerations are taken collectively, there is no escape 



from   the   conclusion   that   the   view   taken   by   the   trial   court   is 



one of the possible views.  Injuries to a witness do indicate his 



presence at the time of incident,  but from that it does not flow 



that  his  evidence  is   to  be  accepted  automatically.   From   what 



we  have  observed  above  it  cannot  be  said  that view taken  by 



the trial court is perverse and therefore, we are of the opinion 



that   in   the   facts   and   circumstances   of   the   case,   the   High 



Court erred in interfering with the order of acquittal.  

11.    In   the   result,   the   appeal   is   allowed,   the   impugned 



judgment of conviction and sentence is set aside.    Appellants 



are in jail, they  be set at liberty forthwith, unless  required in 



any other case.

                                       ................................................J

                                               [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                       .................................................J

                                        [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]



NEW DELHI

JULY 29, 2010.


                                            1




                                                                                      
                                                                       [PART-I]  
                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  843 OF 2006



                                  
           BADRILAL & ORS.                             .....         APPELLANTS

                                      VERSUS

           STATE OF M.P.                          .....    RESPONDENT





                                 O R D E R

             We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.

             Vide our separate reasoned order, we have allowed 

    this   appeal.     As   per   the   counsel,   the   appellants   are 

    stated   to   be   in   jail.   The   appellants   shall   be   set   at 

    liberty   forthwith   if   not   required   in   connection   with 

    any                 other                     case.                             

             The reasoned order to follow.  

                                  ......................J
                                  [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                  ......................J
                                  [C.K. PRASAD]
NEW DELHI
JULY 29, 2010.

