
Supreme Court of India
Sukhdev Singh vs State Of Haryana on 1 June, 2007Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, D.K. Jain
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1049 of 2005

PETITIONER:
Sukhdev Singh

RESPONDENT:
State of Haryana

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 01/06/2007

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT & D.K. JAIN

JUDGMENT:

J U D G M E N T
WITH 
CRIMINAL MISC.PETITION NO.4562 OF 2007

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a learned 
Single Judge of the Punjab and Haryana High Court 
dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant. The appeal was 
filed by the appellant against the judgment of the learned 
Sessions Judge, Sirsa convicting him for offence punishable 
under Section 18 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985 (in short the 'Act') and sentencing him 
to undergo imprisonment for ten years and to pay a fine of 
Rs.1,00,000/- with default stipulation.

2.	Appeal before the High Court was disposed of in the 
absence of learned counsel for the appellant. The order itself 
noticed that with the assistance of learned counsel for the 
State, learned Single Judge perused the records and delivered 
the judgment. 

3.	From the order of the High Court it appears that notice 
was issued to the appellant for engaging another counsel as 
the High Court noticed that he was not represented. It is noted 
in the order that there was no evidence to show that the notice 
was served on the appellant or not, yet the High Court 
disposed of the matter ex parte. 

4.	In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the 
appellant submitted that no notice was received by the 
appellant regarding non-appearance of his lawyer. In any 
event the lawyer who was earlier appearing had withdrawn 
form the case without any intimation to the appellant. 
5.	Though several other points are raised in support of the 
appeal, it is not necessary to refer to them. Since the High 
Court itself was not sure whether notice was served or not, it 
should not have taken up the matter ex parte. The matter is 
remitted to the High Court for fresh consideration on merits. 
As the matter is pending since long before the High Court, let 
the parties appear before the High Court without further 
notice on 16th July, 2007. The Hon'ble Chief Justice is 
requested to list the matter before an appropriate Bench. 

6.	The appeal is disposed of accordingly.

7.	In view of this order, no order is necessary to be passed 
in Crl.M.P.No.4562 of 2007. 

