
Supreme Court of India
Charanjit Lamba vs Commndng.Officer,Southern ... on 6 July, 2010Author: T Thakur
Bench: Dalveer Bhandari, T.S. Thakur
                                                   REPORTABLE



            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICITION

           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1027 OF 2002


Charanjit Lamba                            ...Appellant


         Versus


Commanding Officer, Southern               ...Respondents
Command & Ors.




                    JUDGMENT

T.S. THAKUR, J.


1.   This appeal by special leave arises out of an order

dated 15th September, 1998 passed by the High Court of

judicature at Bombay whereby Criminal Writ Petition No.489

of 1997 filed by the appellant has been dismissed and the
                              2


order of dismissal from service on proved misconduct

affirmed. The factual matrix giving rise to the disciplinary

proceedings against the appellant and his eventual dismissal

from service has been set out by the High Court in the order

under appeal. We need not, therefore, re-count the same

over again. Suffice it to say that the appellant who at the

relevant time was serving as a Major in the Indian Army was

consequent upon a finding recorded against him in a Court

of Inquiry brought up for trial before a General Court Martial

(GCM for short) on the following two distinct charges:


          FIRST CHARGE ARMY ACT SECTION 52(f).

          SUCH AN OFFENCE AS IS MENTIONED IN
          CLAUSE (f) OF SECTION 52 OF THE ARMY
          ACT, WITH INTENT TO CAUSE WRONGFUL
          LOSS TO A PERSON

          In that he, at field on 30th Jul 92, with intent
          to cause wrongful gain to himself, improperly
          claimed Rs.16,589.30 (Rs. Sixteen thousand
          five hundred eighty nine and paise thirty
          only) from CDA (Q) Pune on account of
          moving his household luggage and car to
          Chandigarh, well knowing that he was legally
          not entitled to the same.

          SECOND CHARGE, ARMY ACT SECTION 45
                                3


            BEING AN OFFICER BEHAVING IN A MANNER
            UNBECOMING HIS POSITION AND THE
            CHARACTER EXPECTED OF HIM

            In that he, at Pune, between 03 Sep 92 and
            Jun 93, improperly failed to pay the final
            electricity bill dated 03 Sep 92 amounting to
            Rs.8132.35 (Rs. eight thousand one hundred
            thirty two and paise thirty five only) to
            Maharashtra State Electricity Board (MSEB)
            in respect of H No.12-B Kohun Road, Pune-1
            which was allotted to him."

2.   Evidence adduced before the GCM eventually led to the

appellant    being   held   guilty   for   improperly   claiming

Rs.16,589.30 on account of transfer of his household

luggage and car to Chandigarh. The GCM found that the

family of the appellant had continued to occupy government

accommodation at Pune even after his posting to the field

area and that the agency who is alleged to have transported

the luggage and the car of the appellant did not exist at the

given address. The evidence given by the appellant in his

defence was also found by the GCM to be unreliable on

account of material contradictions in the deposition of the

defence witnesses. The GCM on proof of the said charge
                               4


sentenced him to forfeiture of ten years past service for

purposes of pension. In so far as the second charge, viz.

non-payment of electricity bill was concerned, the GCM

declared the appellant not guilty. In its opinion the appellant

had never refused to pay the electricity bill which was at any

rate a matter between him and the Maharashtra State

Electricity Board. The GCM took the view that the default of

the petitioner could not be termed as conduct unbecoming of

an official subject to the Army Act to call for any penal

action.


3.   Aggrieved by the findings and the sentence awarded to

him by the GCM the petitioner filed an appeal before the

General Officer Commanding, Maharashtra and Gujarat Area

(hereinafter referred to as the `GOC M & G Area') who

happened to be the confirming authority also. The GOC M &

G Area, however, took the view that the sentence awarded

to the appellant on the first charge was lenient inasmuch as

the offence committed by the appellant was serious and

involved moral turpitude. It also noted that the appellant
                              5


had past convictions to his credit which ought to be kept in

view. The finding recorded by the GCM in regard to the

second charge framed against the appellant was also found

to be untenable by GOC M & G Area as according to him the

conduct of the appellant fell within the ambit of Section 4E

of the Army Act which made his behaviour unbecoming of an

officer. The GOC M & G Area accordingly remanded the

matter back to the GCM for re-consideration on the question

of sentence to be awarded to the appellant on the first

charge and whether the appellant could be held guilty on the

second charge. The order made it clear that the GOC M & G

Area did not intend to interfere with the discretion vested in

the GCM which was free to decide the matter in the manner

it liked.


4.    The GCM accordingly assembled again to consider the

matter and while sticking to the reasons given by it in

regard to the first charge found the second charge also to

have been proved. The GCM on that basis revoked the

earlier sentence and sentenced the appellant to dismissal
                              6


from service which order was after confirmation by the

competent authority assailed by the appellant before the

High Court at Bombay in Criminal Writ Petition No.489 of

1997 as already noticed earlier.


5. Before the High Court several contentions appear to have

been urged on behalf of the appellant which were examined

and repelled by the High Court while dismissing the writ

petition in terms of the order impugned in this appeal. The

correctness of the view taken by the High Court on the

grounds urged before it has not been assailed before us

except in so far as the High Court has held that the

punishment of dismissal imposed upon the appellant was in

no way disproportionate to the gravity of the offence

committed by him.


6. Mr. P.S. Patwalia, learned senior counsel appearing for

the appellant argued that the order of dismissal of the

appellant from service was in the facts and circumstances of

the case disproportionate to the gravity of the charges
                               7


framed against the appellant. He relied upon the decisions of

this Court to which we shall presently refer to submit that

judicial review of the order of dismissal would justify

intervention by a Writ Court in cases where punishment was

disproportionate to the nature of misconduct proved against

the delinquent. The present was according to him one such a

case that called for the Court's intervention to either reduce

the punishment or to direct the same to be reduced by the

competent authority.


7.   In Coimbatore District Central Coop. Bank v.

Employees Assn. (2007) 4 SCC 669 this Court declared

that the doctrine of proportionality has not only arrived in

our legal system but has come to stay. With the rapid

growth of the administrative law and the need to control

possible   abuse   of    discretionary   powers        by     various

administrative authorities, certain principles have been

evolved by reference to which the action of such authorities

can be judged. If any action taken by an authority is

contrary   to   law,    improper,   irrational    or        otherwise
                              8


unreasonable, a court competent to do so can interfere with

the same while exercising its power of judicial review.


8.   This Court referred with approval to the decision of the

House of Lords in Council of Civil Service Union v.

Minister for Civil Service (1985 AC 374) where Lord

Diplock summed up the grounds on which administrative

action was open to judicial review by a Writ Court. Lord

Diplock's off-quoted passage dealing with the scope of

judicial review of an administrative action may be gainfully

extracted at this stage:


          "Judicial review has I think developed to a
          stage today when, without reiterating any
          analysis of the steps by which the
          development has come about, one can
          conveniently classify under three heads the
          ground on which administrative action is
          subject to control by judicial review. The
          first ground I would call `illegality', the
          second `irrationality' and the third `procedural
          impropriety'. That is not to say that further
          development on a case-by-case basis may
          not in course of time add further grounds. I
          have in mind particularly the possible
          adoption in the future of the principle of
          `proportionality'....."
                                  9
9.   The doctrine of proportionality which Lord Diplock saw

as a future possibility is now a well recognized ground on

which   a    Writ   Court   can   interfere   with     the   order    of

punishment imposed upon an employee if the same is so

outrageously disproportionate to the nature of misconduct

that it shocks conscience of the Court. We may at this stage

briefly refer to the decisions of this Court which have over

the years applied the doctrine of proportionality to specific

fact situations.


10. In Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh

(1983) 2 SCC 442 this Court held that if the penalty

imposed is disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct,

it would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.


11. In Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India & Ors. (1987) 4

SCC 611, this Court was dealing with a case where the

petitioner    had    made     a       representation     about       the

maltreatment given to him directly to the higher officers. He
                               10


was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for one year for

that offence. While serving the sentence imposed upon him

he declined to eat food. The summary court martial

assembled   the   next   day   sentenced   him   to   undergo

imprisonment for one more year and dismissal from service.

This Court held that the punishment imposed upon the

delinquent was totally disproportionate to the gravity of the

offence committed by him.       So also in Ex-Naik Sardar

Singh v. Union of India & Ors. (1991) 3 SCC 213

instead of one bottle of brandy that was authorized the

delinquent was found carrying four bottles of brandy while

going home on leave. He was sentenced to three months

rigorous imprisonment and dismissal from service which was

found by this Court to be disproportionate to the gravity of

the offence proved against him.


12.   The decision of this Court in Hind Construction &

Engineering Co. Ltd. v. Workmen (AIR 1965 SC 917)

dealt with a situation where some workers had remained

absent from duty treating a particular day as a holiday.
                               11


They were for that misconduct dismissed from service. This

Court held that the absence of the workmen could have

been treated as `leave without pay' and they could also be

warned and not fined. Reversing the order of punishment

this Court observed:


          "It is impossible to think that any other
          reasonable employer would have imposed the
          extreme punishment of dismissal on its entire
          permanent staff in this manner.

13. Reference may also be made to Management of the

Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and

Industry v. Workman, Shri R.K. Mittal (1972) 1 SC 40)

where the employer had issued a legal notice to the

federation and to the international chamber of Commerce

which   brought   discredit   to    the   petitioner-employer.   A

domestic inquiry was held in which he was found guilty and

his services terminated. This Court held that the punishment

was disproportionate to the misconduct alleged observing:


          "The Federation had made a mountain out of
          a mole hill and made a trivial matter into one
          involving loss of its prestige and reputation."
                                12
14.   We may refer to the decision of this Court in M.P.

Gangadharan & Anr. v. State of Kerala & Ors. (2006) 6

SCC 162, where this Court declared that the question of

reasonableness and fairness on the part of the statutory

shall have to be considered in the context of the factual

matrix obtaining in each case and that it cannot be put in a

straitjacket formula. The following passage is in this regard

apposite:


            "34. The constitutional requirement for
            judging the question of reasonableness and
            fairness on the part of the statutory authority
            must be considered having regard to the
            factual matrix obtaining in each case. It
            cannot be put in a straitjacket formula. It
            must be considered keeping in view the
            doctrine of flexibility. Before an action is
            struck down, the court must be satisfied that
            a case has been made out for exercise of
            power of judicial review. We are not
            unmindful of the development of the law that
            from     the    doctrine     of    Wednesbury
            unreasonableness, the court is leaning
            towards the doctrine of proportionality........."

15. That the punishment imposed upon a delinquent should

commensurate       to   the   nature   and    generally   of    the

misconduct is not only a requirement of fairness, objectivity,
                               13


and non-discriminatory treatment which even those form

quality of a misdemeanour are entitled to claim but the

same is recognized as being a part of Article 14 of the

Constitution.    It is also evident from the long time of

decisions referred to above that the courts in India have

recognized the doctrine of proportionality as one of the

ground for judicial review. Having said that we need to

remember that the quantum of punishment in disciplinary

matters   is    something   that    rests        primarily   with   the

disciplinary authority. The jurisdiction of a Writ Court or the

Administrative Tribunal for that matter is limited to finding

out   whether     the   punishment          is     so    outrageously

disproportionate as to be suggestive of lack of good faith.

What is clear is that while judicially reviewing an order of

punishment imposed upon a delinquent employee the Writ

Court would not assume the role of an appellate authority. It

would not impose a lesser punishment merely because it

considers the same to be more reasonable than what the

disciplinary authority has imposed. It is only in cases where
                             14


the punishment is so disproportionate to the gravity of

charge that no reasonable person placed in the position of

the disciplinary authority could have imposed such a

punishment that a Writ Court may step in to interfere with

the same.


16. The question then is whether the present is indeed one

such case where the High Court could and ought to have

interfered with the sentence imposed upon the appellant on

the doctrine of proportionality. Our answer is in the

negative. The appellant was holding the rank of a Major in

the Indian Army at the time he committed the misconduct

alleged and proved against him. As an officer of disciplined

force like the Army he was expected to maintain the highest

standard of honesty and conduct and forebear from doing

anything that could be termed as unbecoming of      anyone

holding that rank and office. Making a false claim for

payment of transport charges of household luggage and car

to Chandigarh was a serious matter bordering on moral

turpitude. Breach of the rule requiring him to clear his
                                15


electricity dues upon his transfer from the place of his

posting was also not credit worthy for an officer. The

competent authority was therefore justified in taking the

view that the nature of the misconduct proved against the

appellant called for a suitable punishment. Inasmuch as the

punishment    chosen     was   dismissal    from     service,   the

competent authority, did not in our opinion, take an

outrageously absurd view of the matter. We need to

remember that the higher the public office held by a person

the greater is the demand for rectitude on his part. An

officer holding the rank of Major has to lead by example not

only in the matter of his readiness to make the supreme

sacrifice required of him in war or internal strife but even in

adherence    to   the   principles   of   honesty,   loyalty    and

commitment. An officer cannot inspire those under his

command to maintain the values of rectitude and to remain

committed to duty if he himself is found lacking in that

quality. Suffice it to say that any act on the part of an officer

holding a commission in the Indian Army which is subversive
                              16


of army discipline or high traditions of the Army renders

such person unfit to stay in the service of the nation's Army

especially when the misconduct has compromised the values

of patriotism, honesty and selflessness which values are too

precious to be scarified on the altar of petty monetary gains,

obtained by dubious means.


17. In the result this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.




                                    ............................................J.
                                    (DALVEER BHANDARI)



                                    ............................................J.
                                    (T.S. THAKUR)
New Delhi
July 6, 2010

