
Supreme Court of India
Department Of Customes vs Sharad Gandhi Proprietor on 27 February, 2019Author: K Joseph
                                                                                            1



                                                                                REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S).174 OF 2019
                         (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.9159 of 2015)

          DEPARTMENT OF CUSTOMS                                           ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                    VERSUS
          SHARAD GANDHI                                                   ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                                   JUDGMENT
          K.M. JOSEPH, J.


          1.                 The    appeal     maintained      by    Special      Leave    is

          directed against the judgment of Learned Single Judge

          of High Court of Delhi upholding the dismissal of the

          complaint filed by the appellant herein against the

          respondent               and     discharging    him       of    offences    under

          Sections 132 and 135 of the Customs Act, 1962. The

          Additional               Chief   Metropolitan       Magistrate        allowed   the

          application               for    discharge     filed      by    the    respondent

          accepting the contention of the respondent that there
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT

          is a complete bar with regard to the prosecution under
Date: 2019.02.27
15:41:44 IST
Reason:


          the              Customs          Act,      1962,         and      under        the
                                                                         2
Customs Act, and the Collector of Customs has power

only to confiscate the goods and impose penalty for

having committed breach of Section 3 of the Antiquities

and Art Treasures Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as

“the   Antiquities     Act”).    The    Magistrate     purported       to

follow the judgment of Learned Single judge of the High

Court of Delhi in Dr. V.J.A. Flynn vs. S.S. Chauhan &

Another.     The High Court by the impugned order has come

to endorse the said view.


2.         We   have    heard     Mr.     Aman       Lekhi,     learned

Additional      Solicitor       General       appearing       for     the

appellant and also learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the respondent.


3.         It   must   be   noted      that    the    Special       Leave

Petition out of which this appeal arise was ordered to

be tagged with SLP(Crl.) No. 1525 of 1996. The said

Special Leave Petition was filed against the                  judgment
                                                                              3



of learned Single Judge of High Court of Delhi which

has     been   relied        upon   by        the    Court’s       below    for

discharging     the    accused.       As      it    turns   out,    the    said

Special Leave Petition has been closed by order dated

09.05.2016 by reason of the death of the respondent in

the said case. The learned Additional Solicitor General

would    contend      that    there      is    a    clear   error     in   the

reasoning of the Court by which it has concluded that

prosecution is not maintainable under Sections 132 and

135 of the Customs Act, 1962. The error stems from a

misapprehension both of the scheme of the Act and also

the principles of law which govern the situation.




4.    The scheme of the Antiquities and Art Treasures
      Act, 1972.
 Section 3 forbids the export of Antiquities and Art

Treasures.     It reads as follows:-

         “3. Regulation of export trade in antiquities and
         art treasures. – (1) On and from the commencement
         of this Act, it shall not be lawful for any
         person, other than the Central Government or any
         authority or agency authorized by the Central
         Government   in  this   behalf,  to  export   any
         antiquity or art treasure.
                                                              4
      (2) Whenever the Central Government or any
      authority or agency referred to in sub-section
      (1) intends to export any antiquity or art
      treasure such export shall be made only under and
      in accordance with the terms and conditions of a
      permit issued for the purpose by such authority
      as may be prescribed.”




5.      Section   4   is   another   material   provision   and

hence we advert to the same. It reads as follows: -

      “4. Application of Act 52 of 1962. – The Customs
      Act, 1962, shall have effect in relation to all
      antiquities and art treasures, the export of
      which by any person (other than the Central
      Government or any authority or agency authorized
      by the Central Government) is prohibited under
      Section 3 save in so far as that Act is
      inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and
      except that (notwithstanding anything contained
      in section 125 of that Act) any confiscation
      authorized under that Act shall be made unless
      the Central Government on an application made to
      it in this behalf, otherwise directs.”




6.      Section 24 reads as follows:-

         “24. Power to determine whether or not an
      article, etc., is antiquity or art treasure. – If
      any question arises whether any article, object
      or thing or manuscript, record or other document
      is or is not an antiquity or is or is not an art
      treasure for the purposes of this Act, it shall
      be     referred  to    the   Director    General,
      Archaeological Survey of India, or to an officer
      not below the rank of a Director in the
      Archaeological Survey of India authorized by the
      Director General, Archaeological Survey of India
      and the decision of the Director General,
      Archaeological Survey of India or such officer,
                                                          5



      as the case may be, on such question shall be
      final.”




7.      The next important provision is Section 25. It

reads as follows:-

      25. Penalty.— (1) If any person, himself or by
      any other person on his behalf, exports or
      attempts to export any antiquity or art treasure
      in contravention of section 3, he shall, without
      prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to which
      he may be liable under the provisions of the
      Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) as applied by
      section 4, be punishable with imprisonment for a
      term which shall not be less than six months but
      which may extend to three years and with fine.

      (2) if any person contravenes the provisions of
      section 5 or section 12 or sub-section (2) or
      sub-section (3) of section 13 or section 14 or
      section   17,  he   shall   be   punishable  with
      imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
      months or with fine or with both and the
      antiquity in respect of which the offence has
      been committed shall be liable to confiscation.

      (3) If any person prevents any licensing officer
      from   inspecting  any   record,  photograph   or
      register maintained under section 10 or prevents
      any officer authorized by the Central Government
      under sub-section (1) of section 23 from entering
      into or searching any place under that sub-
      section, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
      for a term which may extend to six months, or
      with fine, or with both.”
                                                                 6
8.       Section 26 is a companion section of Section 25

and   must   necessarily   be     addressed.      It    reads   as

follows:-

       “26. Cognizance of offences. – (1) No prosecution
       for an offence under sub-Section (1) of Section
       25 shall be instituted except by or with the
       sanction of such officer of Government as may be
       prescribed in this behalf.
       (2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence
       punishable under sub-section (2) or sub-section
       (3) or section 25 except upon complaint in
       writing made by an officer generally or specially
       authorized  in   this  behalf   by  the   Central
       Government.
       (3) No court inferior to that of a Presidency
       Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Class
       shall try any offence punishable under this Act.”




9.       The   last   provision    which   has   been   impressed

upon us and which will throw light upon the scheme of

the Act is Section 30. It reads as follows: -

       “30. Application of other laws not barred. – The
       provisions of this Act shall be in addition to,
       and not in derogation of, the provisions of the
       Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 (7 of
       1904) or the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
       Sites and Remains Act, 1958, (24 of 1958) or any
       other law for the time being in force.”
                                                                              7
10.        Mr. Aman Lekhi, Additional Solicitor General of

India would contend that the prosecution was launched

under Sections 132 and 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 on

the     basis    that       the    ingredients     of    offences       under

Sections 132 and 135 were present. He makes it clear

that    this    is    not    a    case    of   prosecution     within       the

meaning of Section 25(1) of the Act. There is no bar in

prosecuting the respondent under Sections 132 and 135

of the Customs Act, he forcefully submitted. As far as

Section 4 is concerned, he points out that in fact it

saves proceedings under the Customs Act. The only taboo

is that, to the extent, any inconsistency between the

Customs Act and the Act exists, the provisions of the

Antiquities      Act       will   hold    sway.   He    points    out   that

there is no inconsistency involved in maintaining the

prosecution under Sections 132 and 135 of the Customs

Act, 1962. Passing on to Section 25 of the Act, he

would    point       out    that    the    present      case     is   not     a

prosecution under Section 25 read with Section 3 of the

Act. One set of facts may occasion the committing of

more than one offence. The key question to be posed and
                                                                     8



considered     is   what   are   the    elements   which    make    an

offence under an enactment.            A transaction may involve

a person in the committing of two or more distinct

offences. This is neither contrary to Article 20 of the

Constitution of India nor Section 300 of the Code of

Criminal     Procedure.    In    this    regard,     he    drew    our

attention to the following cases:

      (i) 1988 (3) SCC 467

      (ii) 1983 (3) SCC 529

      (iii) 2012 (7) SCC 621

11.         The next argument based on Section 25 is that a

perusal of the heading of the section reveals that it

relates to penalty. The reason which has found favour

with the High Court both in the judgment which was

relied upon and the impugned one is that under Section

25 of the Act after the amendment, [Actually, the High

Court was having in mind, the provisions of Section 4

of    the    Antiquities     (Export      Control)        Act,    1947

(hereinafter referred to as “the 1947 Act”)],                what is

permissible under the Customs Act, 1962, is only the
                                                                            9



confiscation        proceedings     and         penalty    proceedings.

Penalty proceedings have been understood as exaction of

a monetary component. The learned Additional Solicitor

General   takes      exception     to    the     reasoning.     In    other

words, it is his contention that even proceeding on to

basis of the interpretation placed by the High Court

that   after   the    amendment,        under    Section   25    what      is

permitted under the Customs Act, is only confiscation

and imposition of penalty, the imposition of penalty is

not to bear a narrow connotation as was contemplated by

the High Court. On the other hand, a penalty would

include the penal consequence after a prosecution and

such   prosecution         would    include        prosecution        under

Sections 132 and 135 of the Customs Act.




12.       Further, he would complain that the High Court

has lost sight of the true import of Section 30 of the

Act. Section 30 as we have noticed declares that the

provisions     of    the   Act   shall    be     in   addition       to   the

specific laws which are mentioned therein but it does
                                                                              10



not end there. It also provides that it shall be in

addition         to   any     other    existing       law    in     force.    He

complains         that      High    Court     erred    in     applying       the

principles of ejusdem generis, in the interpretation of

Section 30 and holding that the Customs Act will not be

an    Act   which      will    be     embraced     within     the    scope    of

Section 30 under the last limb and therefore, it will

not be an existing law.


13.         Per contra, learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the respondent would support the order of the High

Court.      He    would     point     out   that   the      Antiquities      Act

which is actually enacted in the year 1972 is later in

point of time than the Customs Act.                           The Act must

prevail over the Customs Act. The Act is a special Act

and   it    will      prevail      over     the   general     law    which    is

contained in the Customs Act.


14.         Firstly, we will deal with the contention of

the appellant that the Customs Act is also an existing
                                                                      11



law in force within out of the meaning of Section 30 of

the Antiquities Act.          The High Court has proceeded to

take the view that the words ‘any law in force’ must be

construed ejusdem generis with the two laws which are

indicated in Section 30 namely, The Ancient Monuments

Preservation Act, 1904 and the Ancient Monuments and

Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,1958.



15.          Learned   Additional       Solicitor      General   sought

support from the decision of this Court in Bharat Heavy

Electricals Limited v. Globe Hi-Fabs Limited reported

in    2015    (5)   SCC   718   for     the    principle      that   the

principles of ejusdem generis must not be used to place

a    narrow    construction     where    a    larger    and   purposive

construction is called for.              We would advert to the

following discussion by this Court in paragraph 10.                  It

reads as under:

             “10.   In construing the words “a claim of
        set-off or other proceeding to enforce a right
        arising from contract”, occurring in Section 69
        of the Partnership Act, 1932, the Supreme Court
        refused to limit the generality of “other
        proceeding” and to apply the ejusdem generis
        rule as the preceding phrase ‘a claim of set-
        off’, did not constitute a genus or category.
                                                        12
      In that case, Hidayatullah, J., in explaining
      the principle that the rule cannot be applied
      unless there be “a genus constituted or a
      category   disclosed”,  gave   the  following
      illustration:
                “In the expression `books, pamphlets,
          newspapers and other documents’, private
          letters may not be held included if `other
          documents’ be interpreted ejusdem generis
          with what goes before. But in a provision
          which reads `newspapers or other documents,
          likely to convey secrets to the enemy’, the
          words    `other documents’   would  include
          document of any kind and would not take
          their colour from newspaper.”



16.     Still further we may profitably advert to the

statement of law made by this Court in paragraph 12.

The same reads as under:

           “12.   The rule of ejusdem generis has to
      be applied with care and caution. It is not an
      inviolable rule of law, but it is only
      permissible inference in the absence of an
      indication to the contrary, and where context
      and the object and mischief of the enactment do
      not require restricted meaning to be attached
      to words of general import, it becomes the duty
      of the courts to give those words their plain
      and ordinary meaning.      As stated by Lord
      Scarman:
               “If the legislative purpose of a
          statute is such that a statutory series
          should be read ejusdem generis, so be it,
          the rule is helpful.   But, if it is not,
          the rule is more likely to defeat than to
          fulfil the purpose of the statute.    The
          rule like many other rules of statutory
          interpretation, is a useful servant but a
          bad master.”
                                                                                   13



        So a narrow construction on the basis of
        ejusdem generis rule may have to give way to a
        broader construction to give effect to the
        intention of Parliament by adopting a purposive
        construction.”



17.       The question would be whether the High Court is

right in applying the principles of ejusdem generis.

In    order    that      it    applies,       the     court    must     find      the

existence of enumerated things before general words.

In other words, specified categories must have a common

golden thread of commonality running through them. The

specified      words      must        be   followed     by     general      words.

Since the purpose of interpretation of statute is to

glean     the        legislative             intention        and       purposive

interpretation           being    an       important    tool       of   statutory

interpretation,           the     demands       made    by     the      same      may

overwhelm,         the    temptation          to    place      a     restrictive

interpretation by adopting the principles of ejusdem

generis       unless      it     is    warranted.         Two       views      being

possible,      a    view       which       advances    the     object       may   be

preferred but the question arises whether the learned

Additional         Solicitor          General   would     be       justified      in
                                                                              14



relying upon the principles relating ejusdem generis in

the    facts.   When     the    legislature          makes      a    law,    the

presumption is that it is aware of all existing laws.

The    Court    does     not    begin        with    a    presumption         of

ignorance.      The Act in question, would indeed furnish a

lucid illustration of the aforesaid principles.                              The

legislature was fully conscious that the Customs Act,

1962 exists on the statute book.                    The legislature was

conscious of its operation and it wanted to articulate

the manner in which both laws were to co-exist.                            It is

accordingly that in Section 4 it has expressly provided

that the Customs Act shall apply in relation to all

antiquities and art treasures, the export of which by

any    person    other       than      the    Central         Government      or

authorized or agency is prohibited under Section 3 of

the    Act.      The     only       area     where       it    tabooed       the

application      of    the     Customs       Act    is    where      the     Act

contains      provisions       which    were       irreconcilable          being

inconsistent with        the Antiquities Act.                   Equally, it

also   expressly       provided     for      the    situation        that    any

confiscation,         notwithstanding          Section         125    of     the
                                                                                      15
Customs    Act        thereof,       shall      be     made       in    regard        to

antiquities and art treasure unless on an application

made to the Central Government, it otherwise directs.

Section 125 of the Customs Act is a provision which

enables     the        officer        adjudging             the        confiscation

proceedings to give an option to pay a fine in lieu of

confiscation.          The obvious intention of the legislature

is to provide that once an order for confiscation is

passed under the Customs Act in respect of antiquities

or art treasure the powers ordinarily available under

Section 125 of the Customs Act will not be available.



18.        Still further the legislative light is shone by

the    words     used     in     Section        25     of     the      Act.          The

legislature has provided for penalty for contravention

of    Section     3     of     the    Act       with    the       rider       that     a

prosecution       under      Section        3    of    the     Act       would       not

deprive the competent authority under the Customs Act

to exercise its power of confiscation or imposition of

penalty.       The question as to what is meant by the word

‘penalty’ in Section 25(1) is a separate matter which
                                                            16



we will advert to at the appropriate juncture.         It is

thereafter that Section 30 provides that the provisions

of the Act are not intended to override the Ancient

Monument Preservation Act, 1904 or the Ancient Monument

and Archeological Site and Remains Act, 1958 or any

other law for the time being in force.         The question

which we are to ponder upon and decide is whether the

expression ‘any other law’ which is cast in general

terms is to be influenced by the company it keeps or

the neighbourhood it is found in or is it possible to

accept the case of the appellant that the words ‘any

other law’ for the time being in force must admit of a

wider   meaning.    There   can   be   no   doubt   that   the

Antiquities Act is a special enactment.      We may at this

juncture refer to the statement of objects and reasons

of The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 which

reads as follows:


        “At present Antiquities (Export Control)
        Act, 1947, provides for controlling the
        export of objects of antiquarian or
        historical interest or significance.
        Experience in the working of the Act has
        shown that in the modern set-up the
                                                        17



      provisions contained therein are not
      sufficient with a view to preserving
      objects of antiquity and art treasures
      in India.    It is proposed to make a
      comprehensive law to regulate the export
      trade in antiquities and art treasures
      and to provide for the prevention of
      smuggling of, and fraudulent dealings in
      antiquities.    It is also considered
      necessary to make provision in such law
      for   the   compulsory  acquisition   of
      antiquities   and   art  treasures   for
      preserving in public places.         The
      present Bill is intended to achieve the
      above objectives.”
                            (Emphasis supplied)

19.     Firstly, we must ascertain whether there is a

common genus contained in the specific enumeration of

two laws namely the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act,

1904 and the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites

and Remains Act, 1958.

20.     Let us examine the historical perspective which

led to the passing of these two aforesaid enactments.




21.     The statement of objects and reasons for the

enactment of the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act,

1904 is as follows:
                                              18



  “"The object of this measure is to
preserve to India its ancient monuments
in antiquities and to prevent the
excavation by unauthorised persons of
sites of historic interest and value.
  2. In 1898 the question of antiquarian
exploration    and    research    attracted
attention and the necessity of taking
steps for the protection of monuments
and relics of antiquity was impressed
upon the Government of India. It was
then   apparent    that   legislation   was
required to enable the Government to
discharge their responsibilities in the
matter and a Bill was drafted on the
lines of the existing Acts of Parliament
modified   so   as    to   embody   certain
provisions which have found a place in
recent    legislation      regarding    the
antiquities of Greece and Italy. This
draft was circulated for the opinions of
local Governments and their replies
submitted showed that the proposals
incorporated in it met with almost
unanimous    approval,     the    criticism
received being directed, for the most
part, against matters of detail. The
draft has since been revised, the
provisions of the Draft Bill prepared by
the Government of Bengal have been
embodied so far as they were found
suitable and the present Bill is the
result.
  3. The first portion of the Bill deals
with protection of "Ancient monuments"
an expression which has been defined in
clause 2 (now section 2). The measure
will apply only to such of these as are
from time to time expressly brought
within   its   contents   though   being
                                             19



declared to be "protected monuments". A
greater number of more famous buildings
in India are already in possession or
under the control of the Government; but
there are others worthy of preservation
which are in the hands of private
owners. Some of these have already been
insured or are fast falling into decay.
The preservation of these is the chief
object of the clause of the Bill now
referred to and the provisions of the
Bill are in general accordance with the
policy enunciated in section 23 of the
Religious Endowments Act, 1863 (20 of
1863), which recognises and saves the
right of the Government "to prevent
injury    to    and  preserve    buildings
remarkable in their antiquity and for
their - historical or architectural
value or required for the convenience of
the public". The power to intervene is
at present limited to cases to which
section 3 of the Bengal Regulation 19 of
1810   or    section 3   of   the   Madras
Regulation VII of 1817 applies. In
framing the present Bill the Government
has aimed at having the necessity of
good will and securing the cooperation
of the owners concerned and it hopes
that the action which it is proposed to
take    may     tend   rather    to    the
encouragement than to the suppression of
private effort. The Bill provides that
the owner or the manager of the building
which merits greater care than it has
been receiving may be invited to enter
into an agreement for its protection and
that in the event of his refusing to
come to terms the collector may proceed
to acquire it compulsorily or take
proper course to secure its application.
                                            20



It has been made clear that there is to
be no resort to compulsory acquisition
in the case the monument is used in
connection with religious observances or
in other case until the owner has had an
opportunity   of    entering    into   an
agreement of the kind indicated above;
and it is expressly provided that the
monument maintained by the Government
under the proposed Act, shall not be
used for any purpose inconsistent with
its character or with purpose of its
foundation, and that, so far as is
compatible with the object in view the
public shall have access to it free of
charge. By the 4th proviso of clause 11
(now section 10) it is laid down that in
assessing the value of the monument for
the purpose of compulsory acquisition
under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1
of 1894) its archaeological, artistic or
historical merits shall not be taken
into   account.   The   object   of   the
Government   as   purchaser    being   to
preserve at the public expense and for
the public benefit an ancient monument
with   all  its   associations,    it  is
considered that the value of those
associations should not be paid for.
  [Note:- As the 4th proviso of clause
11 was the subject of unfavourable
comment, it was omitted by the Select
Committee.]
   4. The second portion of the Bill
deals with movable objects of historical
or artistic interest and these may be
divided into two classes: the first
consists of ornaments, enamels, silver
and copper vessels, Persian and Arabian
Manuscripts, and curios general. These
                                            21



are for the most part portable and
consequently difficult to trade; they
are as a rule artistic; are of historic
interest and it would be impracticable
even were it desirable to prevent a
dealer from selling and a traveller from
buying them. The sculptural carvings,
images, bas-reliefs inscriptions and the
like    form   a   distinct    class   by
themselves, in that their value depends
upon   their   local   connection.   Such
antiquities may as in the case of those
of Swat, be found outside India or in
Native States and this the Legislature
cannot reach directly; while as the
regards the British territory and under
the existing law, it is impossible to go
beyond the provisions of the Indian
Treasure Trove Act, 1878 (6 of 1878).
(In these circumstances, it is proposed,
by clause 18 of the Bill to take power
to prevent the removal from British
India of any antiquities which it may be
deemed desirable to retain in the
country, and at the same time to prevent
importation. By thus putting a stop on
draft in such articles it is believed
that it will be possible to protect
against    spoliation    a   number    of
interesting places situated without and
beyond British territory. Clause 19 aims
at providing for antiquities such as
sculptures and inscriptions which belong
to another place and ought therefore to
be kept in situ or deposited in local
museums. The removal of these, it is
proposed to enable the local Government
to prohibit by notification and the
clause also provides that, if the object
is moveable, the owner may require the
Government to purchase it outright and
                                                       22



      that, if it is immovable the Government
      shall compensate the owner for any loss
      caused to him by the prohibition. Clause
      20 (now section 19) deals with the
      compulsory purchase of such antiquities
      if that is found to be necessary for
      their preservation and the owner is not
      willing on personal or religious grounds
      to part with them. In such cases it is
      proposed that the price to be paid
      should be assessed by the Collector,
      subject to a right of appeal to the
      local    Government    but   it    is  for
      consideration      whether     the    Land
      Acquisition    Act    of   1894should   be
      followed and reference to the Courts
      allowed.
        5. The third portion of the Bill deals
      with excavations and gives power to make
      rules to prohibit or regulate such
      operations.
        6. The general power to make rules is
      given by clause 22 (now section 23), and
      clause 23 (now section 24) is intended
      to protect acts done or in good faith
      intended to be done, under the law which
      it is now proposed to enact"


22.     Section 2, inter alia, provides as follows:-


        “2. DEFINITIONS - In this Act, unless there
      is anything repugnant in the subject or
      context,-
      (1) "ancient monument" means any structure,
      erection or monument, or any tumulus or place
      of interment, or any cave, rock-sculpture,
      inscription   or   monolith,  which   is   of
      historical,    archaeological   or   artistic
                                                  23



interest, or any remains thereof, and includes-

  (a) the site of an ancient monument;

   (b) such portion of land adjoining the site
of an ancient monument as may required for
fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving
such monument; and

   (c) the means of access to and convenient
inspection of an ancient monument;

(2) "antiquities" include any moveable objects
which[the Central Government], by reason of
their     historical      or     archaeological
associations, may think it necessary to protect
against injury, removal or dispersion;

 (3)”Commissioner”   includes    any    officer
authorized by the [Central Government] to
perform the duties of a Commissioner under this
Act;

 (4)”maintain” and “maintenance” include the
fencing, covering in, repairing, restoring and
cleansing of a protected monument, and the
doing of any act which may be necessary for the
purpose of maintain a protected monument or of
securing convenient access thereto;

 (5) “land” includes a revenue-free estate, a
revenue-paying   estate,    and   a   permanent
transferable tenure, whether such an estate or
tenure by subject to incumbrances or not; and

 (6) “owner” includes a joint owner invested
with power of management on behalf of himself
and other joint owners, and any manager or
trustee exercising powers of management over an
ancient monument, and the successor in title of
any such owner and the successor in office of
any such manager or trustee:

 Provided that nothing in this Act shall be
deemed to extend the powers which may lawfully
be exercised by such manager or trustee.
                                                                  24
23.       Section      17    deals    with     the   transfer    of

Antiquities:-


        “17.   Transfer    of   ownership,    etc.,  of
        antiquities to be intimated to the registering
        officer. – Whenever any person transfers the
        ownership,   control  or   possession    of any
        antiquity specified in any notification issued
        under sub-section (1) of Section 14 such person
        shall intimate, within such period and in such
        form as may be prescribed the fact of such
        transfer to the registering officer.”




24.       Section 22 reads as follows:-


          “22. Jurisdiction – A Magistrate of the third
        class shall not have jurisdiction to try any
        person charged with an offence against this
        Act.”



25.       It may be noticed that the Antiquity (Export

Control) Act, 1947 came into force.              The said Act has

been repealed by the Antiquities Act but we will refer

to    certain    provisions        contained    in   the   Act   in

connection      with   one    of     the     contentions   of    the

appellant.
                                                              25
26.     It is thereafter that the Ancient Monuments and

Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 which is

another enactment specifically enumerated in Section 30

of the Act in question came to be enacted.


27.     The    statement    of   objects   and   reasons   would

indicate,   inter   alia,    that    the   Ancient     Monuments

Preservation Act, 1904 and the Ancient and Historical

Monuments     and   Archaeological     Sites     and    Remains

(Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951, were

two Acts in force relating to ancient monuments.


It is further stated as follows :


         “While    the     Constitution    has
      distributed the subject-matter under
      three different heads the Act of 1904
      governs all ancient monuments whether
      falling the Central field or the State
      field, and vests all executive power in
      the Central Government. The position of
      the existing law relating to ancient
      monuments is far from satisfactory. The
      present Bill purports to be a self-
      contained law at the Centre which will
      apply exclusively to ancient monument,
      etc. of national importance falling
      under Entry 67 of List 1 and to
      archaeological sites and remains falling
      under Entry 40 in the Concurrent List.
                                                                     26
            Simultaneously, the State Governments
            would be advised to enact a similar law
            in respect of ancient monument etc.,
            falling under Entry 12 in the State
            List.   In this manner, the Central and
            State fields will be clearly demarcated
            and    the   existing    confusion   and
            overlapping of jurisdiction arising from
            the Act of 1904 will be eliminated.”



28.          Section 2(b) defines antiquity in similar terms

as antiquity has been defined under the Antiquities

Act.    The two differences are as follows:

      The word “painting” is also included in the Act in

      question before us, whereas the word “painting” was

      not included specifically in the first part of the

      definition.      Besides the same the definition did not

      contain    the   words    in   Clause   2   which   deals   with

      manuscript,      record   or   other    documents   as   it   is

      contained in the present enactment.            The words “art

      treasure” was not included in the enactment.                  The

      Act     deals     with    monuments,        protected    areas,

      prohibited and regulated areas.             It has created a

      National Monuments Authority (w.e.f. 29.3.2010) vide
                                                     27
Section 20F.   There are specific provisions dealing

with antiquity contained in Sections 25 and 26 of

the Act, which read as follows :

      “25. Power of Central Government to control
   moving of antiquities.- (1) If the Central
   Government considers that any antiquities or
   class of antiquities ought not to be moved from
   the place where they are without the sanction
   of    the  Central  Government,   the   Central
   Government may, by notification in the Official
   Gazette, direct that any such antiquity or any
   class of such antiquities shall not be moved
   except with the written permission of the
   Director General.
     (2) Every application for permission under
   sub-section (1) shall be in such form and
   contain such particulars as may be prescribed.
     (3) Any person aggrieved by an order refusing
   permission may appeal to the Central Government
   whose decision shall be final.


     26. Purchase of antiquities by Central
   Government.- (1) If the Central Government
   apprehends that any antiquity mentioned in a
   notification issued under sub-section (1) of
   section 25 is in danger of being destroyed,
   removed, injured, misused or allowed to fall
   into decay or is of opinion that, by reason of
   its historical or archaeological importance, it
   is desirable to preserve such antiquity in a
   public place, the Central Government may make
   an order for the [compulsory acquisition of
   such   antiquity]  and   the  Collector   shall
   thereupon give notice to the owner of the
   antiquity [to be acquired].
     (2)    Where   a   notice    of   [compulsory
   acquisition] is issued under sub-section (1) in
   respect of any antiquity, such antiquity shall
   vest in the Central Government with effect from
   the date of the notice.
                                                        28
        (3) The power of [compulsory acquisition]
      given by this section shall not extend to any
      image or symbol actually used for bona fide
      religious observances.”


29.     Section 30 provides for penalties and it reads

as follows :

        “30. Penalties.- (1) Whoever—
      (i)   destroys,  removes, injures, alters,
      defaces, imperils or misuses a protected
      monument, or
      (ii) being the owner or occupier of a protected
      monument, contravenes an order made under
      subsection (1) of section 9 or under sub-
      section (1) of section 10, or
       (iii) removes from a protected monument any
      sculpture,    carving,    image,    bas-relief,
      inscription, or other like object, or
        (iv) does any act in contravention of sub-
      section(1) of section 19, shall be punishable
      with [imprisonment which may extend to two
      years], or with [fine which may extend to one
      lakh rupees], or with both.
       (2) Any person who moves any antiquity in
      contravention of a notification issued under
      sub-section (1) of             section 25 shall
      be punishable with [imprisonment which may
      extend to two years or with fine which may
      extend to one lakh rupees or with both] and the
      Court   convicting   a  person   of   any  such
      contravention may by order direct such person
      to restore the antiquity to the place from
      which it was moved.”
                          (Emphasis supplied)
                                                                          29
30.     Section      39    is    a    repealing        provision   and   it

reads thus:

        “39. Repeals and saving.- (1) The Ancient and
      Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites
      and    Remains    (Declaration   of    National
      Importance) Act, 1951 (71 of 1951), and section
      126 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37
      of 1956), are hereby repealed.
        (2) The Ancient Monuments Preservation Act,
      1904 (7 of 1904), shall cease to have effect in
      relation to ancient and historical monuments
      and archaeological sites and remains declared
      by or under this Act to be of national
      importance, except as respects things done or
      omitted to be done before the commencement of
      this Act.”


31.     Now    the        time       is     ripe   to     look     at    the

Constitution   in    order       to       find   out   the   division    of

legislative field in regard to the subject.




32.     Entry 67 of the Union List reads as follows:

        “Entry 67,    Union List-Ancient and historical
      monuments and    records, and archaeological sites
      and remains,    declared by or under law made by
      Parliament to   be of national importance.

33.     Entry 12 of the State List provides for ancient

and historical monuments and records other than those
                                                                      30



declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of

national importance.


34.         Entry 40 of the Concurrent List provides for

archaeological      sites      and    remains   other    than   those

declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of

national importance.


35.         There are laws enacted by state legislature. We

have    noticed   that    in    the   Statement    of   Objects      and

Reasons for the passing of the Act and providing for

the repeal of the earlier law based in the year 1947

was    to   provide    for     comprehensive      law   relating      to

antiquities.      Antiquities made their appearance in the

law which was made in the year 1904 as we have already

noticed. Broadly the heritage of the nation can be said

to be contained in immovable properties in the form of

ancient monuments.       Antiquities on the other hand would

be    essentially     moveable   objects.       What    makes   it    an
                                                                       31



antiquity   is      the    historical    or    archaeological       value

which is associated with the object.




36.      The     1904      Act   and   The    Ancient   Monuments     and

Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 indicate,

therefore, a one common genus.                 The context for the

commonality is provided essentially by history.                 It is,

inextricably intertwined with the heritage and history

of the nation.            All the laws reflect the legislation

intention      to    protect       the    Ancient       Monuments     and

Archaeological Sites and remains as also antiquities.

Apart from the same no doubt under the Antiquities Act,

art treasures being human work of art which are not

antiquities but which become art treasures by way of

notification declaring them to be art treasures are

also dealt with.           One of the questions to be answered

before the principle of ejusdem generis is applied is

whether the genus is already exhaustively enumerated in

the   specified      categories.         See   in   this   regard     the
                                                                      32



following       discussion     in     Principles     of     Statutory

Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh (page 512):

         “…If   the    preceding  words   do   not
       constitute mere specifications of a
       genus but constitute description of a
       complete    genus,    the   rule  has    no
       application. In a policy of insurance,
       the insurance were given as option to
       terminate the policy if they so desired
       `by reason of such change or from any
       other cause whatever’; the words `by
       reason of such change’ in the context
       referred to any and every act done to
       the insured property whereby the risk of
       fire was increased; the Privy Council in
       these circumstances refused to construe
       the words `or from any other cause
       whatever’    by   the   rule   of   ejusdem
       generis. Lord Watson said: “In the
       present case, there appears no room for
       its application.     The antecedent clause
       does not contain a mere specification of
       particulars but the description of a
       complete genus…”


37.       But     the   aforesaid      principle    may     not     have

application as after enumerating enactments which we

have   already      held    constituted      one   genus    there     is

nothing to indicate that the categories of genus are

exhausted.        Rather     these    two    enactments    which     are

specifically embodied in Section 30 are followed by

general     words   which     allow    the    application     of     the
                                                                                   33



principle of ejusdem generis.                     This is for the reason

that the words “any other law for the time being in

force” are employed.                A wide interpretation or narrow

interpretation can be placed on the words ‘any other

law’.         In    particular,          the    use     of       the   word     “any”

preceding the words “other law” interpreted literally

may allow us to declare that all laws in force are

intended       to    apply        even    after       the    passing       of    the

Antiquities Act.            The other view would be to bear in

mind    the    context       of    the    Act     and    still         further   the

object which is sought to be achieved by the enactment.

It is also well settled that every attempt must be made

to place a harmonious construction on each and every

provision of the enactment.


38.        We would think that though the words ‘any other

law for the time being in force’ has been used, the

context for the use of                   the provision is not to                   be

overlooked.            We     have        referred          to     the    relevant

provisions of the two specific enactments which show
                                                                              34



that the said legislation also deals with antiquities

as     it   deals    with    cognate       subjects      namely    ancient

monuments and archaeological sites.                   The common genus

is manifest.        The legislative intention was to declare

that    the    Antiquities     Act    should      not    result     in       the

provision contained in allied or cognate laws being

overridden upon passing of the Antiquity Act.                            Full

play    was    intended      for    the    provisions      contained          in

relation       to    antiquities          contained       in      the        two

engagements.        Despite the passage of the Antiquity Act,

a prosecution for instance would be maintainable if a

case is otherwise made out under the two enactments in

relation to antiquity.              The Antiquities Act in other

words is not to be in derogation of those provisions.

They    were   to    supplement      the    existing     laws.          It    is

therefore in the same context that we should understand

the words ‘any other law for the time being in force’.

For    instance,     there    may    be    laws   made    by   the      State

legislatures which relate to antiquity.                    There may be

any other law which deal with a subject with a common

genus of which the specific law would be an integral
                                                               35



part.     It is all such laws which legislature intended

to comprehend within the expression ‘any other law for

the time being in force’.        Take for example, a case

where there is a theft of an antiquity. Can it be said

that the prosecution under Section 379 of the IPC would

not be maintainable.        The answer will be an emphatic

No.     Certainly, the prosecution will lie.         The Sale of

Goods Act which relate to movable items generally will

be applicable, to the extent that it is not covered by

any provision in the Acts in question.              The Contract

Act may continue to applicable.          But it is not the

question    of   applying   general   laws   that    engage   the

attention of the legislature.          The intention behind

Section 30 was as noted is to provide for any other law

which deal with antiquity to continue to have force and

declare its enforceability even after passing of the

Antiquity Act. In that view of the matter we are of the

view that the words ‘any other law for the time being

in force’ must be construed as ejusdem generis.
                                                                           36
39.         More    importantly,         a    wider      import     may    be

negatived     by    other    evidence         available        in   the   Act

itself.


40.         Section 4 of the Antiquities Act, it must be

remembered, has already provided for the applicability

of the Customs Act in the manner which we have already

explained.          In    other    words,          the   Customs    Act    is

applicable subject to two qualifications.                      Firstly, it

will apply except where the provisions of the Customs

Act   are    inconsistent         with       the     provisions     of    the

Antiquities        Act.     In     other       words,     if    there     are

provisions in the Antiquity Act, which are inconsistent

with the Customs Act, the provisions of the Antiquity

Act will prevail over the Customs Act.




41.         The Second limitation on the applicability of

the Customs Act is as regards the specific provisions

contained in Section 125 and an option ordinarily made

available under Section 125 is not to be extended as
                                                                              37



provided     in    Section        4   of    the    Act.      Still      further

legislature        has        taken   care    to    incorporate         certain

aspects under the Customs Act under Section 25. The

provision that a prosecution under Section 25 will not

take away the power to confiscate or impose a penalty

under the Customs Act is explicitly provided.                           It has

provided for sanction for prosecution in Section 26.

The    legislature        was     fully      conscious     of     the    extant

provisions        of    the     Customs      Act   when    it     passed     the

Antiquity Act, 1972.              It was conscious of the interplay

of    the   two    enactments         and    it    accordingly       made    the

Customs     Act        applicable     in     the    manner      provided      in

Section     4     and    Section      25.    Now    with   Section       4   and

Section 25 as it stands, if we were to accept the

argument of the learned Additional Solicitor General

that the Customs Act must be also included as ‘any

other law for the time being in force’ under Section 30

and    therefore         we     are   persuaded      to    hold    that      the

Antiquity Act is in addition and not in derogation of

the Customs Act 1962 the result will be as follows :
                                                                           38
The Customs Act will apply with all force and

what would be the effect of such application on

Section 4 of the Antiquities Act?                 On the one hand

Section 4 declares that the Customs Act will apply

except     where      it     is    in    consistent         with    the

Antiquities      Act.           The     Antiquities      Act       will,

therefore, prevail over the Customs Act in case of

an   inconsistency.        So     also    there   is    a    modified

application of the Customs Act qua Section 125

thereof.       The application of Customs Act through

the mechanism provided under Section 30 of the Act

will thus bring it into conflict with the Section

4 of the Act and this in our view certainly would

not have been the legislative intention.                         Equally

as we have noted that legislature has taken care

to   provide    for    the      saving    of   powers       to   impose

penalties      and    order       confiscation         despite       the

prosecution under Section 25 of the Antiquities

Act. In view of the clear provisions contained in

the Act, we are of the view that the word “any
                                                                       39



      other law” in Section 30 of the Antiquities Act,

      would not include the Customs Act, 1962.




42.          The next question, is whether prosecution under

Sections 132 and 135(1)(a) of the Customs Act, 1962 is

permitted under Section 4 of the Antiquities Act and

what    is    the    impact    of   Sections   25   and    26    of   the

Antiquities         Act.      Before   we   examine   the       relevant

provisions of the Customs Act, we may advert to a few

decisions about the maintainability of more than one

prosecution.


43.          In Shiv Dutt Rai Fateh Chand & Ors. Vs. Union

of India & Anr., 1983 (3) SCC 529, the matter arose

under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.                    We think it

appropriate to advert to paragraphs 25 and 26 which

read as follows:


         25. The contention of the petitioners is that
         any act or omission which is considered to be
         a default under the Act for which penalty is
         leviable is an offence, that such act or
         omission was not an offence and no penalty
                                                 40



was payable under the law in force at the
time when it was committed and hence they
cannot be punished by the levy of penalty
under a law which is given retrospective
effect. They principally rely on Article 20
(1) in support of their case.      Article 20
(1) is modelled on the basis of section 9 (3)
of Article 1 of the Constitution of the
United States of America which reads: "No
bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall
be passed.” This clause has been understood
in the United States of America as being
applicable only to legislation concerning
crimes. (See Calder v. Bull 3 Dall 386 : IL
Ed. 648(1798)). The expression 'offence' is
not defined in the Constitution.       Article
367 of the Constitution says that unless the
context otherwise provides for words which
are not defined in the Constitution, the
meaning assigned in the General Clauses Act,
1897   may   be   given. Section   3 (38)   of
the General Clauses Act defines 'offence' as
any act or omission made punishable by any
law for the time being in force.           The
marginal   note  of    our   Article   20   is
'protection in respect of conviction for
offences'.   The   presence   of   the   words
'conviction' and 'offences', in the marginal
note 'convicted of an offence', 'the act
charged as an offence' and 'commission of
offence' in clause (1) of Article 20,
'prosecuted and punished' in clause (2)
of Article 20 and 'accused of an offence' and
'compelled to be a witness against himself'
in clause (3) of Article 20 clearly suggests
that Article 20 relates to the constitutional
protection given to persons who are charged
with a crime before a criminal court. [See
H.M. Seervai: Constitutional Law of India
(3rd Edition) Vol. 1, page 759]. The word
'penalty' is a word of wide significance.
Sometimes it means recovery of an amount as a
penal measure even in a civil proceeding. An
exaction   which   is   not  of  compensatory
character is also termed as a penalty even
though it is not being recovered pursuant to
                                                                 41



       an order finding the person concerned guilty
       of a crime. In Article 20 (1) the expression
       'penalty' is used in the narrow sense as
       meaning a payment which has to be made or a
       deprivation of liberty which has to be
       suffered as a consequence of a finding that
       the person accused of a crime is guilty of
       the charge.
       26. In Maqbool Hussain v. The State of Bombay
       1953 SCR 730, the question for consideration
       was whether when the Customs authorities
       confiscated Certain goods under the Sea
       Customs Act there was a prosecution and the
       order    of   confiscation    constituted   a
       punishment within the meaning of clause (2)
       of Article 20. Negativing the said plea, this
       Court observed at SCR pages 738-739:


       "The very wording of Article 20 and the words
       used therein:- "convicted”, "commission of
       the act charged as an offence", "be subjected
       to a penalty", "commission of the offence”,
       "prosecuted and punished", "accused of any
       offence", would indicate that the proceedings
       therein contemplated are of the nature of
       criminal proceedings before a court of law or
       a judicial tribunal and the prosecution in
       this context would mean an initiation or
       starting of proceedings of a criminal nature
       before a court of law or a judicial tribunal
       in accordance with the procedure prescribed
       in the statute which creates the offence and
       regulates the procedure."


44.      In V.K. Agarwal, Assistant Collector of customs

v. Vasantraj Bhagwanji Bhatia And Others 1988 (3) SCC

467,   the   Court   was   faced   with   an   acquittal   of   the
                                                                42



accused person under Section 111 and 135 of the Customs

Act   and   yet   he   was   sought   to   be   prosecuted   under

Section 85 of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968.            The Court

inter alia held as follows:


       8. We have also concluded that a separate
       charge could have been framed in respect of
       the distinct offence under Gold Control
       Act Under the circumstances the plea raised
       by the defence cannot succeed. The two
       conclusions reached by us brings the matter
       squarely within the parametres of the law
       settled by this Court decades ago in S. L.
       Apte's case 1961 (3) SCR 107. In that case
       the element of 'dishonesty' was required to
       be established under section 409 of Indian
       Penal Code whereas it was not required to be
       established under Section 105 of the Indian
       Insurance Act. In this backdrop this Court
       has enunciated the law in the context of the
       plea    based    on Article    20(2) of    the
       Constitution, Section 26of General Clauses
       Act   and section   403(2) of   the   Criminal
       Procedure Code in no uncertain terms:

       "If, therefore, the offences were distinct
       there is no question of the rule as to
       double-jeopardy as embodied in Art. 20(2) of
       the Constitution, being applicable.
       The next point to be considered is as regards
       the scope of s. 26 of the General Clauses
       Act. Though s. 26 in its opening words refers
       to "the act or omission constituting an
       offence under two or more enactments", the
       emphasis is not on the facts alleged in the
       two complaints but rather on the ingredients
       which constitute the two offences with which
       a person is charged. This is made clear by
       the concluding portion of the section which
                                                      43



      refers to "shall not be liable to be punished
      twice for the same offence". If the offences
      are not the same but are distinct, the ban
      imposed by this provision also cannot be
      invoked. It therefore follows that in the
      present case as the respondents are not being
      sought to be punished for "the same offence"
      twice   but   for   two   distinct   offences
      constituted   or   made   up   of   different
      ingredients the bar of the provision is
      inapplicable.
      In passing, it may be pointed out that the
      construction we have placed on Art. 20(2) of
      the Constitution and s. 26 of the General
      Clauses Act is precisely in line with the
      terms of s. 403(2) of the Criminal Procedure
      Code which runs:
      403(2) A person acquitted or convicted of any
      offence may be afterwards tried for any
      distinct offence for which a separate charge
      might have been made against him on the
      former trial under section 235, sub-section
      (1)".

      There is no manner of doubt that section
      403(1) does not come to rescue of the
      respondents 1 to 3 whereas section 403(2) of
      the Code clearly concludes the matter against
      them.”




45.     In a recent judgment of this Court reported in

State of Jharkhand V. Lalu Prasad Yadav 2017 (8) SCC 1

this Court conducted a survey of earlier case law and

this is what the court inter alia held:
                                                                44
         “40.8 In Monica Bedi v. State of A.P.;2011
         (1) SCC 284, this Court considered the
         meaning of the expression “same offence”
         employed in Article 20(2) and observed that
         second prosecution and conviction must be for
         the same offence. If the offences are
         distinct, there is no question of the rule as
         to double jeopardy being applicable. This
         Court has observed thus: (SCC pp. 293 & 295,
         paras 26 & 29)
           “26. What is the meaning of the expression
         used in Article 20(2) “for the same offence”?
           What is prohibited under Article 20(2) is,
         that the second prosecution and conviction
         must be for the same offence. If the offences
         are distinct, there is no question of the
         rule as to double jeopardy being applicable.
           29. It is thus clear that the same facts
         may rise to different prosecutions and
         punishment   and  in   such   an  event   the
         protection afforded by Article 20(2) is not
         available. It is settled law that a person
         can be prosecuted and punished more than once
         even on substantially same facts provided the
         ingredients of both the offences are totally
         different and they did not form the same
         offence.”




46.        In State (NCT of Delhi) V. Sanjay 2014 (9) SCC

772,   a   criminal    prosecution    was   launched   under   the

Indian     Penal      Code   and/or     Mines    and     Minerals

(Development & Regulation) Act 1957 (hereinafter called

‘MMDR Act’) for mining from river beds without valid

licence and permits under the latter Act.          There was no

complaint from the authorised officer under the Act.
                                                                         45



This    Court     took       the   view     that     the     ingredients

constitute      the    offence     under    the    MMDR    Act    and   the

ingredients of dishonestly removal of sand and gravel

from the river bed without the consent which is the

property of the State is a distinct offence under the

Indian Penal Code, therefore, the Magistrate on receipt

of the Police Report for the commission of the offence

under   Section        378   IPC   can     take    cognizance     without

awaiting    the       complaint    which     may    be    filed   by    the

authorised officer under the MMDR Act.                   The court inter

alia held as follows:

        “52. It is a well-known principle that the
        rule against double jeopardy is based on a
        maxim nemo debet bis vexari pro una et eadem
        causa, which means no man shall be put in
        jeopardy twice for one and the same offence.
        Article 20 of the Constitution provides that
        no person shall be prosecuted or punished for
        the offence more than once. However, it is
        also settled that a subsequent trial or a
        prosecution and punishment has no bar if the
        ingredients of the two offence are distinct.”




47.        Now let us examine the scheme of the Customs

Act, 1962.
                                                        46
The Customs Act, 1962 purports to consolidate and amend

the law relating to customs.    Section 11 of the Customs

Act provides as follows:

      11.   Power   to   prohibit  importation   or
      exportation of goods.— (1) If the Central
      Government is satisfied that it is necessary
      so to do for any of the purposes specified in
      sub-section (2), it may, by notification in
      the   Official   Gazette,   prohibit   either
      absolutely or subject to such conditions (to
      be fulfilled before or after clearance) as
      may be specified in the notification, the
      import or export of goods of any specified
      description.
      (2) The purposes referred to in sub-section
      (1) are the following:—
      (a) the maintenance of the security of India;
      (b) the maintenance of public       order   and
      standards of decency or morality;
      (c) the prevention of smuggling;
      (d) the prevention of shortage of goods of
      any description;
      (e) the conservation of foreign exchange and
      the safeguarding or balance of payments;
      (f) the prevention of injury to the economy
      of the country by the uncontrolled import or
      export of gold or silver;
      (g) the   prevention of    surplus  of  any
      agricultural product or     the product of
      fisheries;
      (h) the maintenance of standards for the
      classification, grading or marketing of goods
      in international trade;
      (i) the establishment of any industry;
                                                    47
(j) the prevention of serious injury to
domestic   production of goods  of   any
description;
(k) the protection of human, animal or plant
life or health;
(l) the protection of national treasures of
artistic, historic or archaeological value;
(m) the conservation of exhaustible natural
resources;
(n) the protection of   patents,   trade    marks
and copyrights;
(o) the prevention of deceptive practices;
(p) the carrying on of foreign trade in any
goods by the State, or by a Corporation owned
or controlled by the State to the exclusion,
complete or partial, or citizens of India;
(q) the fulfilment of obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance  of   international  peace  and
security;
(r) the   implementation   of   any   treaty,
agreements or convention with any country;
(s) the compliance of imported goods with any
laws which are applicable to similar goods
produced or manufactured in India;
(t) the   prevention   of   dissemination   of
documents containing any matter which is
likely   to  prejudicially   affect   friendly
relations with any foreign State or is
derogatory to national prestige;
(u) the prevention of the contravention       of
any law for the time being in force; and
(v) any other purpose conducive        to     the
interests of the general public.”
                                                            48
48.       Chapter IV-B came to be inserted with effect

from 03/01/1969.      It contains Section 11H.        Section

11H(a)    provides   that   unless   the   context   otherwise

requires “illegal export” means the export of any goods

in contravention of the provisions of this Act or any

other law for the time being in force.         Section 11(i)

deals with the powers of Central Government to        specify

goods having regard to the magnitude of illegal export

of certain class of goods or description in which case

it would become specified goods for which there are

separate restrictions contained in Section 11J, 11K and

11M.     Section 11N falling under Chapter IVC provides

the Central government with power to exempt.         It reads

as follows:

         “11N. Power to exempt.- If the Central
         Government is satisfied that it is
         necessary in the public interest so to
         do, it may, by notification in the
         Official   Gazette, exempt   generally,
         either absolutely or subject to such
         conditions as may be specified in the
         notification, goods of any class or
         description from all or any of the
         provisions of chapter IVA or Chapter
         IVB.”
                                                                        49
49.     There are various provisions which relate to

levy of duty, assessment of duty, remission of duty

etc. with which we need not be detained.                Section 39 of

the Customs Act provides that the master of a vessel

shall not permit the loading of any export goods, other

than baggage and mail bags, until an order has been

given by the proper officer granting entry-outwards to

such   vessel.       Section         40    of    the     Customs      Act

contemplates that export goods are not be loaded unless

duly passed by the proper officer.                Section 50 deals

with the procedure for clearance of export goods.                     Sub-

section (2) & (3) of Section 50 reads as follows:

       “50. (2) The exporter of any goods, while
       presenting    a    shipping        bill   or    bill      of
       export,   shall        make   and   subscribe        to   a
       declaration       as    to    the    truth      of     its
       contents.

       (3) The exporter who presents              a shipping
       bill or bill of export under this section
       shall ensure the following, namely:-

       (a)   the accuracy and completeness of the
             information given therein;
                                                                       50




         (b)     the authenticity and validity of any
                 document supporting it; and
         (c)     compliance with the restriction               or
                 prohibition, if any, relating to             the
                 goods under this Act or under                any
                 other law for the time being                  in
                 force.”



50.       Chapter    XIII       containing    Section     100   to   110A

provides for searches, seizure and arrest.                 Section 100

deals with power to search suspected persons entering

or leaving India, etc.            Section 103 provides power to

screen    or    X-ray     bodies     of    suspected      persons     for

detecting      secreted    goods.         Section   104   confers     the

power to arrest by an officer of the Customs empowered

in this regard.      Section 108 which is subject matter of

many judgments of courts provides for power to summon a

person to give evidence and produce documents.

51.       Chapter         XIV     has      the      chapter     heading

“Confiscation of Goods and Conveyances and Imposition
                                                       51



of Penalties”.      Section 113 provides for confiscation

of goods attempted to be improperly exported etc.




52.       Section 114 AA provides for penalty for use of

false and incorrect material.     It came to be inserted

by Act 25 of 2006 only with effect from 30/07/2006.

Section 117 deals with penalties for contravention etc.

which are not expressly provided.      Section 119 deals

with confiscation of goods used for concealing smuggled

goods.     Section 121 deals with confiscation of sale-

proceeds of smuggled goods.     The word ‘smuggling’ has

been defined in Section 2 (39) reads as follows:

         2(39) “smuggling”, in relation to any
         goods, means any act or omission which
         will   render  such  goods    liable to
         confiscation  under   section    111 or
         section 113;

53.       Section 125 provides for the power to give an

option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation.
                                                              52
54.     Chapter XIVA deals with settlement of cases.

Various powers of the Settlement Commission are set out

in the provisions falling under the Chapter.             Section

127(h) provides for granting immunity from prosecution

and penalty.


55.     Chapter    XVI    provides     for    ‘Offences      and

Prosecutions’.    It is thereunder that Sections 132 and

135 appears:

      “132. False declaration, false documents, etc.—
      Whoever makes, signs or uses, or causes to be
      made,   signed   or   used,  any    declaration,
      statement or document in the transaction of any
      business relating to the customs knowing or
      having reason to believe that such declaration,
      statement or document is false in any material
      particular,    shall    be   punishable     with
      imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
      years, or with fine, or with both.”


      “135. Evasion of duty or prohibitions. —
      (1) Without prejudice to any action that may be
      taken under this Act, if any person—

      (a) is in relation to any goods in any way
      knowingly concerned in misdeclaration of value
      or in any fraudulent evasion or attempt at
      evasion of any duty chargeable thereon or of
      any prohibition for the time being imposed
      under this Act or any other law for the time
      being in force with respect to such goods; or

      (b) acquires possession of or is in any way
      concerned in carrying, removing, depositing,
                                                   53



harbouring, keeping, concealing, selling or
purchasing or in any other manner dealing with
any goods which he knows or has reason to
believe are liable to confiscation under
section 111 or section 113, as the case may be;
or

(c) attempts to export any goods which he knows
or has reason to believe are liable to
confiscation under section 113; or

(d) fraudulently avails of or attempts to avail
of drawback or any exemption from duty provided
under this Act in connection with export of
goods, he shall be punishable, —

(i) in the case of an offence relating to,—

 (A) any goods the market price       of   which
 exceeds one crore of rupees; or

 (B) the evasion or attempted evasion of duty
 exceeding thirty lakh of rupees; or

 (C) such categories of prohibited goods as
 the Central Government may, by notification
 in the Official Gazette, specify; or

 (D) fraudulently availing of or attempting to
 avail of drawback or any exemption from duty
 referred to in clause (d), if the amount of
 drawback or exemption from duty exceeds
 thirty lakh of rupees, with imprisonment for
 a term which may extend to seven years and
 with fine: Provided that in the absence of
 special and adequate reasons to the contrary
 to be recorded in the judgment of the court,
 such imprisonment shall not be for less than
 one year;

(ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.

(2) If any person convicted of an offence under
this section or under sub-section (1) of
section 136 is again convicted of an offence
under   this  section,   then,   he  shall   be
                                                               54



       punishable for the second and for every
       subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term
       which may extend to seven years and with fine:

       Provided that in the absence of special and
       adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded
       in the judgment of the court such imprisonment
       shall not be for less than one year.

       (3) For the purposes of sub-section (1) and
       (2), the following shall not be considered as
       special and adequate reasons for awarding a
       sentence of imprisonment for a term of less
       than one year, namely: —

           (i) the fact that the accused has been
           convicted for the first time for a reference
           under this Act;

           (ii) the fact that in any proceeding under
           this Act, other than a prosecution, the
           accused has been ordered to pay a penalty or
           the goods which are the subject matter of
           such proceedings have been ordered to be
           confiscated or any other action has been
           taken against him for the same act which
           constitutes the offence;

           (iii) the fact that the accused was not the
           principal offender and was acting merely as a
           carrier of goods or otherwise was a secondary
           party to the commission of the offence;

           (iv) the age of the accused.”



56.   Section 137 provides inter alia that no court can

take cognizance of any offence under Section 132, 133,

134 or Section 135 or Section 135A except with the

previous    sanction    of   the    Principal   Commissioner   of

Customs    or   Commissioner   of    Customs.    Sub-Section(3)
                                                        55



provides for compounding of the offence by the officers

mentioned.   Section 137 reads as under:

      “137. Cognizance of offences. —
      (1) No court shall take cognizance of any
      offence under section 132, section 133, section
      134 or section 135 or section 135A, except with
      the   previous    sanction   of   the Principal
      Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of
      Customs.
      (2) No court shall take cognizance     of   any
      offence under section 136,—
        (a) where the offence is alleged to have been
        committed by an officer of customs not lower
        in rank than Assistant Commissioner of
        Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs,
        except with the previous sanction of the
        Central Government;
        (b) where the offence is alleged to have been
        committed by an officer of customs lower in
        rank than Assistant Commissioner of Customs
        or Deputy Commissioner of Customs, except
        with the previous sanction of the   Principal
        Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner    of
        Customs.
      (3) Any offence under this Chapter may, either
      before or after the institution of prosecution,
      be   compounded   by    the   Principal   Chief
      Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner
      of Customs on payment, by the person accused of
      the offence to the Central Government, of such
      compounding amount and in such manner of
      compounding as may be specified by rules.
      Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
      section shall apply to—
      (a) a person who has been allowed to compound
      once in respect of any offence under sections
      135 and 135A;
                                                    56
(b) a person who has been accused of committing
an offence under this Act which is also an
offence under any of the following Acts,
namely:—
 (i) the   Narcotic  Drugs   and  Psychotropic
 Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985);
 (ii) the Chemical    Weapons   Convention   Act,
 2000 (34 of 2000);
 (iii) the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959);
 (iv) the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (53
 of 1972);


(c) a person involved in smuggling of goods
falling under any of the following, namely:—
 (i) goods specified in the list of Special
 Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, Equipment
 and Technology in Appendix 3 to Schedule 2
 (Export Policy) of ITC (HS) Classification of
 Export and Import Items of the Foreign Trade
 Policy, as amended from time to time, issued
 under   section  5   of  the   Foreign  Trade
 (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of
 1992);
 (ii) goods which are specified as prohibited
 items for import and export in the ITC (HS)
 Classification of Export and Import Items of
 the Foreign Trade Policy, as amended from
 time to time, issued under section 5 of the
 Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation)
 Act, 1992 (22 of 1992);
 (iii) any other goods or documents, which are
 likely to affect friendly relations with a
 foreign State or are derogatory to national
 honour;
(d) a person who has been allowed to compound
once in respect of any offence under this
Chapter for goods of value exceeding rupees one
crore;
                                                               57
      (e) a person who has been convicted under this
      Act on or after the 30th day of December,
      2005.”



57.        Section 140 of the Customs Act which deals with

offence by Companies is identically worded as Section

28 of the Antiquities Act.


58.        At this juncture we may notice the provisions

of the 1947 Act in some greater detail.                 Section 3

provided    that   no   person   shall   export   any   antiquity

except under the authority of a licence granted by the

Central Government.      Section 4 read as follows:

            “4. Application of Act VIII of 1878.- All
      antiquities the export of which is prohibited
      under section 3 shall be deemed to be goods of
      which the export has been prohibited under
      Section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, and
      all the provisions of that Act shall have
      effect accordingly, except that, the provisions
      of section 183 of that Act notwithstanding, any
      confiscation authorised under that Act shall be
      made,    unless  the   Central  Government,  on
      application to it in such behalf, otherwise
      directs.”




59.        Section 5 of the 1947 Act dealt with Penalty

and Procedure.     It read as follows:
                                                                 58
      “5. Penalty and Procedure.- (1) If any person
      exports or attempts to export an antiquity in
      contravention of Section 3, he shall, without
      prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to
      which he may be liable under the provisions of
      the Sea Customs Act, 1878, as applied by
      Section 4, be punishable with imprisonment for
      a term which may extend to one month, or with
      fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,
      or with both.

      (2) No Court shall take cognizance of an
      offence punishable under this section except
      upon complaint in writing made by an officer
      generally or specially authorised in this
      behalf by the Central Government, and no Court
      inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or
      a Magistrate of the first class shall try any
      such offence.”




60.       Under      Section    4   of   the    1947    Act,    all

antiquities, the export of which is prohibited under

Section   3   were    to   be   deemed   as    goods   which   were

prohibited Section 19 of the Sea Customs Act where all

the provisions of the Sea Customs Act were to have

effect except Section 183 which correspond to Section

125 of the present customs Act.          Section 19 of the Sea

Customs Act, 1878 read as follows:

      “19. The Central Government may from time to
      time, by notification in the Official Gazette,
      prohibit or restrict the bringing or taking by
      sea or by land goods of any specified
      description into or out of India across any
                                                                              59



      customs frontier         as    defined     by   the   Central
      Government.”



61.       We may also notice that Section 5 of the 1947

Act is pari materia with Section 25 of the Antiquities

Act in regard to the crucial elements namely `without

prejudice      to   any    confiscation          or    penalty’       both    in

Section 5 of the 1947 Act and in Section 25 of the

Antiquities Act.


62.       In Section 5 of the 1947 Act, the legislature

has employed the very same words namely confiscation or

penalty   as    has    been    employed         in    Section    25    of    the

Antiquities Act.           In the Sea Customs Act, 1878, in

Chapter XVI under the heading “Offences and Penalties”

Section   167       provided     for    various        offences       and    the

penalties   were      in   the      form   of    monetary       exaction      or

confiscation and penalties by way of monetary exaction.

However, besides the same we notice that in respect of

some offences it is provided that such persons shall on

conviction before a Magistrate, be liable to a fine not
                                                                              60



exceeding certain limits (See Sections 167(72) & (74)).

Section 167 (75) deal with cases where on conviction

before a Magistrate, sentence of imprisonment or fine

or    both     were     provided.         The   extent    of     punishment

varied.       The scheme of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 thus

differs from the present Customs Act 1962.                         In other

words, in Section 167 of the Sea Customs Act, penalty

in the sense of monetary exaction, confiscation, or

both    and       lastly   imprisonment         and/or   fine     were    all

classified under common heading ‘penalties’.




63.          In    fact,   we   find   that      this    Court    in   the

Assistant Collector of Customs, Calcutta vs. Sitaram

Agarwala and Another            AIR 1966 SC 955 considered the

scheme    of      Sea    Customs    Act,    1878    as   contained       in

Section 167.            Section 167 (8) contemplated the levy

of penalty by way of liability to confiscation and

penalty of three times not exceeding the value of

goods    or    not      exceeding   one    thousand      rupees.       The
                                                                           61



Court contrasted the said provision with Section 167

(81).    The provision read as follows:



            Offences                   Section   of        Penalties
                                       this Act to
                                       which
                                       offence has
                                       reference
"(81). If any person knowingly, and    General      such   person   shall  on
with intent to defraud the                          conviction     before   a
Government of any duty payable                      Magistrate be liable to
thereon, or to evade any                            imprisonment     for  any
prohibition or restriction for the                  terms not exceeding two
time being in force under or by                     years or to fine or to
virtue of this Act with respect                     both;
thereto acquires possession of,
or is in any way concerned in
carrying, removing, depositing,
harbouring, keeping or concealing or
in any manner dealing with any goods
which have been unlawfully removed
from a warehouse or which are
chargeable with a duty which has not
been paid or with respect to the
importation or exportation of which
any prohibition or restriction is
for the time being in force as
aforesaid; or

If any person is in relation to any
goods in any way knowingly concerned
in any fraudulent evasion or attempt
at evasion of any duty chargeable
thereon or of any such prohibition
or restriction as aforesaid or of
any provision of this Act applicable
to those goods,”




The penalty provided in Column III for the same was

that on confiscation before a Magistrate he will be

liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
                                                                        62



years or to fine or both.           This is what the Court had

to declare in regard to the aforesaid penalties :



        “Then comes Ch. XVI dealing with offenses and
        penalties. Offence enumerated in Ch. XVI are of
        two kinds; first there are contraventions of
        the Act and rules thereunder which are dealt
        with by Customs officers and the penalty for
        which is imposed by them. These may be
        compendiously called customs offences. Besides
        these there are criminal offences which are
        dealt with by Magistrates and which result in
        conviction and sentence of imprisonment and/or
        fine. These two kinds of offences have been
        created to ensure that no fraud is committed in
        the matter of payment of duty and also to
        ensure that there is no smuggling of goods,
        without payment of duty or in defiance of any
        prohibition or restriction imposed under Ch. IV
        of the Act.”

Thus,   this   Court     has    held    that   there    are    custom

offences    and      criminal      offences.       The    criminal

offences were dealt with by the Magistrate which may

culminate      in       conviction       and     imposition       of

imprisonment      and   or   fine.       Thus,   this    being   the

scheme of the Sea Customs Act, when Section 5 of the

Antiquity (Export Control) Act, 1947 provided that

prosecution for contravening Section 3 of the said

Act would be without prejudice to the imposition of

penalties      and      ordering       confiscation      the     word
                                                                               63



‘penalty’ could take in both the customs offences and

also the criminal offences.                   If it is interpreted as

embracing         the     criminal       offences      then     the     word

‘penalty’ would also embrace within its scope penalty

by    way    of     imprisonment         or   fine    imposed    for    the

commission of a criminal offence after a prosecution

before the Magistrate.

64.          We   may     notice       that   under   the     Customs   Act

1962, penalties and confiscation fall under Chapter

XIV.        Penalties as contained in Chapter XIV would

correspond to customs offences in the Sea Customs

Act,   1878.         As    far    as    the    criminal      offences   are

concerned,        they     are     separately        dealt    with    under

Chapter      XVI.         Yet    the    legislature     has,    in    fact,

chosen to repeat the word ‘confiscation and penalty’

when it drafted Section 25 of the Antiquities Act.



65.          There are two submissions we need to address

which are made on behalf of the appellant.                        By virtue

of Section 4, all the provisions of the Customs Act
                                                                              64



except to the extent of inconsistency is provided full

play.    By virtue of the same prosecution under Sections

132 and 135 would lie provided that the ingredients of

the offence contained in Sections 132 and 135 are found

to    exist.     The       second   submission        is    even      the   word

‘penalty’ which is contained in Section 25 should be

interpreted      in    a    broader    sense     so    as       to    encompass

prosecution as contemplated under Sections 132 and 135

of the Customs Act besides the penalty in the form of

monetary exaction.


66.       In order to arrive at an appropriate conclusion

in this regard we must cull out the ingredients of the

offences under Sections 132 and 135 of the Act. The

ingredients of Section 132 are as follows:

        1) Making, signing or using or causing to
           be     made,        signed       or    used           any
           declaration statement or document;

        2) The        aforesaid       act    must          be        in
           transaction of any business relating
           to the customs;
                                                          65
      3) The acts mentioned above must be done
           with the knowledge or having reason to
           believe    that   such   a     declaration
           statement or document is false in any
           material particular.

If we contrast Section 132 of the Customs Act with

Section 25 of the Act, it will be seen that the offence

under Section 25 of the Antiquity Act lies in exporting

or attempting to export any antiquity or art treasure

by violating Section 3 of the Act.             When a person

exports or attempt to export an antiquity it is but

essential that he would be having a transaction with

relation to the customs.       If in his transaction with

the customs in regard to export or attempted export of

any antiquity or art treasure he does any of the acts

contained in Section 132 of the Customs Act, can it be

said that he is being prosecuted for the same offence

as contained in Section 3 read with Section 25 of the

Antiquity Act.       The answer is, No.    Quite clearly the

ingredients of Section 25 of the Act and Section 132 of

the Customs Act are distinct and different from one

another.    It may be true that it may be the same acts
                                                                                    66



or transaction which gives rise to the two distinct

offences but that may not matter.


67.          The    complaint       in   this        case       also    adverts     to

Section 50 of the Customs Act.                      Section 50 declares it

to be a duty on the part of the exporter to make and

subscribe      to    a    declaration          as    to    the    truth       of   the

contents of the shipping bill or bill of export.                                   The

exporter is to ensure the accuracy and completeness of

information         given    by   him.          He    has       also    to     ensure

compliance         with     Section      50(3)(c)          in    law.         Section

50(3)(C) of the Customs Act, it may be noticed declares

that    the    exporter       shall      ensure       compliance         with      the

restriction or prohibition if any relating to the goods

under the Customs Act or under any other law for the

time being in force.                Certainly, the restrictions or

prohibition         within    the       meaning       of    Section       50(3)(C)

would comprehend Section 3 read with Sections 25 and 26

of     the    Antiquities         Act     as        Antiquities         Act     would

certainly be inter alia a law for the time being in
                                                                               67



force   within        the   meaning        of       Section      50(3)(c).

Certainly, such provisions are complementary and not

antithetical to or inconsistent with Section 25 of the

Antiquities    Act.         If    an     exporter        gives      a    false

declaration    or      information,         should        not    the       law

effectively deal with him?               Section 132 does precisely

that by making false declaration as provided therein

punishable.      It    is   inconceivable           as   to   how       such   a

provision namely Section 132 would be inconsistent with

Section 25 or 26 of the Antiquities Act.                      It is to be

noted at any rate that Section 25 apart from providing

for prosecution for the export or attempted export,

declares that the person concerned can be visited with

a confiscation proceedings and penalty. Even accepting

the contention of the respondent that what is permitted

under Section 25 is imposition of penalty in the sense

of monetary exaction, it is to be noted this is in

connection with the prosecution for the offence under

Section 25 read with Section 3 of the Antiquities Act.

In   other   words,    when      there    is    a    prosecution         under

Section 25 of the Antiquities Act, it will not bar the
                                                                                68



imposition of confiscation and penalty in the form of

monetary      exaction        but      that        does     not    mean       that

prosecution        for    a   distinct       and    separate       offence      as

contained in Section 132 of the Customs Act is in any

way prohibited as being inconsistent with Section 25.

In this regard though for prosecution under the Customs

Act the sanctioning authority is different from the

authority to sanction prosecution under the Antiquities

Act,    the    authority          to   sanction           prosecution      under

Section 26 is only qua the offence under Section 25 of

the    Antiquities         Act.        The    authority        competent        to

sanction      prosecution         under      the    Customs       Act    is   the

exclusive      authority          to   countenance          prosecution        for

offences under the Customs Act. So, there can be no

conflict      if   a     prosecution      under      Section      132    of    the

Customs Act is maintained after proper sanction by the

competent authority under the Customs Act.                              It would

not in any way violate either Section 25 or Section 26

of the Act.
                                                                   69
68.       Section 133 deals with obstruction of officers

of custom.       It provides that if any person obstructs

any person of the customs in exercise of the power

under the Act he is liable for punishment. Section 134

penalizes resistance or refusal to allow a radiologist

to screen or to take X-ray picture of his body as per

the   order     of   the   Magistrate    under    Section   103   by

resisting or refusing to allow action on the basis of

advice    of    a    registered    medical       practitioner     for

bringing out goods secreted inside his body as provided

under Section 103.          Take a situation where a person

secretes an antiquity in his body and incurs the wrath

of    section    134.      Can    he    be   heard   to   say   that

prosecution under the Customs Act is barred?              Since the

case does not involve prosecution under these sections,

we are not making any final pronouncement in regard to

the same.
                                                                            70
69.          The time is now ripe for us to look at the

complaint which has been filed by the appellant.                           The

complaint inter alia appears as follows:

      One    wooden      box    was     intercepted     on     suspicion    on

      18/02/1995. In the courier manifest the contents of

      the said wooden box were declared as ‘Stone Figure

      Handicrafts’. Suspecting it to be an antiquity, the

      officers of the Archaeological Survey of India were

      called and it was declared to be an antiquity and

      was    identified        as   a   sand   stone    head     of   Buddha.

      Respondent’s statement was recorded under Section

      108 of the Customs Act.               The respondent had stated

      that    he   was    only      a   commission     agent    and   he   had

      prepared a declaration as given by his client Mr.

      Robert Jaeger. There are other allegations. It is

      finally stated further as follows:

                “……….
                m.    From the aforementioned facts,
            it is clear that the accused, attempted
            to export the seized antique piece.
            I.e. Sand Stone Head of Buddha illegally
            as elaborated below :
                                      71
(i)    The    accused     used    a
       fictitious name viz. Mr.
       Robert Jaeger to book the
       antique piece in his name
       for `whom he failed to
       provide                  any
       identification
       particulars/      reference
       details.    He also failed
       to produce any evidence
       to prove that the said
       antique piece was handed
       over to him by the said
       Robert Jaeger.     In fact,
       had Mr. Robert Jaeger
       existed in reality the
       accused      would      have
       obtained a receipt from
       him showing the purchase
       of the seized antique
       piece and also he would
       have      obtained        as
       encashment      certificate
       from him which he failed
       to   obtain/    produce-the
       accused    also   did    not
       obtain      any      written
       authority/      declaration
       from the said Mr. Robert
       Jaeger authorising him to
       export the parcel on his
       behalf.
(ii)   The    accused    himself/
       prepared     the     false
       proforma Invoice in his
       own     handwriting    and
       signed the declaration on
       the proforma invoice and
       also signed the airway
       bill knowingly that the
                                                                  72



                           said    piece       was       an
                           antique.
                 (iii) The ace used deliberately
                       and knowingly concealed
                       the facts and issued a
                       false certificate to the
                       effect   that   the  Sand
                       Stone Head of Buddha was
                       new and a non-antiquity.
             n. Export, of the Antiquities is
         prohibited until and unless authorised
         by the Central Govt. by (virtue of
         Section 3 of the Antiquities & Art:
 Treasures Act, 1962 read with Section
         3 of the Foreign Trade (Development &
         Regulation) Act, 1992 by Virtue of
         which the restrictions are deemed to
         be issued under Section 11 of the
         Customs Act, 1962 para 123 (Chapter
         xi) of the export and Import policy
         1992-97 (which is deemed to be issued
         under Section 5 of the Foreign Trade
         (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992)
         specifically prohibits the export of
         goods, which are restricted under any
         other law for the time being in
         force.”




70.      Under   Section     26   of   the   Act,    a   prosecution

under Section 25(1) can be instituted only by or with

the   sanction   of   an    officer     of   the     Government   as

prescribed in this behalf.             The antiquities and Art

Treasure Rules 1973 came to be published on 31st August
                                                                       73



1973 in the Gazette.          Rule 15 which was inserted with

effect    from   30/11/1978       declared       that   the    Director

General of Archaeological Survey of India shall be the

officer    competent     in      terms    of     Section      26(1)   to

institute or to sanction institution of prosecution for

the offence under Sub-section (1) of Section 25 of the

Act.


71.       Coming    finally      to    Section    135(1)(a)     of    the

Customs Act, the third limb which alone is invoked in

this case, penalises fraudulently evading or attempting

to evade any prohibition for the time being imposed

under the Customs Act or any other law for the time

being in force in regard to such goods.




72.       Now,     in   regard    to     the     last   part    in    the

complaint inter alia there is reference to the export

of antiquity being prohibited under Section 3 of the

Antiquities Act, read with Section 3 of the Foreign

Trade (Development & Regulation) Act 1992 by virtue of
                                                     74



which the restrictions are deemed to be issued under

Section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962 issued in paragraph

123 of Chapter XI of the Export And Import Policy 1992-

1997 which is deemed to be issued under Section 5 of

the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act 1992

specifically prohibiting the export of goods which are

restricted under any law for the time being in force.

Thereafter, what follows is crucial: -

        “4. The accused did not declare the
        recovered and seized antiquity as
        required under Section 50 of the
        Customs Act, 1962 and was knowingly
        concerned    in   fraudulent  evasion/
        attempt at evasion of the prohibitions
        imposed on the export of the above
        said recovered and seized antiquity.
        The   accused   has,   thus, committed
        offences punishable under Sections 132
        and 135 (1)(a) of the Customs Act,
        1962.”


Thus, the prosecution is maintained under Sections 132

and 135(1)(a) of the Customs Act, 1962.




73.     Section 3 of the Foreign Trade (Development and

Regulation) Act, 1992 reads as follows: -
                                                         75
      “3. Powers to make provisions relating to
      imports and exports. -(1) The Central Government
      may, by Order published in the Official
      Gazette, make provision for the development and
      regulation of foreign trade by facilitating
      imports and increasing exports.

      (2) The Central Government may also, by Order
      published   in  the   Official  Gazette,   make
      provision   for  prohibiting,  restricting   or
      otherwise regulating, in all cases or in
      specified classes of cases and subject to such
      exceptions, if any, as may be made by or under
      the Order, the import or export of goods or
      services or technology:
      Provided that the provisions of this sub-
      section shall be applicable, in case of import
      or export of services or technology, only when
      the service or technology provider is availing
      benefits under the foreign trade policy or is
      dealing with specified services or specified
      technologies.

      (3) All goods to which any Order under sub-
      section (2) applies shall be deemed to be goods
      the import or export of which has been
      prohibited under section 11 of the Customs Act,
      1962 (52 of 1962) and all the provisions of
      that Act shall have effect accordingly.

       (4) without prejudice to anything contained in
      any other law, rule, regulation, notification
      or order, no permit or licence shall be
      necessary for import or export of any goods,
      nor any goods shall be prohibited for import or
      export except, as may be required under this
      Act, or rules or orders made thereunder.”




74.     Of relevance to this case is sub section 3 of

Section 3.   It purports to declare that all goods to
                                                                   76



which any order under sub-section (2) applies are to be

deemed     as   goods   the   import   and   export   of   which   is

prohibited under Section 11 of the Customs Act. Para

123   of    the   Import-Export    policy     1992-1997     read   as

follows:

         “123. All goods may be exported without any
         restriction except to the extent such exports
         are regulated by the Negative List of Exports
         or any other provision of this Policy or any
         other law for the time being in force.
         The Director General of Foreign Trade may,
         however, specify through a Public Notice the
         terms and conditions according to which any
         goods not included in the Negative List of
         Exports may be exported without a licence. Such
         terms and conditions may include Minimum Export
         Price   (MEP),   registration   with   specified
         authorities,   value    addition,   quantitative
         ceilings and compliance with other laws, rules,
         regulations.”



Goods placed in the negative list are those goods which

are completely prohibited items.             It is to be borne in

mind that Section 3 of the Antiquities Act does not

completely prohibit export of antiquity or art treasure

and it countenances export by the Central Government or

by persons authorised.
                                                                       77
75.       Therefore,      the   prosecution       is    launched       in

regard to Section 135(1)(a) on the basis that Section 3

of the Antiquities Act prohibits export of antiquity

and this is read with Section 3 of the Foreign Trade

and Development Act 1992 read with Export and Import

Policy for the year 1992-1997 bringing in Section 11 of

the Customs Act.


76.       In the last limb of Section 135(1)(a) of the

Customs Act, 1962, the ingredients of the offence are

the   fraudulent    evasion     or   attempt    at     evading   any

prohibition   for   the    time      being    imposed   under    the

Customs Act or under any other law for the time being

in force with respect to such goods. On the basis of

the Import-Export Policy for the year 1992-1997 which

we have referred to in para 123 thereof read with

Section   3   of   The    Foreign     Trade    (Development      and

Regulation) Act, 1992, the restriction as to export

of antiquities is deemed to be issued under Section

11 of the Customs Act, 1962. Therefore, the export of
                                                                78



antiquity and art treasures became prohibited by the

deeming provisions of Section 3(3) of The Foreign

Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 under

Section   11   of   the   Customs   Act,    1962.    Section

135(1)(a), in so far as, the prosecution is concerned

under the third limb can be said to be under Section

11 of the Customs Act read with Section 135(1)(a) no

doubt with the aid of Section 3(1) of the Antiquities

Act also. It would make it a case of prosecution for

fraudulently   evading    or   attempting    to     evade   a

prohibition contained in the Customs Act, 1962 though

invoking Section (3) of the Antiquities Act also. The

second part of the last limb of Section 135(1)(a)

permits prosecution for fraudulent evasion or attempt

to evade the prohibition contained in any other law

for the time being in force. The said prohibition in

the facts of this case would attract the prohibition

contained in Section 3 of the Antiquities Act. It may

be noted that as far as a prosecution under Section

25 of the Antiquities Act read with Section 3 of the

said Act is concerned, the ingredients of the offence
                                                                           79



consist     of     exporting      or    attempting        to    export

antiquities       or   art   treasures.     In    contrast      to   the

same, the ingredients of the offence under Section

135(1)(a)        contains    an   additional        and       different

element, namely, fraudulently evading or attempting

to evade the prohibition in the matter of exporting

the goods or attempting to export the goods which are

prohibited. Be it on the basis of deemed prohibition

under Section 11 of the Customs Act or on the basis

of   prohibition        contained      in   Section       3    of    the

Antiquities Act only to sustain a prosecution in the

third     limb    thereof    of   Section        135(1)(a),     it    is

incumbent on the prosecution to establish that the

accused fraudulently evaded or attempted to evade the

prohibition against export. Therefore, in the said

sense, the ingredients of the offences under Section

135(1)(a) and the offence under Section 3 read with

Section 25 of the Antiquities Act are different and

distinct.
                                                                          80
77.       The question, however, would arise whether

having regard to the mandate of Section 4 of the

Antiquities        Act,    the      prosecution       under    Section

135(1)(a) when it is on the basis of fraudulently

evading     or     attempting       to   evade       the   prohibition

contained in Section 3 of the Antiquities Act would

be inconsistent with Section 25 read with Section 26

of the Antiquities Act. A prosecution under Section

25 of the Antiquities Act is to be done on the basis

of    sanction     of    Director    General     of    Archaeological

Survey of India            who is the statutory sanctioning

authority. Like a prosecution under Section 132 of

the Customs Act, a prosecution under 135(1)(a) must

be on the basis of sanction given by the competent

authority        under    the    Customs     Act,      and    not   the

Antiquities Act.


78.       The      last    aspect    which     may    be   necessary      to

notice, the provision of Section 24 of the Antiquities

Act. Section 24 deals with the power to decide whether

an article is an antiquity or art treasure. It declares
                                                                                  81



that if any question arises whether under any article,

object or thing or manuscript record or other document

is or is not an antiquity or art treasure or is or is

not an art treasure, the matter must be referred to the

Director General of Archaeological Survey of India or to

an officer not below the rank of Director authorized by

the Director General and his decision for the purpose

of the Act on such question shall be final. Section 24

makes a declaration about the decision of the named

authorities being final for the purposes of this Act. A

perusal    of    the       complaint,        in    fact,    would    show       that

there is a case for the appellant that they have got

stone head of Buddha examined and there is an opinion

by   authorized            nominee     of    the    Director        General       of

Archaeological Survey of India, finding it to be an

antiquity       and    on     the    basis    of    request       made   by      the

appellant       officers         and        reference       has     been        made

specifically          to    Section     24    of    the    Antiquities          Act.

Section 24 as noticed confers power on the Director

General    or    his        authorized       nominee       to   determine        the

question    as        to     whether        the    articles       etc.     is     an
                                                                                    82



antiquity       or    not    or    an    art     treasure        or    not.      This

determination which is to be treated as final is for

the   purposes        of    the    Act.    Undoubtedly,              one   of      the

purposes       of    the    Act    would       be   a     prosecution         under

Section 25 of the Act. In this case, the case of the

appellant is that the prosecution is under Sections 132

and 135(1)(a) of the Customs Act, 1962. Whether it is

necessary for the Customs Authorities to procure the

opinion     of       the    Director      General         of     Archaeological

Survey     of       India   or     his    authorized           officer       for    a

prosecution under the Customs Act?



79.        We have noticed the contents of the complaint.

There     is     undoubtedly       reference        to         the    prohibition

contained       against      export       of   antiquity,            inter    alia,

under the Antiquities Act.                     Under Section 4 of the

Antiquities          Act,    the    Customs         Act        has    been       made

applicable except to the extent of the inconsistency.

The     inter        play    between       two      enactments,            can      be

understood as follows – while the prosecution under the

Customs Act in regard to the Antiquity or art treasure
                                                                       83



may   be   permissible,        when   a    question    arises    as    to

whether an article is an antiquity or not or an art

treasure or not, the provisions contained under Section

24 of the Antiquities Act would be applicable and the

question must be decided by the Director General of

Archaeological        Survey    of    India    or     his    authorized

nominee and finality would be attached therewith. The

Director General or his authorized officers would be

the authorities who would have the necessary knowledge,

experience and could give an authoritative opinion in

the case of dispute as to whether an article is or is

not an antiquity or art treasure. By this process, we

would think that we can give full play on a harmonious

construction to both the provisions and what is more

giving the primacy to the antiquities Act where it is

called for accordingly.


80.        It   may     be     noticed     that     the     concept   of

‘inconsistency’        is    found    in    Article       254   of    the

Constitution of India.          Article 254 has a marginal note

which speaks about inconsistencies between laws made by
                                                                               84



Parliament and laws made by legislatures of the State.

The Article goes on to state that if the law made by

the State is repugnant to the law made the Parliament,

the    law    made    by     the   Parliament        to   the      extent      of

repugnancy shall prevail.             This is no doubt subject to

sub-Article          (2).      The      said     Article           being       a

constitutional         provision      dealing        with    the     complex

subject of the quasi federal structure we have in India

in part may not be entirely apposite for interpreting

the    provision       of     Section     4     which       speaks        about

inconsistency between the Customs Act, 1962 and the

Antiquities     Act.         However,    we    may    only      refer     to    a

Constitution         Bench    judgment     of    this       Court       in     K.

Karunanidhi vs. Union of India and Another                          1979 (3)

SCC 431.      This Court proceeded to hold that the Tamil

Nadu    Men    (Criminal       Misconduct)      Act,        1973    was      not

repugnant      to    the     Indian   Penal     Code,       Prevention         of

Corruption Act and Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1952

and it was in addition to and not in derogation of any

law in force.         The Court inter alia held in paragraph

24 as follows:
                                                        85
      “24……..Before any repugnancy can arise,     the
      following conditions must be satisfied:-
        1. That there is a clear and direct
        inconsistency between the Central Act and the
        State Act.
        2. That such an inconsistency is absolutely
        irreconcilable.
        3.   That  the   inconsistency  between  the
        provisions of the two Acts is of such a
        nature as to bring the two Acts into direct
        collision with each other and a situation is
        reached where it is impossible to obey the
        one without disobeying the other.

81.     Finally, it summed up with the conclusions in

paragraphs 35 which reads as under:


      “35. On a careful consideration, therefore, of
      the   authorities   referred   to above,   the
      following propositions emerge:-
        1. That in order to decide the question of
        repugnancy it must be shown that the two
        enactments     contain    inconsistent   and
        irreconcilable   provisions,  so   that they
        cannot stand together or operate in the same
        field.
        2. That there can be no repeal by implication
        unless the inconsistency appears on the face
        of the two statutes.
        3. That where the two statutes occupy a
        particular field, but there is room or
        possibility of both the statutes operating in
        the same field without coming into collision
        with each other, no repugnancy results.
        4. That where there is no inconsistency but a
        statute occupying the same field seeks to
        create distinct and separate offences, no
        question of repugnancy arises and both the
                                                                                   86



             statutes      continue      to   operate   in    the   same
             field.

This Court also held:


         36. In the light of the propositions enunciated
         above, there can be no doubt that the State Act
         creates distinct and separate offences with
         different ingredients and different punishments
         and it does not in any way collide with the
         Central Acts……”



No doubt the Court in the said case took note of the

provision which provided for saving of other laws and

came    to    the       conclusion       that    the    intention      that       the

State        Act        which     was         undoubtedly       the        dominant

legislation         would       only     be    “in   addition       and     not   in

derogation         of    any     other    law    for    the    time    being      in

force”       which      manifestly        included      the     Central       Acts,

namely,       the       Indian     Penal       code,    The     Prevention        of

Corruption Act and the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act,.

82.          We may also notice the following test which has

been laid down in the decision of this court reported

in AIR 1959 SC 648 which has in fact been adverted in a
                                                                          87



recent judgment of this Court in Innoventive Industries

Limited v. ICICI Bank and Another                 2018 (1) SCC 407.

Paragraph 43 of the said judgment reads as under:

          “43. In Deep Chand v. State of U.P., 1959 Supp.
          (2) SCR 8, this Court referred to its earlier
          judgments in Zaverbhai Amai Das v. State of
          Bombay 1955 (1) SCR 799 and Tika Ramji v. State
          of U.P. 1956 SCR 393 and held:

          29….“Repugnancy between two statutes may thus
          be ascertained on the basis of the following
          three principles:
           (1) Whether there is direct conflict between
           the two provisions;
           (2) Whether Parliament intended to lay down
           an exhaustive code in respect of the subject
           matter replacing the Act of the State
           Legislature; and (3) Whether the law made by
           Parliament and the law made by the State
           Legislature occupy the same field.”


83.         While it may be true that the Antiquities Act

is    a   comprehensive   law,     it   cannot    be    treated      as   a

complete or exhaustive code.            Of course, the principles

relating     to    repugnancy    have    been     expounded     in    the

context     of    conflicting    claims      to   legislative     power

between     two    legislatures.        In    this     case   both    the

Customs Act 1962 and Antiquities Act have been made by

Parliament.
                                                                      88
84.        We have expounded the ingredients of Sections

132 and 135(1)(a) of the Customs Act.                  The view we are

taking would give full play to the Customs Act to the

extent that it is not inconsistent with the Act as

contemplated under Sector 4.              The view which we are

declaring does not do violence to the provisions of

Section 25 of the Act.               The contrary view which has

gained acceptance at the hands of the High Court, in

our   view,      fails   to   give    meaning    and    full   play   as

intended to the Customs Act as provided in Section 4 of

the Act.      Furthermore, the principle that a transaction

or the same set of facts can give rise to more than one

distinct offence provided the legislative intention in

this regard is clear from the provisions which creates

such offences cannot be lost sight of.




85.        The    upshot      of   the   above   discussion     is    as

follows:- Prosecution under Sections 132 and 135(1)(a)

of the Customs Act, 1962, is not barred in regard to

the antiquities or art treasures. Accordingly, we allow
                                                                       89



the   appeal      and   set   aside      the   impugned    order.    The

complaint   filed       may   be   proceeded     with     as   per   law.

However, we make it very clear that pronouncement of

this order shall not           come in the way          of the Court

deciding    the    matter     on   its    merits.   The    Court     will

proceed to consider the matter on its own and shall not

be influenced by any observation which may have been

made in this order regarding merits.




                                               …………………………….J.
                                                    (Ashok Bhushan)




                                                …………………………J.
                                                  (K.M. Joseph)

New Delhi;
February 27, 2019

