
Supreme Court of India
P.V. Mohammad Barmay Sons vs Director Of Enforcement on 20 August, 1992Equivalent citations: 1993 AIR 1188, 1992 SCR  (3) 960
Author: K Ramaswamy
Bench: Ramaswamy, K.
           PETITIONER:
P.V. MOHAMMAD BARMAY SONS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DIRECTOR OF ENFORCEMENT

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/08/1992

BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
PANDIAN, S.R. (J)

CITATION:
 1993 AIR 1188		  1992 SCR  (3) 960
 1993 SCC  Supl.  (2) 724 JT 1992 (4)	565
 1992 SCALE  (2)227


ACT:
     Foreign Exchange  Regulation  Act	7  of  1947-Sections
5(1)(a),  (b) and 23(1) read with Sections 9(1)(a), (c)	 and
50  of	the  Foreign Exchange Regulation  Act  46  of  1973-
Comparative  study-Language,  penalty  and   contraventions-
Whether differ.
     Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act 46 of 1973-Section  81
read with Section 6 (e) of the General Clauses Act-Repeal of
the  Foreign  Exchange	Regulation  Act	 7  of	 1947-Rights
acquired  or  accrued,	penalty,  liability,  forfeiture  or
punishment incurred whether kept alive.
     Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act 46 of 1973-Section  81
read  with  Section 6(e) of the	 General  Clauses  Act-Legal
proceeding  for	 enforcing a right acquired  or	 accrued  or
liability,  penalty,  forfeiture,  punishment  incurred	 and
legal proceedings for acquisition of a right-Distinction.
     Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act 46 of 1973-Section  81
read with section 6(e) of the General Clauses Act-Acts done,
penalties,  forfeiture	or punishment  incurred	 before	 the
Repealed  Act  7  of 1947, though no  proceedings  initiated
there-under-Whether  attracts  Section	6  of  the   General
Clauses	 Act-Legislative  intention  of	 Act  46  of   1973-
Appreciation-Court's duty.
     Foreign  Exchange	Regulation Act 46  of  1973-Sections
9(1)(a), (c) and 50 read with Section 5(1)(a), (b) and 23 of
the  Foreign  Exchange	Regulation  Act	 7  of	1947-Penalty
imposed-Legality  of-Doctrine  of double  jeopardy,  Whether
applicable.



HEADNOTE:
     The  appellant-firm owned three vessels and carried  on
export	of timber, coir etc. to Gulf countries and  imported
Emuphraez Zabdi Dates on return.
     Out  of  the amounts payable in  Pounds  deducting	 the
price  for dates, the appellant had fitted 230 H.P.  Gardner
engine (second hand) to its first vessel and 240 H.P. Kalvin
engine (second hand) to its second vessel.  The
						       961
second-hand engines were purchased at the cost of Rs. 50,000
and  Rs.  55,000 respectively .	 Out of the  amount  payable
through	 Nakoda	 in Basrah , a sum of Rs. 30,000  was  paid.
For the third vessel an agreement was entered into to fit in
a second hand engine with one M/s. Mohd. Zasim of Kuwait  at
a price of 2,100 Kuwaiti Dinars and payable in three  annual
instalments.
     On	 4.10.1974, a raid conducted on the premises of	 the
appellant  by the respondent and it was discovered that	 the
appellant  contravened	Secs.  5(1)(a) and  5(1)(b)  of	 the
Foreign	 Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.	 In  consequence  of
discovery  a notice was issued on 11.10.1974 and not  having
been  satisfied with the explanations, a  show-cause  notice
was issued.  An explanation was given by the appellant.	 The
Addl. Director, Enforcement Directorate in the	proceedings,
found  that the appellant had purchased two engines and	 got
fitted	to  two	 motor vessels and agreement  to  the  third
engine	was also concluded without obtaining the  permission
of  the	 Reserve Bank of India and that	 the  appellant	 was
found to have committed the contravention of Sec.  5(1)(a) &
(b) and penalty of Rs. 50,000 was imposed on 5.7.1977.
     On appeal, the Appellate Board confirmed the penalties,
reduced the penalty from Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 37,500.
     The appellant filed this appeal by special leave  under
Art. 136 of the Constitution of India challenging the  order
of the Appellate Board.
     The  appellant  contended	that  the  Foreign  Exchange
Regulation  Act	 7  of	1947 was  repealed  by	the  Foreign
Exchange  Regulation  Act 46 of 1973;  that  no	 action	 was
taken under the repealed Act before the Act 46 of 1973	came
into  force  on	 19.9.1973 and, therefore,  the	 action	 was
without	  jurisdiction	and  authority	of  law;  that	 the
proceedings  against the appellant was taken under  the	 Sea
Customs Act, 1922  and the adjudicating authority imposed  a
penalty of Rs. 4,30,000 and on Appeal, the Central Board  of
Excise and Customs set aside the penalty; that for the	same
offence	 no  proceedings under the Act 46 of 1973  could  be
taken; that the finding was based on no evidence, since	 the
respondent  did	 not prove the offence	under  the  repealed
Foreign	 Exchange  Regulation  Act, 1947 Act  or  under	 the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973.
     The respondent submitted that in view of Sec. 81 (2) of
the Foreign
						       962
Exchange  Regulation  Act,  1973 read with  Sec.  6  of	 the
General	 Clauses  Act,	the  power  of	the  respondent	  to
investigate  and enforce the liability or  penalty  incurred
under  the Repealed Act was saved, though the Act 7 of	1947
was repealed under sub-sec. (2) of Sec. 81 of the Act.
     Dismissing the appeal, this court
     HELD : 1, A comparative study of the provisions of	 the
repealed Foreign Exchange  Regulation Act 7 of 1947 and	 the
Foreign	  Exchange  Regulation	Act  46	 of   1973   clearly
adumberated that save as may be provided in accordance	with
any general or special exemption from the provisions of this
sub-section,   which   may  be	granted	  conditionally	  or
unconditionally	 by  the Reserve Bank of  India,  no  person
resident  in or outside	 India shall make any payment to  or
for the credit of any persons residents outside India  draw,
issue, negotiate any bill of exchange or promissory note  or
acknowledge  any  debt	so that a right	 whether  actual  or
contingent to receive a payment is created or transferred in
favour	 of  any  persons  resident  outside  India,  is   a
contravention  of the Repealed Act 7 of 1947 and the Act  46
of  1973,  as  well such person is  liable  to	the  penalty
prescribed under the respective provisions.  Three times the
value  was the	penalty prescribed  under the  Repealed	 Act
and five times the value has been prescribed under the	Act.
Except	this difference, there is no difference	 as  regards
the  language, in nature of penalty and	 contraventions	 are
concerned.  [967 D,E,F]
     2.01.   The effect of the Repealed Act of 7 of 1947  by
operation of clause (e) of Sec. 6 of the General Clause	 Act
read with sub-sec. (2) of Sec. 81 is that though the Act  46
of 1973 obliterates the operation of Act 7 of 1947,  despite
its   repeal,	the  penalty,	liability,   forfeiture	  or
prosecution  for  acts done while the repealed	Act  was  in
force were kept alive, though no action thereunder was taken
when the Repealed Act was in force. [968-G]
     2.02.    The   rights  acquired  or  accrued   or	 the
liabilities   incurred	 or  any  penalty,   forfeiture	  or
punishment incurred during the operation of the Repealed Act
are  kept  alive.  Investigations to be made or	 any  remedy
which may have been available before the repeal be  enforced
are  also  preserved.  Such  rights,  liabilities,  penalty,
forefeiture or punishment, due to repeal  "shall not lapse".
The saving clause, thus, aimed to preserve the legal  effect
and  consequences  of things done though those	affects	 and
consequences projected to post repealed period. [968-H-969A]
						       963
     2.03.  The things done adumberated in Sec. 81(2) of the
Act  46	 of  1973 or Sec. 6 of the  General  Clause  Act  or
penalty	 or  punishment	 incurred would	 envisage  that	 the
things	already done or liabilities, penalty, punishment  or
forfeiture  incurred, though happened before  the Act 46  of
1973  came  into  force, Sec. 81(2) of the Act	43  of	1973
empowers  to effectuate the liabilities, penalties, etc.  as
if  they have been in existence and amenable to	 be  pursued
under the Act 46 of 1973 or under the Repealed Act 7 of 1947
by  operation  of Sec. 6 of General Clauses  Act.   What  is
unaffected  by the repeal of the Act  7 of 1947 is  a  right
accrued, etc. [969-C]
     3.	  There is a distinction between a legal  proceeding
for  enforcing	a right acquired or  accrued  or  liability,
penalty,  forfeiture,  punishment  incurred  and  the  legal
proceedings for acquisition of a right, the former is  saved
whereas	 the later is not.  In spite of repeal the right  to
investigation or to take legal proceedings remain unaffected
and  preserved as if the old Act continues to be  operative.
[969-D]
     4.01.   What  remains to be done, after the Act  46  of
1973  came into force, is the quantification,  if  necessary
after due investigation and legal proceedings and if  proved
to impose the penalty, forfeiture or punishment.  The  Court
takes cognizance of the offence and not the offender or	 the
acts done.  What the court is to enquire into is whether the
Act  is	 incompatible with the Repealed Act and	 whether  it
manifested  any	 contrary  intention to	 the  Repealed	Act.
Unless a different intention has been manifested in the Act,
the Repealed Act would continue to be operative.  Even in  a
case  of bare repeal accompanied by a fresh  legislation  on
the same subject, the provisions of the new Act will have to
be  looked  into  to find where and  how  far  the  new	 Act
envisages  a contrary intention affecting the  operation  of
Sec.  6	 of the General Clauses Act.  Unless  such  contrary
intention is manifested, liabilities, penalties,  forfeiture
or punishment under the Repealed Act will continue to  exist
and  remain in force by operation of Sec. 6 of	the  General
Clauses Act. [969-E-F]
     4.02.   The Act 46 of 1973 did not evince any  contrary
intention.   It merely reiterated the earlier law  operating
the  feld.  Therefore, Clauses(d) of  Sec.6 of	the  General
Clauses Act gets attracted to the acts done or the penalties
incurred  or  forfeiture  or  punishment  had  already	been
committed before the repealed enactment, though no  criminal
proceedings  have  been actually  initiated  under  repealed
enactment before its repeal.
					       [969-H-970-A]
						       964
     5.01.   The  Repealed Act prescribed  three  times	 the
value  as  penalty  and	 under the Act	43  of	1973  Sec.50
provides five times penalty.  So what would be impossible as
penalty	 is three times.  the penalty imposed as reduced  by
the   appellate	 Tribunal  is  even  not  three	 times,	  as
contemplated under Sec. 23 of the Repealed Act.	  Therefore,
though	the Act 43 of 1973, evinced a contrary intention  of
imposition  of higher penalty than one prescribed under	 the
Act  7	of  1947, on the facts in  this	 case,	the  penalty
imposed is perfectly valid and legal.  [970-D]
     5.02.   The mere fact that the penalty proceedings	 for
evasion	 of  the  excise duty had ended	 in  favour  of	 the
appellant,  does  not  take away  the  jurisdiction  of	 the
enforcement authorities under the Act to impose the  penalty
in  question.	The  doctrine of  double  jeopardy  has	 not
application.
						   [970-F-H]
     5.03.  Since there was no express permission granted by
the Reserve Bank of India for the payments by the  appellant
to  the agent outside  India, the contravention	 was  proved
and  penalty  was  imposed.  It is the	penalty	 under	Sec.
5(1)(a)	 & (b) of the Repealed Act equivalent to  sec.9	 (1)
(a)  &	(c) of the Act.	 Therefore, the penalty	 imposed  is
based on material, valid reasons and proper findings.  [971-
A-B]
     O. Abdul Aziz & Ors. v. Addl. Director of	Enforcement,
AIR  1983  Madras  59;	A.K.L.	Labbai	Thamdi	Maraicar  v.
Enforcement Directorate & Ors., AIR 1983 Madras 102;  Tiwari
Kanhaiyalal  &	Ors. v. Commissioner of	 Income-tax,  Delhi,
[1975 4 SCC 101 and The Commissioner of Income-tax, U.P.  v.
M/s Shah Sadiq & Sons, [1987] 3 SCC 516 at 524, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal	 No.
95 of 1981.
     From  the Judgment and Order dated 17.10.1978   of	 the
Foreign	 Exchange Regulation Appellate Board, New  Delhi  in
Appeal No. 112 of 1977.
     S.P. Singh and Sunil Kr. Singh for the Appellants.
     K.T.S.   Tulsi,   Addl.  Solicitor	  General,   Ms.   A
Subhashini,  Ms.  A.  Kripal and  Kailash   Vasdev  for	 the
Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
						       965
     K.	 RAMASWAMY, J. A short but interesting	question  of
law had arisen in this case.  The appellant is a firm  which
owned  three vessels, by name M.V. Fathel Beir, M.V.  Fathel
Rehman and M.V. Saad Salam.  It carries on export of timber,
coir  etc.  to Gulf countries and  imported  Euphraez  Zabdi
Dates  on  return.  Out of the	amounts	 payable  in  Pounds
deducting the price for dates, the appellant had fitted	 230
H.P.   Gardner	 engine	 (second  hand)	 to   their   vessel
Fatherlbari  and  240 H.P. Kalvin engine  (second  hand)  to
their  vessel  Fazther Rehman, which were purchases  at	 the
cost of Rs. 50,000 and Rs. 55,000 respectively.	 Out of	 the
amount payable through Nakoda in Basrah, a sum of Rs. 30,000
was paid.  For the third vessel Saad Salam an agreement	 was
entered	 into to fit in a second hand engine with M/s  Mohd.
Zasim  of  Kuwait  at a price of  2,100	 Kuwati	 Dinars	 and
payable in three annual installments.  The Addl.   Director,
Enforcement Directorate, Madras adjudicated the	 proceedings
against	 the  appellant	 and found that	 the  appellant	 had
purchased  two	engines and got them fitted into  two  motor
vessels and agreement to the third engine was also concluded
without	 obtaining  the permission of the  Reserve  Bank  of
India.	Thereby it contravened Secs. 5(1)(a) and 5(1)(b)  of
the  Foreign  Exchange	Regulation Act of  1947,  for  short
`Repealed   Act',    In	  this	 behalf	  admittedly	this
contravention  was  discovered on a raid  conducted  on	 the
premises   of  the  appellant  on  October  4,	 1974.	  In
consequence of discovery a notice was issued on October	 11,
1974 and not having been satisfied with the explanations,  a
show-cause  notice  was	 issued	 on  October  18,  1975	  an
explanation  was given by the appellant and he was found  to
have  committed the contravention of Sec. 5(1)(a) & (b)	 and
penalty	 was imposed on July 5, 1977.  On appeal,  while  by
order  dated October 17,1978, the Appellate Board  confirmed
the  penalties, reduced the penalty from Rs. 50,000  to	 Rs.
37,500.	  Questioning  the legality  thereof  the  appellant
filed  this  appeal by special leave under Art. 136  of	 the
Constitution of India.
     Two main contentions have been raised by the appellant.
The first contention is that the Act 7 of 1947 was  repealed
by  Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act, 46 of 1973  for  short
`the  Act'.   No  action was taken under  the  repealed	 Act
before	the Act came into force on September, 19,1973.	 The
impugned  action,  therefore, is  without  jurisdiction	 and
authority of law.  It is also contended that the proceedings
against the appellant was taken under the Customs Act,	1962
and  the  adjudicating authority imposed a  penalty  of	 Rs.
4,30,000.   On	Appeal,	 the Central  Board  of	 Excise	 and
Customs	 by  order  dated  August 19,  1975  set  aside	 the
penalty.  For the same offence no proceedings under the	 Act
could be taken.	 It is also contended
						       966
that  the  finding  is	based  on  no  evidence,  since	 the
respondents did not prove the offence under the Repealed Act
or under the Act.
 Section 5(1)(a) and (b) of the Repealed Act reads thus:
	 "5(1) - Save as may be provided in an in accordance
	 with  any  general or special	exemption  from	 the
	 provisions of this sub-section which may be granted
	 conditionally	or  unconditionally by	the  Reserve
	 Bank, no person in or resident in, (India) shall-
	 (a) - make any payment to or for the credit of	 any
	 person resident outside India.
			 xxx	  xxx	  xxx
	 (b)  draw, issue or negotiate any bill of  exchange
	 or promissory note or acknowledge any debt, so that
	 a right (whether actual or contingent) to receive a
	 payment is created or transferred in favour of	 any
	 person resident outside India."
 Section 9(1)(a) and (c) of the 1973 Act provide thus:
	 "9(1)	Save as may be provided in and in accordance
	 with  any  general or special	exemption  from	 the
	 provisions of this sub-section which may be granted
	 conditionally	or  unconditionally by	the  Reserve
	 Bank, no person in, or resident in, India shall-
	 (a) - make any payment to or for the credit of	 any
	 person resident outside India:
			 xxx	 xxx	 xxx
	 (c) - draw, issue or negotiate any bill of exchange
	 or promissory note or acknowledge any debt, so that
	 a right (whether actual or contingent) to receive a
	 payment is created or transferred in favour of	 any
	 person resident outside India."
     Section  23(1) of the Repealed Act	 prescribes  penalty
thus :
	      "No  person shall enter into any	contract  or
	      agreement	 which would directly or  indirectly
	      evade or avoid in any way	 the
						       967
	      operation of any provisions of this Act or  of
	      any rule, direction or order made thereunder."
     Section 50 of the Act provides penalty thus :
	 "If any person contravenes any of the provisions of
	 this  Act (other than Sec. 13, clause (a)  of	sub-
	 section (1) Sec. 18 and  clause (a) of	 sub-section
	 (1)  of Sec. 19)or of any rule, direction or  order
	 made thereunder, he shall be liable to such penalty
	 not  exceeding five times the amount of  the  value
	 involved in any such contravention or five thousand
	 rupees,  whichever is more, as may be	adjudged  by
	 the Director of Enforcement or any other officer of
	 Enforcement  not  below  the  rank  of	 an   Asstt.
	 Director  of  Enforcement specially   empowered  in
	 this  behalf  by order of the	Central	 Govt.	 (in
	 either	  case	hereinafter  referred  to   as	 the
	 adjudicating officer)."
	      A comparative study of these provisions of the
	 Repealed  Act and the Act clearly adumberated	that
	 save  as  may be provided in  accordance  with	 any
	 general or special exemption from the provisions of
	 this	 sub-section,	which	may    be    granted
	 conditionally	or  unconditionally by	the  Reserve
	 Bank  of  India, no person resident in	 or  outside
	 India	shall make any payment to or for the  credit
	 of any persons residents outside India draw, issue,
	 negotiate any bill of exchange or promissory not or
	 acknowledge any debt so that a right whether actual
	 or  contingent to receive a payment is	 created  or
	 transferred  in  favour  of  any  persons  resident
	 outside  India, is a contravention of the  Repealed
	 Act  and the Act as well and such person is  liable
	 to  the  penalty prescribed  under  the  respective
	 provisions.  Three times the value  was the penalty
	 prescribed  under the Repealed Act and	 five  times
	 the  value  has  been	prescribed  under  the	Act.
	 Except	 this difference, there is no difference  as
	 regards   the	language,  nature  of  penalty	 and
	 contraventions	 are concerned.	 Section 81  of	 the
	 Act repeals and saves thus :
	 "Repeal  and  saving  - (1)  The  foreign  Exchange
	 Regulation  Act,  1947	 (7  of	 1947),	 is   hereby
	 repealed.
	 (2)  "anything done"..........under the Act  hereby
	 repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent
	 with the provisions of this act, be deemed to	have
	 been done or taken under the
						       968
	 corresponding provisions of this Act."
     Section 6 of the  General Clause Act, 1897 provides the
effect of repeal thus :
	 "Where	 this Act or any Central Act  or  Regulation
	 made after the commencement of this act repeals any
	 enactment  hitherto made or hereafter to  be  made,
	 then,	unless	a different intention  appears,	 the
	 repeal shall not -
			 xxx	xxx    xxx
	 (e)  affect any investigation, legal proceeding  or
	 remedy	 in  respect of any such  right,  privilege,
	 obligation,   liability,  penalty,  forfeiture	  or
	 punishment.......
	 and  any  such investigation, legal  proceeding  or
	 remedy	 may be instituted, continued  or  enforced,
	 and  any such penalty,forfeiture or punishment	 may
	 be  imposed as if the Repealing Act  or  Regulation
	 had not been passed."
     Sri Tulsi, the learned Addl. Solicitor General  placing
reliance  in  O.  Abdul Aziz & Ors.  v.	 Addl.	Director  of
Enforcement,  AIR  1983 Madras 59 and A.K.L.  Labbai  Thambi
Maraicar v. Enforcement Directorate & Ors., AIR 1983  Madras
102,  contended that in view of Sec. 81(2) of the  Act	read
with  Sec.  6 of the General Clause Act, the  power  of	 the
respondents  to	 investigate and enforce  the  liability  or
penalty incurred under the Repealed Act is saved, though the
Act  7 of 1947 has been repealed under sub-sec. (2) of	Sec.
81  of	the Act 7 of 1947 has been repealed  under  sub-sec.
(2) of Sec. 81 of the Act. The contention of the  respondent
is that the Repealed Act, after the Act had come into  force
in 1973, is a dead corpse and no life into it could be blown
with  the  aid	of Sec. 81(20 of the Act or Sec.  6  of	 the
General	 Clause	 Act read with Sub-sec. (2) of	sec.  81  is
that,  though the Act obliterates the operation of Act 7  of
1947, despite its repeal, the penalty, liability, forfeiture
or  prosecution for acts done while the repealed Act was  in
force were kept alive, though no action thereunder was taken
when the Repealed Act was in force.  The rights acquired  or
accrued	  or  the  liabilities	incurred  or  any   penalty,
forfeiture  or punishment incurred during its operation	 are
kept alive.  Investigations to be made or any remedy
						       969
which may have been available before the repeal be  enforced
are  also  preserved.  Such  rights,  liabilities,  penalty,
forefeiture or punishment, due to repeal "shall not  lapse".
The saving clause, thus, aimed to preserve the legal  effect
and  consequences  of things done though those	effects	 and
consequences projected to post repealed period.	 The  things
done  adumberated in  Sec. 81(2) or Sec. 6  of	the  General
Clause Act or penalty or punishment incurred would  envisage
that  the  things  already  done  or  liabilities,  penalty,
punishment  or forfeiture incurred, though  happened  before
the  Act came into force, Sec. 81(2) of the Act empowers  to
effectuate the liabilities, penalties, etc. as if they	have
been  in existence and amenable to be pursued under the	 Act
or under the Repealed Act by operation of Sec. 6 of  General
Clauses Act.  What is unaffected by the repeal of the Act  7
of  1947  is a right accrued, etc.  There is  a	 distinction
between a legal proceeding for enforcing a right acquired or
accrued	 or  liability,	 penalty,  forefeiture,	  punishment
incurred  and  the legal proceedings for  acquisition  of  a
right,	the  former is saved whereas the later is  not.	  In
spite of repeal the right to investigation or to take  legal
proceedings  remain unaffected and preserved as if  the	 old
Act  continues	to be operative.  What remains to  be  done,
after  the  Act came into force, is the	 quantification,  if
necessary after the investigation and legal proceedings	 and
if  proved to impose the penalty, forfeiture or	 punishment.
The  Court  takes  cognizance  of the  offence and  not	 the
offender  or  the acts done.  What the court is	 to  enquire
into  is whether the Act is incompatible with  the  Repealed
Act and whether it manifested any contrary intentions to the
Repealed  Act.	 Unless	 a  different  intention  was	been
manifested in the Act, the Repealed Act would continue to be
operative.   Even in a case of bare repeal accompanied by  a
fresh  legislation  on the same subject, the  provisions  of
the  new Act will have to be looked into to find  where	 and
how far the new Act envisages a contrary intention affecting
the operation of Sec. 6 of the General Clauses Act.   Unless
such   contrary	  intention  is	  manifested,	liabilities,
penalties, forfeiture  or punishment under the Repealed	 Act
will  continue to exist and remain in force by operation  of
Sec. 6 of the General Clauses Act.
     We	 have already seen that the Act did not	 evince	 any
contrary  intention.  It merely reiterated the	earlier	 law
operating in the field.	 Therefore, clause (d) of Sec. 6  of
the General Clauses Act gets attracted to the acts  done  or
the  penalties of forfeiture or punishment for	any offaence
which  had  already  been  committed  before  the   repelled
enactment, though no criminal proceedings have been actually
initiated under repealed enact-
						       970
ment before its repeal.
 In Tiwari Kanhaiyalal & Ors. v. Commissioner of Income-
tax,  Delhi,  [1975] 4 SCC 101 where  prosecution  was	laid
after	the  repeal  of	 the  Income-tax  Act,	1992,	 the
contention  raised  was that saving clauses in Sec.  297  of
1961  Income-Tax  Act did not save the	punishment  incurred
under  the Repealed Act.  Therefore, recourse to Sec.  6  of
General	 Clauses  Act cannot be had, was negatived  by	this
Court  and  held  that	the  repeal  had  not  effected	 the
liability incurred under Sec. 52 of the Income-tax Act	1922
and  it continued even after its repeal.  The same view	 was
reiterated  in the Commissioner of Income-tax, U.P.  v.	 M/s
Shah  Sadiq & Sons., [1987] 3 SCC 516 at 524.	Accordingly,
we hold that despite repeal of Act 7 of 1947 by operation of
Sec. 6 of the General Clauses Act read with Sec. 81(2),	 the
penalty	 incurred by the appellant contained to subsist	 and
the  respondents are entitled to institute  the	 proceedings,
conduct investigation or enquiry and impose such penalty.
 Article  20(1)  of the Constitution of  India  provides
that no person shall be convicted of any offence except	 for
violation  of the law in force at the time of commission  of
the Act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty
greater than that which might have been inflicted under	 the
law in force at the time of commission of the offence.	 The
Repealed Act prescribed three times the value as penalty and
under the Act Sec. 50 provides five times penalty.  So	what
would be imposeable as penalty is three times.	The  penalty
imposed	 as reduced by the appellate Tribunal is  even	 not
three  times as contemplated under Sec. 23 of  the  Repealed
Act.  Therefore, though the Act evinced a contrary intention
of  imposition of higher penalty than one  prescribed  under
the  Act 7 of 1947, on the facts in this case,	the  penalty
imposed is perfectly valid and legal.
     The further contention that under the Customs Act	1962
for  the  self same contravention, the	penalty	 proceedings
terminated in favour of the appellant, is of little avail to
the  appellant for the reason that the two Acts	 operate  in
different  fields,  one for Contravention of  FERA  and	 the
second for evasion of customs duty.  The mere fact that	 the
penalty	 proceedings  for evasion of the  customs  duty	 had
ended  in  favour of the appellant, does not take  away	 the
jurisdiction of the enforcement authorities under the Act to
impose	the  penalty in question.  The	doctrine  of  double
Jeopardy has no
						       971
application.   The  further contention that the	 offence  is
based on no evidence is devoid of any substance.  Notice was
given	to   the  appellant.   In  the	 show-cause   notice
contravention was brought to its notice.  The appellant gave
the  explanation.   After consideration of the	facts  since
there was no express permission granted by the Reserve	Bank
of  India  for the payments by the appellant  to  the  agent
outside India, the contravention was proved and penalty	 was
imposed.  It is the penalty under Sec. 5(1) (a) & (b) of the
Repealed  Act  equivalent  to  Sec.  9(1)(a)  of  the	Act.
Therefore,  the penalty imposed is based on material,  valid
reasons and proper findings.
     Accordingly we do not find any merit to interfere	with
the  order.  The appeal is accordingly dismissed, but  under
the circumstances the parties are directed to bear their own
costs.
V.P.R.					   Appeal dismissed.
						       972




