
Supreme Court of India
Parshuram Jha vs State Of Jharkhand on 9 September, 2010Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. 156 of 2004

                                                    1





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 156 OF 2008



                                            
                      PARSHURAM JHA                             .....         APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS

                      STATE OF JHARKHAND                       .....         RESPONDENT




                                                O R D E R

          1.          This   appeal   by   the   accused   is   directed   against   the 

          concurrent findings of conviction and sentence recorded by 

          the Special Judge as well as the High Court convicting the 

          appellant under Sections 161 of the Indian Penal Code and 

          Section 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(ii)of the Prevention of 

          Corruption Act, 1947 with a  sentence of one year rigorous 

          imprisonment   under   Section   161   and   rigorous   imprisonment 

          for   one   year   and   a   fine   of   Rs.   500/-   and   in   default   of 

          payment   of   fine   to   undergo   a   further   period   of   one   year 

          rigorous imprisonment for the offence under Section 5(1)(d) 

          read   with   Section   5(ii),   both   the   sentences   to   run 

          concurrently.

          2.          We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at 

          great   length   and   gone   through   the   judgments   of   the   trial 

          court as well as the High court as also the evidence.  

          3.          We   find   that   the   prosecution   story   is   supported   by 


Crl.A. 156 of 2004

                                                 2





          the complainant Lalan Sahu and also the shadow witness P.W. 

          6 as well as the Investigating Officer - P.W. 9.   We also 

          see   that   circumstantial   evidence   with   regard   to   the 

          phenolphthalein   test   also   supports   the   prosecution   story. 

          4.          Ms.   Bindu   K.   Nair,   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

          appellant has, however, argued that the   case against the 

          accused appellant had been foisted on him by Lalan Sahu as 

          he bore animosity towards him and as evidence of this fact, 

          a   report   had   also   been   lodged   with   the   police   by   the 

          appellant   (Exhibit   B)   one   week   before   the   incident 

          apprehending   implication   in   some   case.     She   has   also 

          pointed out that from a perusal of evidence of P.W. 6, the 

          shadow   witness,   it   was   clear   that   he   had   not   heard   the 

          conversation between the complainant and the appellant nor 

          had he seen the money being handed over or recovered from 

          him on the day in question.  

          5.          It is true that a complaint Exhibit B had been filed 

          by the appellant in the police station apprehending harm at 

          the   instance   of   Lalan   Sahu.     However,   in   the   face   of 

          evidence already referred to above and the fact that P.W. 9 

          the     Investigating   Officer   had   no   animosity   against   the 

          appellant,   we   are   of   the   opinion   that   the   factum   of   the 

          complaint   having   been   filed   loses   all   significance.     We 

          also   notice   that   in   his   examination   in   chief   on     19th 

          January, 1994, P.W. - 6,   he had completely supported the 


Crl.A. 156 of 2004

                                               3





          prosecution   story   but   when   he   was   recalled   for   cross 

          examination   on   12th  April,   1994,   he   deviated   from   his 

          initial statements obviously with the intention of helping 

          the appellant.   We are, therefore, of the opinion that no 

          benefit can be  drawn by the appellant notwithstanding the 

          fact that P.W. 6 was not declared hostile.

          6.          Ms. Nair has then argued that the incident happened 

          in the year 1985 and as of now 25 years had elapsed since 

          that day.   She has, accordingly, prayed that in the light 

          of   the   judgment   of   this   Court   in  Bhagwan   Das   Keshwani   &  

          Anr.  v.  State of Rajasthan  (1974) 4 SCC 611, the delay in 

          the disposal of the matter and the fact that the appellant 

          was  now fairly  advanced in  age being  65, and  that he  had 

          already undergone four months of the sentence, the sentence 

          should be reduced to that already undergone. 

          7.          We also see from the record which is before us that 

          the   appellant   has   undergone   about   four   months   of   the 

          sentence.  In the light of the above facts and in the light 

          of the cited judgment, we are of the opinion that the case 

          of   the   appellant   would   fall   under   the   proviso   to   Section 

          5(2) of the Act.   We, accordingly, dismiss the appeal but 

          reduce the sentence to that already undergone.



                                               ........................J


Crl.A. 156 of 2004

                                          4





                                           [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                           ........................J
                                           [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

          NEW DELHI
           SEPTEMBER 09, 2010.    



