
Supreme Court of India
State Of Mp vs Rakesh Gandhi on 12 July, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. 22 of 2009

                                                  1





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 22  OF 2009




            STATE OF M.P.                              .....          APPELLANT

                                               VERSUS

            RAKESH GANDHI                              .....          RESPONDENT





                                             O R D E R

         1.          We   have   heard   learned   counsel   for   the   parties   at 

         length.

         2.          The   trial   court   convicted   the   respondent   accused 

         for   an   offence   punishable   under   Section   13(2)   of   the 

         Prevention   of   Corruption   Act   and   sentenced   him   to   one 

         year's rigorous imprisonment and a fine of `1,000/- and in 

         default of payment of fine to suffer rigorous imprisonment 

         for   three   months.     The   judgment   of   the   trial   court   has 

         been set aside by the High Courtand the accused has been 

         acquitted.  The present appeal has been filed by the State 

         of M.P. impugning the judgment of acquittal.

         3.          We have gone through the various reasons that have 

         been given by the High Court in arriving at its conclusion 

         that   the   case   against   the   accused   had   not   been   proved 

         beyond doubt and these have been culled out in paragraph 

         16 thereof.   It has been found that the prosecution had 


Crl.A. 22 of 2009

                                                2





         failed   to   prove   that   the   accused   had   ever   demanded   any 

         illegal gratification or bribe from the complainant  as he 

         was   not   authorised   to   issue   a   No   Objection   Certificate. 

         It   has   also   been   highlighted   that   the   seizure   of   the 

         currency notes was not from the possession of the accused 

         but from a drawer of the table which had been kept in the 

         office concerned and this table was equally available to 

         other   persons   working   in   the   office.     Likewise,   it   has 

         been noted that P.W. 3, the only independent witness, had 

         not   supported   the   prosecution   and   had   been   declared 

         hostile on that account.  

         4.          We   have   examined   the   observations   aforesaid   and 

         find   that   they   are   borne   out   by   the   evidence.   No 

         interference is, therefore, called for in this appeal. 

         5.          Dismissed.


                                                     ........................J
                                                     [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                     ........................J
                                                     [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]
         NEW DELHI
         JULY 12, 2011.



