
Supreme Court of India
Menoka Malik vs The State Of West Bengal on 28 August, 2018Author: J Mohan Shantanagoudar
                                                         1


                                                                           REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1198 OF 2006


          Menoka Malik and others                                          ..Appellants


                                     Versus


          The State of West Bengal and others                              ..Respondents
                                                  J U D G M E N T




          MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.


          1.             The   instant   appeal   arises   out   of   the   judgment   and   order

          dated 30th  June, 2004 passed in C.R.R. No. 765 of 2002 by the

          High Court of Judicature at Calcutta confirming the judgment of
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND

          acquittal passed by the  Sessions Judge at Burdwan dated 15 th
Date: 2018.08.28
16:47:57 IST
Reason:
                                         2


December,   2001   in   Sessions  Case No.  91/1998  (Sessions  Trial

No. 10(7)/2000).

2.    The case of the prosecution in brief is that on 30.05.1993,

panchayat   elections   were   held   in   Karanda   village,   wherein   the

CPI(M) party won and the IPF party lost.  On the next day, i.e. on

31.05.1993,   at   about   8:30   a.m.,   15   to   16   members   of   the   IPF

party took shelter in the house of PW2, Badal Malik, their party

leader, upon being chased by some CPI(M) workers.   At around

1:30 p.m., Bhanu Hathi, Kachi Hathi and Bhaluk Hathi (accused

no.56/respondent no.57 herein) started to abuse PW3, Shyamali

Pakrey, the wife of PW30, Sunil Pakrey, an IPF supporter, upon

whose   protest,   the   CPI(M)   persons   mobilised   around   250­300

party   workers,   all   being   armed   with   weapons   such   as   lathi,

balam, tangi etc.  It is further the case of the prosecution that the

persons belonging to CPI(M) party set on fire the houses of IPF

members, including the party leader Badal Malik, assaulted IPF

members and broke into the houses of the locality and destroyed

household   articles,   apart   from   stealing  an   amount   of   Rs.700/­

and   snatching   a   pair   of   gold   earrings.     In   the   assault   on   IPF

members,   five   persons   expired   and   24   persons   were   seriously

injured.
                                        3
3.    The   first information came to be lodged by Menoka Malik

(PW1/appellant   no.1   herein)   before   Memari   Police   Station,

Burdwan   District,   which   came   to   be   registered   in   Case   No.

82/1993   dated   31.05.1993   for   the   offences   punishable   under

Sections 147, 148, 149, 342, 448, 325, 326, 436, 379, 307 and

302 of the Indian Penal Code.

4.    Charges were framed for the aforementioned offences.   As

many as 82 accused were tried.  49 witnesses were examined by

the prosecution, which included 36 eye witnesses, i.e. PWs 1­23,

29, 30, 31,  33,  34, 35, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45 and 47. Out of

these,   the   testimonies   of   PWs   17   and   18   ran   counter   to   the

prosecution’s   case,   and   PW42   claimed   to   not   recollect   the

incident on account of mental sickness.

5.    The trial Court, at the outset, determined that there were

cogent allegations only against 32 persons out of the 82 accused

and proceeded to examine the evidence against those 32 persons

only.   On   evaluation   of   the   material   on   record,   the   trial   Court

acquitted all the accused by giving them the benefit of doubt. It

was observed by the trial Court that the prosecution sought to

establish the death of five persons through the use of sharp and

pointed  weapons,   but such factum was not alleged in the first
                                        4


information report and only the factum of assault leading to the

death of two persons was reported; the names of the assailants

had   not   been   disclosed   in   the   first   information   report;   several

witnesses were found to have admitted to have made disclosures

of  allegations   for  the   first time before the Court at the time of

recording   their   depositions;   the   evidence   of   the   investigating

officer disclosed a number of contradictions in the evidence of eye

witnesses; there was non­recovery of burnt articles, etc.   It was

also observed by the trial Court that the medical evidence was

contrary to the ocular testimony of the witnesses, inasmuch as

the post mortem reports of the deceased and medical reports of

the injured showed the absence of incised or punctured wounds,

wherein the prosecution witnesses had stated that the deceased

and   injured   had   been   assaulted   with   sharp   weapons   such   as

tangi, ballam, kencha, etc.  The injuries found on the deceased as

well   as   on   the   injured   persons   were   in   the   nature   of   bruises,

abrasions   and   lacerations,   which,   according   to   the   trial   Court,

might have been suffered due to a stampede.   On these, among

other grounds, the trial Court acquitted the accused.

6.    The  State  did  not prefer any appeal against the judgment

and order of acquittal passed by the trial Court.   However, the
                                        5


first   informant   along   with   three   others   filed   a   revision   petition

under Section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure before the

High Court.  During the course of hearing of the revision petition,

it was submitted on behalf of the revision petitioners that no case

is made out against 48 of the 82 accused, and that the revision

petition would be concerned only with rest of the 34 accused.  It

may be noted at this juncture that in the course of arguments

before  us,   it  was   brought to  our  notice that  6 out of these 34

accused are now dead. 

7.    The High Court found that there was no perversity or gross

procedural defect or error of law leading to glaring injustice, to

warrant interference with the decision of the trial Court.  Though

a number of contentions were raised by the revision petitioners

before the High Court, the High Court proceeded to decide the

revision   petition   merely   on   the   basis  of  the   above   finding.  The

only other finding was that the non­determination of the issue of

unlawful assembly by the trial Court in the manner suggested by

the appellants was not a sufficient reason to remand the case.

This was based on the reasoning that a direction for reappraisal

of evidence would create an unconscious impression in the mind

of the trial judge that the High Court wished the lower court to
                                       6


reach   a   particular   conclusion,   and   would   also   complicate   the

issue   in   the   given   situation,   where   a   large   number   of   persons

were involved but no evidence existed against most of them. The

High Court further proceeded to observe that the trial Court had

reached   a   finding   of   acquittal   upon   a   consideration   of   the

probative value of the evidence on record, in accordance with set

canons of law, and upon a meticulous examination of the same.

Certain general observations relating to the revisional powers of

the High Court were adverted to by the High Court, while coming

to its conclusion.  Practically, the High Court has not touched the

case of the prosecution on merits, at least prima facie, to find out

as to whether the trial Court’s reasoning is just and proper or

not. 

Preliminary Issue:

8.      We   have   heard   learned   counsel   on   either   side.     Before

proceeding   further,   we   would   like   to   decide   the   preliminary

question that arose during the course of arguments regarding the

scope of interference by this Court with a judgment of the High

Court in exercise of its revisional power, affirming a conviction.

The question is no more  res integra,  inasmuch as this Court in

the case of Dharma vs. Nirmal Singh, (1996) 7 SCC 471 has held
                                       7


that the bar under Section 401(3) does not restrict the power of

the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.  While

concluding so, the following observations were made:

      “4. Before   we   record   our   reading   of   the   evidence
      produced   in   the   case,   let   a   legal   submission
      advanced by Shri Lalit, appearing for the respondent­
      accused, be dealt with. His submission is that as the
      complainant   had   approached   the   High   Court   in
      revision and as under the revisional power available
      to the High Court under Section 401 CrPC, the High
      Court could not have altered the finding of acquittal
      into   one   of   conviction,   because   of   what   has   been
      stated   in   sub­section   (3)   thereof,   if   we   were   to   be
      satisfied that the acquittal was wrongful, it would not
      be within our competence to convict the respondent;
      at best the case could be sent back for retrial. We are
      not impressed with this submission inasmuch as the
      approach to this Court being under Article 136 of the
      Constitution. We do not read the limitation imposed
      by Section 401(3) of the Code qua the power available
      to us under the aforesaid provision. May it be pointed
      out that a similar submission had been advanced by
      Shri   Lalit   himself   in   the   case   of E.K.
 Chandrasenan v. State of Kerala [(1995) 2 SCC 99 :
      1995   SCC   (Cri)   329   :   JT   (1995)   1   SC   496]   ,   then
      contending   that   this   Court   is   incompetent   to   issue
      rule   of   enhancement   as   had   been   done   in   those
      cases. It was held in the aforesaid decision that the
      power available to this Court under Article 136 is not
      circumscribed by any limitation. In any case, power
      under Article 142 is available to pass such order as
      may   be   deemed   appropriate  to   do  complete  justice.
      We, therefore, reject this contention of Shri Lalit and
      proceed to examine the materials to find out whether
      case of conviction does exist, as the contention of the
      appellant.”
                                         8
9.    In  the  case   of  State  of  Rajasthan vs. Islam, (2011) 6 SCC

343, this Court relying upon the earlier judgment in  Dharma’s

case, held that if this Court is of the opinion that the acquittal is

not   based   on   a   reasonable  view,  then  it  may  review  the  entire

material   and   there   will   be   no   limitation   on   this   Court’s

jurisdiction  under  Article 136 of the Constitution to come to a

just conclusion quashing the acquittal.

10.   From the aforementioned decisions, it is amply clear that it

is open for this Court to review the entire material and there is no

limitation on this Court’s jurisdiction under Article 136 to come

to a just conclusion if it determines that the High Court’s view

was not reasonable.  The restriction as contained under Section

401(3)   of   the   Cr.P.C.   on   the   High   Court   cannot   restrict   the

powers of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.  Thus,

it   is   for   us   to   determine   whether   the   view   taken   by   the   High

Court was reasonable or not based on available records.

Main Issue:

11.   The   trial   Court,   while   coming   to   its   conclusion,   has

observed   that   several   eye   witnesses   had   revealed   the   material

facts before the trial Court for the first time, inasmuch as such

statements   of   the   witnesses   before   the   Court   are   material
                                       9


improvements; such statements were not made by the witnesses

during the course of investigation before the police officials and

omissions are proved as per law. 

      However,   we   have   endeavoured   to   satisfy   our   conscience

regarding   the   consistency/inconsistency   of   the   eyewitness

accounts. To that end, we have gone through the testimonies of

the   PWs.   As   we   do   not   wish   to   burden   this   judgment   by

discussing the testimonies of all PWs, we would like to revisit, as

examples, the testimonies of PWs 5, 7 and 14. Moreover, we are

mindful of the principle that in  cases of this nature involving a

large   number   of   offenders   and   a   large   number   of   victims,   the

evidence   of   only   two   or   three   witnesses   who   give   a   consistent

account of the incident is sufficient to sustain conviction, as was

observed by this Court in the case of Masalti vs. State of U.P., AIR

1965 SC 202.

      PW5, Anna Pakrey, deposed that on the day of the incident,

some IPF workers took shelter in the house of PW2, Badal Malik

on being threatened  by  some CPI(M) workers. After  some time,

around   200­250   CPI(M)   workers,   including   Harigopal   Goswami

(A­80/R­81   herein),   Ram   Tah   (A­68/R­69   herein)   and   Satya
                                       10


Chakroborty   (A­71/R­72   herein)   assembled   around   the   house,

hurling abuses at the persons inside. The CPI(M) workers asked

Bhanu Hati (chargesheeted as accused, since deceased) to set the

house on fire, upon which the hiding people rushed out and took

shelter in the house of PW9, Mantu Mal, which was set on fire by

one Kachi Hati (a reference to Kartik Hazra, A­28/R­29 herein).

Thereafter, the IPF workers started running from room to room.

Dilip Pakrey (deceased), PW5’s husband, came out of the house,

at which point he was assaulted by Jiten Kora (A­1/R­2 herein),

Kena   Kora   (A­7/R­8   herein),   Bhola   Mukherjee   (A­77/R­78

herein),   and   Sitaram   Makar   (A­70/R­71   herein),   with   deadly

weapons such as tangi, bogi, and kencha. Pranab Bouri (A­40/R­

41   herein),   struck   Dilip   Pakrey   with   a   ballam.   Sakti   Gadi   (A­

15/R­16 herein) passed urine in his mouth. At this point, PW5

fainted.   After   she   regained   consciousness,   she   went   around

looking for her children and got assaulted by Radhi Kora (A­8/R­

9 herein) with a shavol and by one Santana Majhi (a reference to

Sanatan   Mandi,   A­44/R­45   herein)   by   a   bamboo   lathi.   PW5

further   stated   that   Manik   Hazra   (deceased)   was   assaulted   by

Sudeb Hati (a reference to Sudeb Hazra, A­30/R­31 herein), and

that one Rajib Kora cut off Manik Hazra’s penis. 
                                      11
         PW7, Nemai Hazra is an injured witness. He deposed that

on   the   day   of   the   incident,   on   being   threatened   by   CPI(M)

workers,   he,   his   elder   brother   Manik   Hazra   (deceased),   PW10,

Uttam Hazra, PW33, Uday Hazra, one Madan Hazra (referring to

PW43,   Madau   Hazra)   and   Narayan   Hazra   (referring   to   PW39,

Harayan   Hazra)   took   shelter   in   PW2   Badal   Malik’s   house.   At

around 11­11.30 am, around 100­150 persons armed with lathis,

rods,   sabol,   tangi,   etc.   assembled   nearby,   upon   which   Badal

Malik left the house and did not return. Soon, the mob outside

surrounded   the   house,  and  started throwing  stones, brickbats,

etc. at the house. Thereafter, they set the house on fire, with a

view   to   smoke   out   the   hiding   persons,   upon   which   the   people

hiding inside took shelter in PW9 Mantu Mal’s house. This house

was also set on fire, though PW7 did not see the perpetrator. As

the hiding persons came out, they started getting assaulted. PW7

was assaulted by Sudeb Hazra (A­30/R­31 herein) with a tangi,

Jeydeb   Hazra   (A­29/R­30   herein)   with   an   iron   rod,   Sitaram

Makar (A­70/R­71 herein) with a lathi, Sadhan Some (A­78/R­79

herein) with a lathi and by Becha Duley (A­67/R­68 herein) as

well. 
                                     12
        In his cross examination, PW7 stated that he did not know

of any provocation for the incident.   He also stated that around

40­50 persons had hidden inside Badal Malik’s house. He further

stated that he was beaten severely by the mob, and received 8­10

lathi blows, one rod blow, and was also assaulted by tangi, sabol,

etc.

       PW14,   Subhadra   Malik   is   the   mother   of   Manik   Hazra

(deceased) and PW2, Badal Malik. She deposed that on the day of

the incident, Manik Hazra along with several IPF supporters took

shelter   in   Badal   Malik’s   house,   where   PW14   also   lived,   after

CPI(M)   workers   started   threatening   IPF   workers.   Soon,   several

CPI(M) workers surrounded the house. Bhanu Hati and his son

Bhaluk Hati (A­56/R­57 herein) entered the house, and the latter

set the house on fire on his father’s instruction. After being thus

smoked   out,   the   hiding   persons   sought   shelter   in   PW9   Mantu

Mal’s house, which was set ablaze by Kachi Hati (possibly Kartik

Hazra,   A­28/R­29   herein,   see   supra).   The   IPF   persons   started

coming   out   one   by   one   and   got   assaulted.   Sitaram   Makar   (A­

70/R­71 herein), Abhoy Roy (A­69/R­70 herein), one Sakti Duley,

Joydev   Duley,   Joydev   Hati   (Joydeb   Hazra,   A­29/R­30   herein),

Sudeb   Hati   (Sudeb   Hazra,   A­30/R­31   herein),   one   Khudi   Tah,
                                     13


Ganesh Kshetrapal (A­39/R­40 herein), one Promod Kshetrapal

and   one   Angad   Kshetrapal   began   to   assault   Dilip   Pakrey.   One

Pranab Pakrey pierced his belly with a ballam. Sona (Som) Kora

(deceased) was assaulted by Sitaram (A­70/R­71 herein), Abhoy

Roy (A­69/R­70 herein), Joydeb (A­20/R­21 herein), Sudeb Hari

(Sudeb Hazra, A­30/R­31 herein), Joydeb Hari (Joydeb Hazra, A­

29/R­30   herein)   and   others.   Sadhan   Nayak   (deceased)   was

dragged out of PW9 Mantu Mal’s house and assaulted by Sitaram

(A­70/R­71 herein), Abhoy (A­69/R­70 herein) and others. Suko

Kora (A­53/R­54 herein) assaulted Sadhan with an axe and killed

him. Manik Hazra (deceased) was assaulted by Sitaram (A­70/R­

71 herein) with a ballam, and by Sudeb Hari (Sudeb Hazra, A­

30/R­31 herein) with a sabol, after which he died. Sudeb inserted

a sabol in his rectum. Rajib Kora cut off Manik’s penis with a

banti. PW14 further deposed that she herself was assaulted by

one   Sudeb   Tah,   one   Kena  Bagdi and  others  with  a lathi, after

which she lost consciousness. She was in hospital for a number

of days due to her injuries.  In her cross examination, she stated

that she did not recollect stating the above facts to the IO. 

12.   We   could   not   find   any   significant   variation   in   the

testimonies   of   all   these   witnesses.   No   major   contradiction   or
                                     14


variation is found. The presence of the witnesses on the spot has

not   been   seriously   doubted   by   the   defence   during   the   cross­

examination. It is but natural to have certain minor variations in

the evidence of eye­witnesses, when a large number of people had

gathered to assault a smaller group of people and which resulted

in   death   of   five   persons   and injuries to 24 persons. In such a

scenario, it could not have been possible to meticulously observe

all the actions of each and every accused. The Court also should

not expect from the witnesses to depose in a parrot­like fashion.

However,   the   overall   evidence   of   these   witnesses,  prima   facie,

appears to be untainted.

13.   It is also evident that the above testimonies are consistent

on material facts, such as that on the day of the incident, CPI(M)

workers threatened IPF workers, who hid in PW2 Badal Malik’s

house.   Thereafter,   a   mob   of   CPI(M)   workers  assembled  outside

the house, which was set on fire to smoke out the hiding persons.

When they tried hiding in PW9 Mantu Mal’s house, that house

was  set on fire  as well. Finally, the IPF supporters ran out, at

which   point   they   were   assaulted   by   CPI(M)   persons.   All   the

witnesses may not be consistent on each and every detail, such
                                      15


as   who   set   the   house   on   fire   and   who   hit   who   with   which

weapon, etc. It may be true that their depositions are found to

contain exaggerations such as the mutilation of deceased Manik

Hazra’s   penis,   which   was   found   to   be   intact   upon   medical

examination. However, such embellishments and inconsistencies

do not go to the root of the matter. Additionally, we find from the

material on record that the improvements, if any, were only with

respect to weapons that had been used in the assaults and not to

the factum of assaults per se. The improvements, if any, made for

the first time before the Court, no doubt, need to be eschewed.

But that does not mean that the entire evidence of the witnesses

should be ignored only on the said ground. 

14.  It is  a well settled position of law that the testimony of a

witness cannot be discarded in toto merely due to the presence of

embellishments   or   exaggerations.   The   doctrine   of  falsus   in

uno, falsus in omnibus, which means “false in one thing, false in

everything”   has   been   held   to   be   inapplicable   in   the   Indian

scenario,   where   the   tendency   to   exaggerate   is   common.   This

Court has endorsed the inapplicability of the doctrine in several

decisions, such as  Nisar Ali v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1957

SC 366,   Ugar Ahir v. State of Bihar, AIR 1965 SC 277,   Sucha
                                       16


Singh v. State   of  Punjab,  (2003)  7  SCC  643,    Narain  v.  State  of

Madhya   Pradesh,   (2004)   2   SCC   455  and  Kameshwar   Singh   v.

State  of   Bihar,  (2018)  6   SCC  433. In  Krishna  Mochi   v.  State  of

Bihar,   (2002)   6   SCC   81,   this   Court   highlighted   the   dangers   of

applying the doctrine in the Indian scenario:

       “51.   …The   maxim falsus   in   uno,   falsus   in
       omnibus has   no   application   in   India   and   the
       witnesses   cannot   be   branded   as   liars.   The
       maxim falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus (false in one
       thing,   false   in   everything)   has   not   received   general
       acceptance nor has this maxim come to occupy the
       status of rule of law. It is merely a rule of caution. All
       that it amounts to is, that in such cases testimony
       may   be   disregarded,   and   not   that   it   must   be
       disregarded.   The   doctrine   merely   involves   the
       question   of   weight   of   evidence   which   a   court   may
       apply in a given set of circumstances, but it is not
       what may be called “a mandatory rule of evidence”.
       (See Nisar Ali v. State of U.P. [AIR 1957 SC 366 : 1957
       Cri   LJ   550]   )…   The   doctrine   is   a   dangerous   one,
       specially in India, for if a whole body of the testimony
       were   to   be   rejected,   because   the   witness   was
       evidently speaking an untruth in some aspect, it is to
       be   feared   that   administration   of   criminal   justice
       would   come   to   a   dead   stop.   Witnesses   just   cannot
       help in giving embroidery to a story, however true in
       the main. Therefore, it has to be appraised in each
       case   as   to   what   extent   the   evidence   is   worthy   of
       acceptance, and merely because in some respects the
       court considers the same to be insufficient for placing
       reliance   on   the   testimony   of   a   witness,   it   does   not
       necessarily follow as a matter of law that it must be
       disregarded in all respects as well. The evidence has
       to be sifted with care. The aforesaid dictum is not a
       sound   rule   for   the   reason   that   one   hardly   comes
       across a witness whose evidence does not contain a
                                        17


       grain   of   untruth   or   at   any   rate   exaggeration,
       embroideries   or   embellishment.   (See Sohrab v. State
       of   M.P. [(1972)   3   SCC   751   :   1972   SCC   (Cri)   819]
       and Ugar   Ahir v. State   of   Bihar [AIR   1965   SC   277   :
       (1965) 1 Cri LJ 256] .) An attempt has to be made to,
       as   noted   above,   in   terms   of   felicitous   metaphor,
       separate   the   grain   from   the   chaff,   truth   from
       falsehood.”


 15. It   is   not   uncommon   for   witnesses   to   make   exaggerations

during   the   course   of   evidence.     But   merely   because   there   are

certain   exaggerations,   improvements   and   embellishments,   the

entire prosecution story should not be doubted.   In Ranjit Singh

v. State of Punjab, (1974) 4 SCC 552,  this Court observed:

       “26. It   is   trite   that   even   when   exaggerations   and
       embellishments are galore the courts can and indeed
       are expected to undertake a forensic exercise aimed
       at   discovering   the   truth.   The   very   fact   that   a   large
       number of people were implicated in the incident in
       question who now stand acquitted by the High Court
       need   not   have   deterred   the   High   Court   from
       appreciating   the   evidence   on   record   and   discarding
       what   was   not   credible   while   accepting   and   relying
       upon   what   inspired   confidence.   That   exercise   was
       legitimate for otherwise the Court would be seen as
       abdicating   and   surrendering   to   distortions   and/or
       embellishments   whether   made   out   of   bitterness   or
       any   other   reason   including   shoddy   investigation   by
       the   agencies   concerned.   The   ultimate   quest   for   the
       court   at   all   times   remains   “discovery   of   the   truth”
       and   unless   the   court   is   so   disappointed   with   the
       difficulty besetting that exercise in a given case, as to
       make   it   impossible   for   it   to   pursue   that   object,   it
       must make an endeavour in that direction.”
                                        18


This   Court   in  State  of  Punjab v. Hari  Singh  (1974) 4  SCC 552,

observed as follows:

      “16. As   human   testimony,   resulting   from   widely
      different   powers   of   observation   and   description,   is
      necessarily   faulty   and   even   truthful   witnesses   not
      infrequently exaggerate or imagine or tell half truths,
      the Courts must try to extract and separate the hard
      core of truth from the whole evidence. This is what is
      meant   by   the   proverbial   saying   that   Courts   must
      separate   “the   chaff   from   the   grain”.   If,   after
      considering the whole mass of evidence, a residue of
      acceptable   truth   is   established   by   the   prosecution
      beyond any reasonable doubt the Courts are bound
      to   give   effect   to   the   result   flowing   from   it   and   not
      throw   it   overboard   on   purely   hypothetical   and
      conjectural grounds.”


 16. Thus, it cannot be doubted that it is the duty of the Court to

separate the chaff from the grain. Moreover, minor variations in

the evidence will not affect the root of the matter, inasmuch as

such   minor   variations   need   not   be   given   major   importance,

inasmuch   as   they   would   not   materially   alter   the

evidence/credibility of the eye witnesses as a whole. 

17.   In light of the above discussion,  prima  facie, we find from

the records that the versions of the eye witnesses cannot be said

to be untrustworthy, especially in light of the observation of this

Court in Masalti’s case (supra).  There are as many as 24 injured
                                      19


eye witnesses in the case and their presence cannot be doubted.

In this situation, we find that the High Court has not applied its

judicial  mind   in  determining whether the judgment of the trial

court was perverse inasmuch as the entire body of evidence was

discarded, simply on the basis that some of the witnesses had

deposed for the first time before the Court. 

18.   Curiously,   the   High   Court   has   not   at   all   considered   the

evidence concerning charges other than murder.   Although, the

charges had been framed on questions such as burning houses,

unlawful   assembly,   etc.,   the   evidence   on   these   questions   was

entirely overlooked and no finding was made by the trial Court as

well   as   the   High   Court.   For   instance,   the   Trial   Court   has

overlooked the entire evidence related to burning of houses, on

the sole ground that the burnt articles were not produced before

the Court. On the other hand, we find from the records that the

burnt articles were seized and produced before the Court, as is

clear from the seizure list (Ex. 1).  

19.   So far as the issue of unlawful assembly and common object

of the unlawful assembly is concerned, the Court generally could

determine those aspects based on the evidence on record. In the
                                      20


matter on hand, 36 eye­witnesses are available. According to the

case of the prosecution, all the accused came in a group to the

house of PW2, Badal Malik and PW9, Mantu Mal, and torched

these   houses   knowing   fully   well   that   the   IPF   party   men   had

assembled in those houses.  Prima facie, the Court can visualize

the common object of unlawful assembly from this evidence. The

Court cannot expect the prosecution to prove its case by leading

separate   evidence   with   respect   to   unlawful   assembly   and

common object. If those factors can be found out based on the

available   material   on   record,  there  is  no  reason  as  to  why  the

Courts should ignore the same.

20.   The   non­consideration   of   such   vital   issues   by   the   High

Court, without which a question before the Court could not have

been satisfactorily determined, has led to injustice of a serious

and substantial character, warranting interference of this Court

and remand of the matter to the High Court for rehearing.   We

find that the High Court has failed to consider whether the trial

Court   brushed   aside   material   evidence   related   to   the   issue   of

murder,   attempt   to   murder   and   grievous   hurt,   and   entirely

overlooked   material   evidence   on   vital   issues   such   as   house
                                       21


burning,   grievous   hurt   and   unlawful   assembly.     Thus,   in   this

aspect too, the High Court has failed to apply its judicial mind to

verify whether the judgment of acquittal passed by the trial Court

was perverse or not. 

21.   With   regard   to   the   conflict   between   the   ocular   testimony

and   the   medical   evidence,  in  our  considered opinion,   the  High

Court   has   ignored   the   fact   that   lathis   were   also   used   while

assaulting   along   with   sharp   edge   weapons.     Moreover,   it   is   by

now  well  settled   that   the  medical  evidence cannot  override the

evidence   of   ocular   testimony   of   the   witnesses.     If   there   is   a

conflict between the ocular testimony and the medical evidence,

naturally the ocular testimony prevails.   In other words, where

the   eye   witnesses   account   is   found   to   be   trustworthy   and

credible,   medical   opinion   pointing   to   alternative   possibilities   is

not accepted as conclusive [See  State of U.P. vs. Krishna Gopal,

(1988) 4 SCC 302]. We do not wish to comment further on the

merits   of   the   matter   at   this   stage   since   the   matter   needs

remittance to the High Court.  

22.   The High Court has not at all assigned any cogent reason

for   reaching   its   conclusion.   We  are conscious  of the  fact that
                                      22


revisional jurisdiction must be exercised by the High Court only

in exceptional circumstances, where there is a gross miscarriage

of justice, manifest illegality or perversity in the judgment of the

lower court.   Interference would be warranted only if there is a

manifest illegality in the judgment of the lower court.  But in the

matter   on   hand,   in   our   considered   opinion,   because   of   non­

furnishing of valid reasons by the Trial Court, while coming to its

conclusion, there is manifest illegality, and thus, the view taken

by the High Court cannot be termed as reasonable. When there is

a glaring defect or manifest error leading to a flagrant miscarriage

of   justice,   this   Court   cannot   shut   its   eyes   merely   on

technicalities,   particularly   while   exercising   jurisdiction   under

Article 136 of the Constitution.   In our considered opinion, the

revisional   jurisdiction   vested   in   the   High   Court   has   not   been

properly exercised by the High Court.  The High Court should not

have proceeded casually while affirming the judgment of the trial

Court.     Having   regard   to   the   material   on   record   and   having

regard  to  the   magnitude   of the offence, the High Court should

have been more serious while considering the revision petition.

23.   In the case of Sheetala Prasad vs. Shree Kant (2010) 2 SCC
190,  this   Court   noted   the   principles   on   which   the   revisional
                                      23


jurisdiction can be exercised.   The relevant observations of this
Court are as under:

      “12. The   High   Court   was   exercising   the   revisional
      jurisdiction at the instance of a private complainant
      and, therefore, it is necessary to notice the principles
      on   which   such   revisional   jurisdiction   can   be
      exercised. Sub­section (3) of Section 401 of the Code
      of   Criminal   Procedure   prohibits   conversion   of   a
      finding   of   acquittal   into   one   of   conviction.   Without
      making   the   categories   exhaustive,   revisional
      jurisdiction can be exercised by the High Court at the
      instance of a private complainant

        (1)   where   the   trial   court   has   wrongly   shut   out
        evidence which the prosecution wished to produce,

        (2)   where   the   admissible   evidence   is   wrongly
        brushed aside as inadmissible,

        (3) where the trial court has no jurisdiction to try
        the case and has still acquitted the accused,

        (4)  where   the   material   evidence   has   been
        overlooked either by the trial court or the appellate
        court   or   the   order   is   passed   by   considering
        irrelevant evidence, and

        (5)   where   the   acquittal   is   based   on   the
        compounding of the offence which is invalid under
        the law.

      13. By   now,   it   is   well   settled   that   the   revisional
      jurisdiction, when invoked by a private complainant
      against   an   order   of   acquittal,   cannot   be   exercised
      lightly   and   that   it   can   be   exercised   only   in
      exceptional cases where the interest of public justice
      requires   interference   for   correction   of   manifest
      illegality   or   the   prevention   of   gross   miscarriage   of
      justice.   In   these   cases,   or   cases   of   similar   nature,
      retrial or rehearing of the appeal may be ordered.”
                                       24


                                           (Emphasis Supplied)



24.   From the aforementioned decision, it is clear that where the

material evidence has been overlooked either by the trial Court or

by   the   appellate   Court   or   the   order   is   passed   by   considering

irrelevant evidence, the revisional jurisdiction can be exercised by

the High Court.   In the matter on hand, as already mentioned,

material evidence has been overlooked by the Trial Court and the

High  Court   was   incorrect in  observing   that  the  witnesses have

deposed   for   the   first   time   before   the   court.     We   have   already

clarified that the contradictions and improvements were minor in

nature, e.g. mainly with regard to weapons used.   In the matter

on hand, the presence of the witnesses is not in dispute, and the

fact that 24 witnesses have suffered injuries cannot be disputed

either. Five deaths have also taken place.  Curiously, the Courts

have   observed   that   the   injuries   must   have   been   suffered   in   a

stampede.  There is no reason as to why only one group of people

would sustain injuries in the alleged stampede, if any. Thus, the

theory of stampede also  prima facie  may not be available to the

defendant having regard to the evidence on record.     Moreover,
                                      25


the material evidence regarding the charges other than murder

has also been ignored. 

25.   Thus,   the   High   Court   has   failed   to   consider   whether   the

Trial Court discarded material evidence in the form of eye­witness

testimony   on   the   issues   of   murder,   attempt   to   murder   and

grievous   hurt   and   completely   overlooked   evidence   on   other

charges   such   as   unlawful   assembly   and   house­burning.

Consequently,   we   find   that   the   High   Court   has   not   given   due

consideration to the evidence on record to arrive at a reasoned

conclusion   and   has   thus   failed   to   exercise   its   revisional

jurisdiction   in   accordance   with   established   principles.   In   our

opinion, it would be appropriate for the High Court to undertake

proper consideration of the material of the matter once again with

due application of the judicial mind to find out as to whether the

trial   Court’s   order   has   caused   gross   miscarriage   of   justice,

manifest illegality or perversity.

26.   Before parting with the matter, we hasten to add that any

observations made in this order will not influence the High Court

in   deciding   the   revision   petition   on   merits.   With   these

observations, the appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment and

order of the High Court dated 30.06.2004 passed in C.R.R. No.
                                      26


765 of 2002 is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High

Court   to   decide   the   revision   petition   on   merits,   in   accordance

with law.


                                      ……………………………………..J.
                                      [N.V. RAMANA]


NEW DELHI;                            ………………………………………J.
AUGUST 28, 2018.                      [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]

