
Supreme Court of India
C.B.I vs Kartar Singh & Anr on 21 April, 2009Author: ......................J.
Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, V.S. Sirpurkar
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JUSRISDICTION

               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.813 OF 2009
             (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl) No. 4071/2006)

C.B.I.                                               ....Appellant

Versus

Kartar Singh & Anr.                                ....Respondents

                            ORDER

1.       Leave granted.

2.       Mr. P.K. Ghosh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

respondents submits on instruction that the respondents have

already been dismissed from the service and in this view of the

matter, the appeal has become infructuous. Mr. Ghosh also

submits on instruction that against the order of the dismissal

from service, an appeal has been taken before the appropriate

forum which is still pending.

3.       Mr. P.K. Dey, Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of

the appellant therefore submits that the appellant does not want

to proceed with this appeal. However, liberty was prayed to

revive the appeal in case the appeal now pending against the

order of dismissal from service is allowed and order of dismissal

is set aside.
      Such being the position, we dispose of this appeal having

become infructuous. In interim order if any stands vacated.

      In view of the fact that the appeal has been preferred

against the order of dismissal which is pending, we make it

clear that in the event the order of dismissal is set aside, in that

case, it would be open to the appellant to revive this appeal.

      However, we request the High Court to expedite the

hearing of the appeal pending before it and dispose of the

same at an early date without granting any unnecessary

adjournment to either of the parties.

      Accordingly the appeal is disposed of as infructuous.



                                                 ......................J.
                                                 [Tarun Chatterjee]




New Delhi;                                       ......................J.
April 21, 2009.                                  [V.S.Sirpurkar]

