
Supreme Court of India
Sunil vs State Of Haryana on 13 July, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 1299 of 2006

                                              1





                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1299 OF 2006





            SUNIL                                  .....         APPELLANT

                                           VERSUS

            STATE OF HARYANA                       .....         RESPONDENT





                                          O R D E R

         1.          This appeal arises out of the following facts:

         1.1         Suraj   Bhan   accused,   Satbir   P.W.   And   Ramphal 

         deceased   were   three   of   several   brothers   all   living 

         jointly   in   one   home.     About   15   days   prior   to   the 

         occurrence Azad, wife of Suraj Bhan, and Satbir Singh's 

         wife Jantar quarrelled over the taking of water from the 

         tap.     At   about   5:00p.m.   on   the   22nd  February,   1993   , 

         Suraj Bhan accused who was in the Army but was on leave 

         that   day,   accompanied   by   his   son   Sunil   and   Azad   Azad 

         aforesaid     came   to   Satbir's   side   of   the   family   home 

         where   he   along   with   his   brother   Ram   Phal,   Ram   Phal's 

         wife Saroj and Zile Singh, another brother, were sitting 


Crl.A. No. 1299 of 2006

                                               2





         together.   Suraj Bhan was armed with a shot gun whereas 

         Sunil   was   carrying   a   bandolier   containing   cartridges. 

         Azad exhorted her husband and son to teach the others a 

         lesson whereupon Suraj Bhan aimed his gun towards them. 

         Ram Phal, however, ran towards the roof whereupon Suraj 

         Bhan fired two shots at him.   Sunil thereafter took the 

         gun from his father and fired two shots towards them but 

         as Satbir Singh and the others had taken shelter behind 

         a parapet no injury was suffered by them.    The accused 

         thereafter ran away from the spot.  




         1.2         Ram   Phal,   who   was   seriously   injured,   was 

         thereafter   taken   towards   the   Civil   Hospital,   Dadri   for 

         treatment   but   he   died   on   the   way   due   to   his   injuries. 

         On   the   basis   of   the   statement   made   by   Satbir   to     Sub 

         Inspector Amrik Singh,  S.H.O., Police Station Dadri, at 

         8:40p.m.   Near   village   Chiriya,   a   formal   First 

         Information Report was recorded at Police Station Dadri 

         at   9:05p.m.   and   the   Special   Report   delivered   to   the 

         Judicial Magistrate First Class, Charkhi Dadri at about 

         10:40p.m.,   the   same   night.     On   the   completion   of   the 

         investigation   Suraj   Bhan,   his   wife   Azad   and   their   son 

         Sunil   were   brought   to   trial.     The   prosecution   relied 

         primarily   on   the   eye   witness   account   of   Satbir   P.W.   4 

         and   his   brother   Zile   Singh,   P.W.   5   as   also     SI   Amrik 


Crl.A. No. 1299 of 2006

                                              3





         Singh - P.W. 6 as well as the medical evidence of P.W. 2 

         - Dr. S.N. Sharma and P.W. 3 - Dr. S.C. Gupta, who had 

         performed the post mortem on the dead body.   The trial 

         court, relying on the aforesaid evidence as well as the 

         recoveries   of   the   spent   cartridges   and   wads   from   the 

         place   of   incident   and   finding   that   the   eye   witness 

         account was supported by the medical evidence convicted 

         Suraj   Bhan   and   Sunil   under   Section   302/34,   307/34   and 

         450     of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   and   Suraj   Bhan   under 

         Section 27 of the Arms Act as well and sentenced them to 

         life   imprisonment   for   the   primary   offence.     Azad   was 

         given   the   benefit   of   doubt   and   acquitted.     The   matter 

         was   thereafter   taken   in   appeal   before   the   High   Court 

         which   has   confirmed   the   judgment   of   the   trial   court. 

         The   present   appeal   has   been   filed   by   Sunil   only   after 

         the grant of special leave.  


         2.          We notice from the judgment of the High Court that 

         it had relied on the significant fact that the FIR had 

         come   into   existence   within   four   or   five   hours   of   the 

         incident   as   the   incident   had   taken   place   at   about 

         5:00p.m.   and   that   the   special   report   had   also   been 

         received by the Judicial Magistrate First Class,   Dadri 

         at   10:40p.m..     The   High   Court   had   also   relied 

         extensively on the statements of P.Ws. 4 and 5 who are 


Crl.A. No. 1299 of 2006

                                                4





         the   real   brothers   of   the   victim   as   also   of   Suraj   Bhan 

         and   therefore   the   uncles   of   the   appellant   Sunil.     We 

         have   also   seen   the   site   plan   which   reveals   that   the 

         incident happened in the house of the parties concerned, 

         who happened to be the real brothers.  


         3.          Mr.   Sanjay   Jain,   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

         appellant     has,   however,   argued   that   as   the   spent 

         cartridge   cases   had   been   picked   up   not   from   one   place 

         but   from   different   places   it   appeared   that   the   story 

         that Sunil had taken the gun from his father and fired 

         two shots, was not borne out.   We have perused the site 

         plan and find that the distance between the two places 

         from where the spent cartridges had been picked up was 

         so minimal that it would have no effect on the merits of 

         the   case.     In   any   event,   the   eye   witness   account   of 

         P.Ws. 4 and 5 who are the brothers of the deceased and 

         the accused Suraj Bhan cannot be faulted in any manner. 

         It is also the admitted position that both the parties 

         were   living   jointly   in   the   same   house   although   in 

         different portions thereof.


         4.          On  the  last  date  of  hearing  that  is,  on  the  12th 

         January, 2011, Mr. Jain had raised an argument that the 

         appellant was less than 18 years of age on the date of 


Crl.A. No. 1299 of 2006

                                                5





         the incident and in this view of the matter he could not 

         have   been   brought   to   trial   along   with   his   co-accused. 

         We   had,   accordingly,   adjourned   the   matter   seeking   a 

         report   from   Bhiwani.     Mr.   Satish   Ahlawat,   Additional 

         District   and   Sessions   Judge,   Bhiwani   has   sent   a   report 

         dated 28th  February, 2011  and we have perused the same. 

         It   reveals   that   on   the   date   of   the   incident     i.e.   2nd 

         February, 1993 the appellant was 18 years 9 months and 

         26   days   of   age.     He   was,   therefore,   clearly   not   a 

         juvenile.   We, accordingly, find no merit in the appeal 

         which is, accordingly, dismissed. 



                                               .........................J
                                               [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                               .........................J
                                               [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]



         NEW DELHI
         JULY 13, 2011.



