
Supreme Court of India
Boppana Surya Prakasa Rao vs Bolla Subrahmanyam Srinivas & Ors on 6 August, 2009Bench: S.B. Sinha, Deepak Verma
                                                        1



                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1457 OF 2009
                       [Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 1253/2007]


BOPPANA SURYA PRAKASA RAO                                  ...    APPELLANT(S)

                                      :VERSUS:

BOLIA SUBRAHMANYAM SRINIVAS AND ORS.                       ...    RESPONDENT(S)




                                      ORDER

   1.       Leave granted.

   2.       The appellant is the first informant who lodged the first information

   report before the Sub Inspector of Police, P.S. Bhimavaram on 26.3.2006 as

   against the respondents herein. The said first information report is based on

   three suicidal notes written by Sujatha - the deceased; one to the police

   department and public, second to the her near relatives and third to accused

   No.1 who was her would be husband.


   3.       For the purpose of disposal of this appeal, we would only take note of

   certain basic facts. They are as under:


   4.       The deceased was a student of M.B.A.. She had done her post-

   graduation. Accused No.1 at the relevant time was not employed. The families of
                                         2

the deceased and accused No.1 negotiated for marriage and engagement

ceremony was held on 18.8.2006. A sum of Rs. 2,30,000/- was paid by way of

dowry. Some land was also registered by the appellant in favour of the deceased

as demanded by the respondents herein. After the betrothal ceremony was over,

the accused No.1 obtained an employment in a factory. The marriage was to take

place on 3.2.2006. Allegedly, the demand for dowry was increased. It also

appears that the deceased and accused No.1 were in constant touch with each

other. In fact, they had been going to places.


5.       For certain reason with which we are not concerned at this stage, the

engagement was broken. A sum of Rs. 30,000/- was returned and the rest of the

dowry amount was promised to be returned by the end of March, 2006. The

deceased committed suicide by jumping from a running train on 26/3/2006.

Relying on or on the basis of the suicide note, a first information report, as

noticed hereinbefore, was lodged on 26.3.2006.


6.       There are six     respondents in this appeal but notice was issued to

respondent Nos. 4 & 5 only. Respondent No.4 Nekkanti Ravindra Kumar is a

teacher in a village Chinamallam in the West Godavari District. Respondent

No.5 Chinta Suribabu is a Sub Inspector of Police of Annavaram Police Station,

situate in East Godavari District. The first information report was lodged under

Section 306 of the I.P.C. and Section 3/4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act.



7.       All the accused filed an application before the High Court for quashing
                                        3

of the said first information report on or about 8.6.2006. By reason of the

impugned judgment the said application has been allowed so far as respondent

Nos. 4 & 5 who were arrayed as accused Nos.4 & 5 in the said first information

report, are concerned.


8.       The impugned order is not a speaking one. It is a 3-paragraph order

which we may notice hereat:


                "This Criminal Petition is field by A-1 to A-5 in Cr. No.
      22 of 2006 on the file of Kaikalur (R) P.S. to quash the
      proceedings against them for the offences under Section 306 of
      I.P.C. and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act (for
      short 'the Act').
                From the reading of the complaint, it is made out that A-
      1 alleged to be speaking bad about the deceased and A-1 to A-3
      alleged to have demanded more dowry, if they want the alliance to
      continue. Otherwise, they are not willing to marry the deceased
      girl. A-4 and A-5, though present at the time of transaction, did
      not play any role, therefore, is no prima facie case against A-4 and
      A-5 and the prosecution is liable to be quashed against them for
      the said offences.
                Accordingly, the Criminal Petition is allowed in part.
      The prosecution against A-4 and A-5 for the offence under Section
      306 and Sections 3 and 4 and of the Act is quashed. However, the
      prosecution against A-1 to A-3 shall continue."

9.       Submission of Mr. Mahabir Singh, learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellant is that from a perusal of the first information report

lodged before the officer incharge of the Bhimavaram Police Station as well as

the three suicide notes which were annexed thereto, it would appear that not only

the respondents have been named therein, specific roles have been attributed to

them and in that view of the matter, the High Court committed a serious error in

holding that they were only present at the time of transaction and played no role.
                                        4

The first information report as also the suicide notes read in their entirety, Mr.

Singh would contend, would leave no room for any doubt that the respondents

herein had not only played active role in the matter of demand of dowry, they

also played very crucial role in the matter of breaking the proposal for marriage,

which ultimately led to the commission of suicide by the deceased. It was

furthermore urged by the learned senior counsel for the appellant that it was not

a fit case where the High Court should have quashed the proceedings at the

initial stage. Strong reliance has been placed by him on State of Orissa and Anr.

Vs. Saroj Kumar Sahoo, 2005 (13) SCC 540.


10.       Mr. A.T.M. Rangaramanujam, learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that:



          (1) The reference to the respondents herein in the suicidal notes by the

deceased is based on hearsay and thus no reliance could be placed thereupon;

          (2) Respondents being residents of different villages, it is improbable

that they would have played any role either in the matter of demand for dowry

or breaking of engagement of the deceased with the first respondent resulting in

the commission of suicide by the deceased. In any event, a charge-sheet having

been filed only against accused Nos.1, 2 & 3, the remedy of the appellant, if any,

is to file a protest petition.


11.       A bare perusal of the suicide notes written by Sujatha (deceased) shows

that they are credible. We, however, do not propose to deal with the statement
                                         5

made therein in details as any observation made by us thereupon may prejudice

the parties in one way or the other. We, however, must place on record that both

the respondents Nos. 4 & 5 herein have specifically been named in the suicide

notes. Specific roles have been attributed to them. The roles attributed to them

not only relate to allegations of demand of dowry but also breakage of

engagement. The statement made by the deceased with regard to Respondent

No.4 is hearsay but then certainly she was truthful enough to tell: "I don't know

how far it is true. Probably, the proposal was mooted for my marriage with

second son-in-law. My family rejected that proposal for his drinking habits, for

that he bore a grudge."       Therefore, it was a matter of investigation. The

circumstances narrated by the deceased in her suicide notes addressed to the

police department and public clearly lead to a motive on his part in respect

thereof. We, therefore, have no hesitation to hold that the learned Judge of the

High Court was entirely wrong in holding that no allegations have been made

against the respondents in regard to any role played by the accused. A prima

facie case for investigation, in our opinion, had been made out and thus it was

not a fit case where the first information report should have been quashed.



12.      In State of Orissa and Anr. Vs. Saroj Kumar Sahoo, (supra) this Court

held as under:


       "As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under
       Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. are very wide and the very plenitude of
       the power requires great caution in its exercise. Court must be
       careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on
       sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to
       stifle a legitimate prosecution. The High Court being the highest
                                        6

       court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie
       decision in a case where the entire facts are incomplete and hazy,
       more so when the evidence has not been collected and produced
       before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal,
       are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective
       without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can
       be laid down in regard to cases in which the High Court will
       exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding
       at any stage. (See: Janata Dal v. H. S. Chowdhary, [1992] 4 SCC
       305, and Raghubir Saran (Dr.) v. State of Bihar, AIR (1964) SC
       1). It would not be proper for the High Court to analyse the case
       of the complainant in the light of all probabilities in order to
       determine whether a conviction would be sustainable and on such
       premises arrive at a conclusion that the proceedings are to be
       quashed. It would be erroneous to assess the material before it
       and conclude that the complaint cannot be proceeded with. When
       an information is lodged at the police station and an offence is
       registered, then the mala fides of the informant would be of
       secondary importance. It is the material collected during the
       investigation and evidence led in court which decides the fate of
       the accused person. The allegations of mala fides against the
       informant are of no consequence and cannot by themselves be the
       basis for quashing the proceedings. (See: Dhanalakshmi v. R.
       Prasanna Kumar, [1990] Supp SCC 686, State of Bihar v. P. P.
       Sharma, AIR (1996) SC 309, Rupan Deol Bajaj v. Kanwar Pal
       Singh Gill, [1995] 6 SCC 194, State of Kerala v. O.C. Kuttan, AIR
       (1999) SC 1044, State of U.P. v. O.P. Sharma, [1996] 7 SCC 705,
       Rashmi Kumar v. Mahesh Kumar Bhada, [1997] 2 SCC 397,
       Satvinder Kaur v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi, AIR (1996) SC
       2983 and Rajesh Bajaj v. State NCT of Delhil, [1999] 3 SCC
       259)."

13.      The fact of filing of the charge sheet only against accused Nos. 1 to 3

may now be considered to which, as noticed hereinbefore, our attention was

drawn by Shri Rangaramanujan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

the respondents. The High Court by an interim order dated 26 th June, 2006,

stayed the investigation. The impugned order was passed on 2nd August, 2006.

Charge sheet against accused Nos. 1 to 3 has been filed on 1st September, 2006.



14.      We have noticed hereinbefore that the first information report was
                                          7

lodged on 26th March, 2006. It is possible that the investigating officer could not

file the charge sheet against the respondent Nos. 4 & 5 herein not only because

the investigation was stayed, but also for the reason that before the charge sheet

could be filed, the High Court quashed the proceedings as against them. We,

therefore, are of the opinion that this aspect of the matter should be considered

by the learned Magistrate at the time of taking cognizance of the offence.



15.        It is now a well settled principle of law that where a final form is filed,

the complainant must be given notice thereof in writing. Even at that stage the

learned Magistrate may take recourse to one of the three notes highlighted by

this Court in Abhinandan Jha and Ors. vs. Dinesh Mishra, AIR 1968 SC 117,

namely :

           (i) The investigating officer may be asked to undertake further

investigation in terms of sub-section (8) of Section 173 of Cr.P.C.

           (ii) Take cognizance against the accused concerned on the basis of a

protest petition filed by the complainant.

           (iii) Take cognizance of the offence against the accused persons

although they have not been challaned, relying on or on the basis of the materials

collected during the investigation.


16.        Therefore, while taking notice of the subsequent events, which have

been brought to our notice by the learned senior counsel, we are of the opinion

that recourse to one of the modes above-mentioned may be taken by the learned

Magistrate as also by the parties as they think fit and proper. However, there
                                         8

cannot be any doubt whatsoever that for the reasons mentioned hereinbefore the

impugned judgment cannot be sustained. The same is set aside accordingly and

the appeal is allowed with the aforementioned observations.



17.      We, however, must clarify that we have not entered into the merits of

the matter nor any remedies available to the parties are foreclosed.



                                    ..........................J
                                    (S.B. SINHA)




                                    ..........................J
                                   (DEEPAK VERMA)

NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 6, 2009.

