
Supreme Court of India
Bhagirath vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 23 October, 2018Author: R Banumathi
                                                           1


                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2301 OF 2009


     BHAGIRATH                                                                     ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                          VERSUS

     THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                                  ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                               J U D G M E N T

     R. BANUMATHI,J.


     1.                        This appeal arises out of the judgment of the High

     Court of Madhya Pradesh in Criminal Appeal No. 309 of 2007 in and

     by               which    the   High   Court   has   affirmed       the   conviction     of   the

     appellant under Section 302 IPC and also the life imprisonment

     imposed upon him.

     2.                  The case of the prosecution is that on 19.08.2005 at about

     10.00 p.m. the deceased-Bherulal was surrounded by the appellant-

     Bhagirath (armed with farsi) and other accused persons (since

     acquitted) viz. Mangu, Sangita Bai, Suma Bai and Ramkunwar.                                    In

     the wordy quarrel between the deceased and the appellant-accused

     Bhagirath is said to have inflicted the farsi blow on the right

     side of skull near ear. When PW-6 (Ramchandra) tried to save the

     deceased, he also sustained injuries on his right hand. Further,
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.10.25

     case
16:33:15 IST
Reason:                   of   the   prosecution    is    that     all    other    accused     (since

     acquitted) also inflicted injuries on the deceased-Bherulal. On

     completion                 of   investigation,       the    appellant-accused      and    other
                                                  2

accused      were     charge-sheeted           for     the       offence        under    Sections

148/325/302 read with 149 IPC.

3.    Relying upon the evidence of injured eye witness (PW-6),

the     Trial      Court    has     convicted         the        appellant-accused            under

Section 302 IPC and other accused under Section 302 read with

Section    149      IPC    and    sentenced       all       of    them     to    undergo      life

imprisonment. For the conviction under Section 325 read with

Section 149 IPC, they were sentenced to undergo R.I. for one

year.

4.    In     the    appeal       before    the        High       Court,    the     High       Court

confirmed       the    conviction         of    the     appellant-accused               and    also

sentence of imprisonment as aforesaid. So far as the other co-

accused are concerned, the High Court acquitted all of them

holding that the charges against them have not been established

beyond reasonable doubt.

5.    We   have       heard   Mr.    P.C.       Agarwal,         learned        senior   counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant, as well as Ms. Swarupama

Chaturvedi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State of

Madhya Pradesh, and also perused the impugned judgment and the

materials on record.

6.    The case of the prosecution rests upon the evidence of PW-6

(Ramchandra),         an   injured     eye       witness,         who     has    deposed      about

quarrel between the deceased-Bherulal and the accused party. PW-6

has   also      spoken     about    the        infliction         of    farsi     blow    by    the

appellant-Bhagirath on the right side of the head near the ear of

the deceased. When PW-6 tried to rescue the deceased-Bherulal,

PW-6 (Ramchandra) also sustained injuries on his right hand. PW-6
                                              3

was also injured in the occurrence is supported by the medical

evidence and evidence of PW-2 (Dr. C.S. Gangrade). PW-6 being

injured     eye   witness,      his    evidence    stands    on    higher   footing.

Presence of injuries on the person of PW-6 lends assurance to his

testimony (See: Abdul Sayeed v. State of M.P. reported in (2010)

10 SCC 259 ). We do not find any convincing reason to disbelieve

the testimony of injured eye witness(PW-6).

7.    The High Court acquitted all the other accused, since fatal

blow is attributed to the appellant-accused. The question falling

for consideration is to the nature of the offence. As pointed out

earlier, the occurrence was at about 10.00 p.m., when there was

wordy     quarrel    between    the     accused    party    and    the   deceased   –

Bherulal that there was a quarrel between them is established

from the evidence of PW-6 also. In the quarrel, the appellant-

accused has inflicted injuries on the right side of the head of

the deceased measuring 15x2 ½ x 3 c.m. Though there was another

injury found on the deceased it was one contusion measuring 10x2

cm   on   lower     portion    of     right   neck.   The   fourth     exception    to

Section     300   IPC   deals       with   death   committed      in   sudden   fight

without premeditation. The sudden fight implies the absence of

premeditation. Even as per the evidence of PW-6, there was a

wordy quarrel and in that quarrel the appellant inflicted farsi

blow on the head of the deceased. As the injuries inflicted on

the deceased in the sudden fight between the deceased and the

accused party. There was no premeditation. One injury was caused

to the deceased by farsi blow on the head which indicates that

the appellant has not taken undue advantage of the deceased. The
                                            4

manner the occurrence and the injury inflicted on the deceased

attract     Exception      4    to    Section    300.        In    the    facts   and

circumstances of the case, the conviction of the appellant is

modified under Section 304 Part-I IPC and the sentence is reduced

to the period already undergone.

8.   In the result, the conviction of the appellant under Section

302 IPC is modified as conviction Section 304 Part-I IPC and

sentence    of    the   appellant      is   reduced     to   the   period      already

undergone    by     him.       The   appellant   is     ordered    to    be   released

forthwith if his presence is not required in any other case.

9.   The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.


                                                   ….......................J.
                                                   [R. BANUMATHI]


                                                   …......................J.
                                                   [INDIRA BANERJEE]
NEW DELHI
23RD OCTOBER, 2018

