
Supreme Court of India
Garlapati Krishna vs State Of A.P Rep.By Public ... on 3 November, 2011Author: ......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                    1


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.557 OF 2008

GARLAPATI KRISHNA                                 APPELLANT

                 VERSUS

STATE OF A.P REP.BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR             RESPONDENT



                                    O R D E R

            This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   judgment   and   order 

passed by the High Court of Judicature,  Andhra Pradesh in Criminal 

Appeal   No.1113   of   2004   dated   11th  August,   2006.     By   the   impugned 

judgment and order, the High Court has affirmed the findings and the 

conclusions reached by the II  Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track 

Court   No.II)   in   S.C.No.159   of   2001   dated   21.04.2004.   The   Trial 

Court,   after   ignoring   the   minor   contradictions,   has   come   to   the 

conclusion   that   the   Prosecution   has   proved   the   case   against   the 

accused   person.   Accordingly,   it   has   convicted   and   sentenced   the 

accused person to undergo imprisonment for life under Section 302 of 

the Indian Penal Code (for short 'I.P.C.'). 

            We   have   heard   Mr.A.T.M.Ranga   Ramanujam,   learned   senior 

counsel for the appellant.  The learned senior counsel would contend 

that the finding and conclusion reached by the Trial Court is fully 

perverse   and,   therefore,   requires   interference   of   this   Court.     In 

support of this contention, the learned senior counsel would take us 

through the evidence of P.W.Nos.1,2,6, 16 and 17.




            We have carefully perused the evidence that was read to us 


                                           2


by   Shri   Ranga   Ramanujam.       After   reading   the   evidence,   we   cannot 

agree   with   the   submission   that   the   findings   of   the   Trial   Court   as 

well as the High Court suffers from the vice of perversity.  In that 

view of the matter, we cannot accept the submission of the learned 

senior counsel Shri Ranga Ramanujam.

            The   learned   senior   counsel   would   further   contend   that 

there   is   enormous   delay   in   lodging   the   First   Information   Report 

before   the   jurisdictional   police   authority.     In   the   present   case, 

the incident took place at 10.30 p.m. on 10.02.2000.   On the next 

date i.e. on 11.02.2000 at 7.00 a.m. F.I.R. was lodged.

            This   aspect   of   the   matter   has   been   taken   note   of   by   the 

High Court and the High Court has stated as under :

      "In  the  case  covered  by  the  above  decision,  the  incident 
      occurred opposite to the police station.  When there was a 
      delay   of   12   hours   in   giving   the   complaint,   the   Court 
      entertained   a   doubt   about   the   genuineness   of   the   version 
      given by the prosecution at a belated stage and made the 
      above   observation.   But   in   the   present   case,   the   offence 
      took place at about 10.30 p.m.  Immediately, they took the 
      deceased  to  the  hospital  and  the  doctor  on  examining  the 
      deceased   declared   dead   and   they   remained   at   the   hospital 
      till   the   morning   and   the   report   was   presented   to   the 
      police at about 7.00 a.m. on the next day morning.   This 
      is a case against the sole accused.  There was consistency 
      in the version of the prosecution from the beginning that 
      the accused was responsible for the death of the deceased. 
      The accused is no other than the neighbour of the deceased 
      and related to them. If there are number of accused and if 
      overt   acts   are   attributed   to   such   accused,   one   can 
      apprehend that the people who have not participated in the 
      commission   of   offence   were   also   arrayed   as   accused   after 
      due   deliberations   by   taking   sufficient   time.     But   here 
      there   was   only   one   accused   who   was   inimical   towards   the 
      deceased, therefore, the delay in preferring the complaint 
      by   itself   is   not   a   ground   to   threw   away   the   prosecution 
      case   when there is sufficient material to establish that 


                                         3


      the   accused   is   responsible   for   the   commission   of   the 
      offence, the above decision is not applicable to the facts 
      of the case."

            We have carefully seen the conclusions reached by the High 

Court. In our opinion, this is the only conclusion that could have 

been   taken   by   the   High   Court   keeping   in   view   the   facts   and 

circumstances of the case. The view that is taken by the High Court 

cannot be characterized as a perverse finding. In that view of the 

matter,   the   submission   of   the   learned   senior   counsel   cannot   be 

accepted by us.
            Accordingly,  we do  not see  any infirmity  in the  judgment 

and order passed by the Trial Court which is affirmed by the High 

Court.   Therefore, confirming the order and judgment passed by the 

High   Court,   we   reject   the   appeal   filed   by   the   appellant.   Ordered 

accordingly.


                                                      ......................J.
                                                                     (H.L. DATTU)




                                                     .......................J.
                                                     (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)

NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 03, 2011 



