
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P.& Anr vs Ram Ashrey & Anr on 11 September, 2012Bench: Surinder Singh Nijjar, H.L. Gokhale
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1393-1394  OF 2012
                (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) Nos.2963-2964/2010)


      STATE OF U.P. & ANR.                      Appellant(s)
                           :VERSUS:
      RAM ASHREY & ANR.                         Respondent(s)




                                  O R D E R

         Permission to file special leave petition is granted.
            Delay condoned.
               Leave granted.
               These appeals have been preferred against the  judgment  and
    orders dated 26th February, 2010 and      17th August, 2009  passed  by
    the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow  Bench,  in  pending
    Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.2009 of 2009 seeking quashing of the FIR
    Case Crime No.194/2005 as also the  consequential  proceedings  pending
    before the Court of Judicial Magistrate, Ambedkar Nagar.  The  relevant
    facts have been noticed in the impugned orders and,  therefore,  it  is
    not necessary to repeat the same herein. However, it  is  necessary  to
    notice certain crucial dates which led to filing  of  the  petition  by
    respondent No.1 under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. On
    3rd May, 2005, respondent No.2  (Ram  Shakal)  made  a  complaint  that
    respondent  No.1  (Ram  Ashrey  Yadav)  attempted  to   take   forcible
    possession of the Abadi land which was the subject matter  of  a  civil
    suit. On 30th April, 2005, while attempting to take forcible possession
    of certain piece of  land,  respondent  No.1,  along  with  some  other
    persons, abused respondent No.2. They also beat him up  and  threatened
    to kill him. According to the complaint, respondent No.1 and his  party
    entered the house  of  respondent  No.2  and  inflicted  injuries  with
    intention to kill his daughter-in-law. Assuming her  to  be  dead,  the
    attacking party left the house of respondent No.2. When respondent No.2
    along with his injured daughter-in-law went to the local Police Station
    to lodge an FIR of the incident, no action was  taken  by  the  police.
    Rather, the complainant along with his daughter-in-law, were forced  to
    remain seated at the Police Station for quite some time. He, therefore,
    made a  written  complaint  to  appellant  No.2  (Mr.  Anil  Sant)  for
    initiation of appropriate action against respondent No.1.
       Appellant No.2, at the relevant time was posted as Secretary, Social
    Welfare Department, U.P.  Acting on the complaint  made  by  respondent
    No.2, appellant No.2 on 6th May, 2005 forwarded the  same  to  Shri  K.
    Satyanarain,  Superintendent  of  Police,  Ambedkar  Nagar   with   the
    following observations:

           “Thus, a copy of the application  is  being  enclosed  with  the
           request that the First Information Report may be  lodged  and  a
           thorough investigation in the matter be conducted by an  officer
           not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police,  so  that
           effective action may be taken and the  Government  may  also  be
           informed.”


               It appears that  an  FIR  was  actually  registered  on  27th
      October, 2005. It further appears that  in  the  meantime,  respondent
      No.2 filed a complaint before the Chief Judicial Magistrate,  Ambedkar
      Nagar on 16th May, 2005. In the  complaint  proceedings,  the  learned
      Chief Judicial Magistrate on 17th August, 2005  directed  registration
      of an FIR with a further direction to the police to act in  accordance
      with law.  Aggrieved by the aforesaid  order  passed  by  the  learned
      Judicial Magistrate, respondent No.1 challenged  the  same  by  filing
      Criminal Misc. Revision No.191 of 2005 in  the  Court  of  District  &
      Sessions Judge, Ambedkar Nagar.
               By order dated 5th September, 2005, the Sessions Judge stayed
      the operation of the order passed by the learned  Magistrate  on  17th
      August, 2005 and ultimately on 15th  February,  2007,  Criminal  Misc.
      Revision No.191 of 2005 was allowed and the order dated  17th  August,
      2005/2nd September,2005 directing the  registration  of  the  FIR  was
      quashed.  In view of the order passed by the Sessions  Judge,  no  FIR
      was registered  pursuant  to  the  direction  issued  by  the  learned
      Magistrate. However, it appears that on the basis of the letter  dated
      6th May, 2005, Circle Officer, Jabalpur, District Ambedkar  Nagar,  on
         21st October,  2005  directed  the  Station  Officer,  Malipur,  to
      register  the  case  against  respondent  No.1  and  others.  A  First
      Information Report  (FIR)  being  Case  Crime  No.194  of  2005  under
      Sections 323, 324,  504,  506  of  IPA  and  Section  3(1)(x)  of  the
      Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention  of  Atrocities)
      Act, 1989 (for short  “the  Act”)   came  to  be  registered  on  27th
      October, 2005. Subsequently, upon investigation, it appears  that  the
      police also filed charge-sheet on 27th  May,  2007  in  the  Court  of
      learned Magistrate.  The filing of the charge-sheet and  consequential
      proceedings have been challenged by the appellants by way of  Criminal
      Miscellaneous Petition under Section  482  of  the  Code  of  Criminal
      Procedure in the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench.
      When the matter was taken up for preliminary hearing, the  High  Court
      passed an interim order on 26th February, 2010 and  the  petition  was
      directed to be listed on 2nd April, 2010.
               It is this interim order that is challenged in  the  present
      special leave petition.
               We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
               Mr.Dash, learned senior counsel for the appellants 1  and  2
      has pointed out that in the impugned order the  conduct  of  appellant
      No.2 was severely criticized by the High Court. It was  observed  that
      appellant No.2 had written a letter dated 6th May, 2005  ignoring  the
      consideration that such a letter would play havoc with the liberty and
      character of the person who is otherwise not involved  in  the  crime.
      The High Court also observed:

           “The conduct of such officer should be taken into  consideration
           by  the  Court  as  reckless,  unmindful   and   being   without
           jurisdiction and  also  with  a  view  to  harass  the  innocent
           citizens/petitioners under  his  authority  of  high  rank.  The
           higher officer the more responsibility lies on the  shoulder  of
           the said officer and he should not  act  casually,  but  with  a
           sense of deep responsibility.”




           The High Court further observed as follows:
           “Therefore, in the circumstances of the case and with a view  to
           curb such incidents, so that such letters may not be written  in
           future and also that people may be certain in their mind  as  to
           what is the proper forum to approach and in order to reduce  the
           administrative chaos, it is necessary that a  censure  entry  be
           recorded in the character roll of the officer for  writing  such
           letter without authority of law. The Court,  therefore,  directs
           the Chief Secretary to record a censure entry in  the  character
           roll of the officer.”


               Mr. Dash, learned  senior  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of
      appellant Nos.1 and 2 submitted that  the  officer  –  appellant  No.2
      herein, has been unnecessarily castigated by the High Court as he  was
      unaware of the orders passed by the Sessions Judge on  5th  September,
      2005.  Furthermore, the said officer has not  played  any  role  other
      than writing the letter dated 6th May, 2005 forwarding  the  complaint
      made by respondent No.2  against  respondent  No.1  to  the  competent
      authority for further action in accordance with law.

               We are of the  considered  opinion  that  in  the  facts  and
      circumstances of this case,  the  High  Court  was  not  justified  in
      recording such scathing remarks about the action  taken  by  appellant
      No.2 on the complaint made by respondent No.2. It must  be  remembered
      that the petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure
      is still pending before the High Court.   In  our  opinion,  the  High
      Court  unnecessarily  proceeded  to  record  a  conclusion  that   the
      respondent No.1 is an innocent person not involved in any crime.  Such
      a finding could not have been  recorded  at  an  interim  stage.   The
      petition under Section 482 was yet to be  heard  on  merits,  and  was
      listed for hearing on 2nd April, 2010.

               Having perused the relevant provisions of  the  Act  and  the
      rules, we are satisfied that the action taken by  appellant  No.2  was
      within the scope of Rule 5(3) and Rule 6(1) of  the  Scheduled  Castes
      and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of  Atrocities)  Rules,  1995.  A
      perusal of the aforesaid rules clearly indicates that it was not  even
      necessary for appellant No.2 to be holding the position which  he  was
      actually holding, for forwarding the complaint made by respondent No.2
      against respondent No.1.  Any  person  who  has  knowledge  about  the
      atrocities being committed which would  constitute  an  offence  under
      Section 3 of the aforesaid Act would be within his  right  to  forward
      the complaint to the appropriate authority requesting that  action  be
      taken against the alleged offender in accordance  with  law.  In  such
      circumstances, we are of the opinion  that  the  High  Court  was  not
      justified in making the scathing remarks  against  the  officer.   We,
      therefore, direct that the adverse remarks recorded by the High  Court
      including the direction to make an entry of “censure” in  the  service
      record of appellant  No.2,  be  expunged.   The  impugned  orders  are
      accordingly set aside and the appeals are allowed.

               Before we part with the case,  we  make  it  clear  that  the
      petition filed by respondent No.1 under Section 482  of  the  Code  of
      Criminal Procedure shall be decided on its  own  merits,  strictly  in
      accordance with law, without being influenced by any observations made
      by this Court.

                                                   ........................J
                   (SURINDER SINGH NIJJAR)







                            ......................J
                                          (H.L. GOKHALE)


      New Delhi;
      September 11, 2012.

