
Supreme Court of India
Kameshwar Singh vs The State Of Bihar on 9 April, 2018Author: M M Shantanagoudar
                                                   1


                                                                NON-REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 903 OF 2012

          Kameshwar Singh                                            .. Appellant

                                                Versus

          State of Bihar & Ors.                                   .. Respondents

                                                WITH

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 904 OF 2012

          Tarkeshwar Singh and others                                ..Appellants

                                                  Versus

          State of Bihar                                           ..Respondent




                                           JUDGMENT

          Mohan M. Shantanagoudar, J.

                      1.   This is yet another case of the brutal murder of a person
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
                           with a view to prohibit such person from deposing before
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.04.09
15:43:29 IST

                           the Court in a case against his assailant. This is a case
Reason:


                           wherein the dead body was cut into two pieces, and
                             2


     thrown at two different places, in order to destroy the

     evidence.

2.   These appeals are directed against the judgment dated

     16.08.2010/06.09.2010 passed by the High Court of

     Judicature at Patna in Criminal Appeal No. 291 of 1988,

     confirming the judgment of conviction passed against the

     appellants herein by the 8th Additional Sessions Judge,

     Sasaram in Sessions Trial No. 192/117 of 1977/1983, for

     the offences   punishable   under Section 302 read with

     Section 149 and Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code.

     The appellants were sentenced to undergo rigorous

     imprisonment for life under Section 302 read with

     Section 149, and a further period of three years under

     Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code.
3.   Seven accused including the appellants were tried.

     Among the seven accused, two accused have died. Five

     accused are before us as appellants in these two appeals.
4.   The case of the prosecution in brief is that, on

     14.10.1973 at 11:00 p.m., deceased – Gupteshwar Singh

     along with PW6– Shambhu Singh carried meals for his

     farm worker; the farm worker was staying in the pump

     house of the deceased which is situated at the west of
                            3


Pusauli railway station. The first informant, viz., Srimati

Surajbansi Kuer, PW11, who is none other than the

step-mother of the deceased – Gupteshwar Singh, found

that the deceased had omitted to take his torch light

along with him.        Since it was pitch dark and as the

pump house was located at quite a distance from her

house    into the fields,       she   along   with    Muneshwar

Singh, PW-14, the brother of the deceased, went to

handover the torch to the deceased. When she reached

the lane situated east of the cattle shed of one Chhabi

Koiri,   she   found    PW6       –   Shambhu        Singh,   who

accompanied the deceased, coming back running from

south.    He told the informant that seven accused

including the appellants caught hold of the deceased,

pushed him down on the ground near the south-eastern

corner of the cattle shed of Chhabi Koiri and were

pressing his neck at the place which was a shallow land.

When she reached along with PW6 – Shambhu Singh and

PW14 – Muneshwar Singh near the said spot, she heard

the moaning sound – ‘Aah aah’ of the deceased. When

she flashed the torch light, they saw seven accused
                          4


including   the     appellants   holding     the   deceased   –

Gupteshwar Singh. One of the accused, namely, Shesh

Badan Singh (now expired) was armed with a gun and the

remaining accused were having lathis. When she raised

hue and cry that the seven accused were killing her

son(deceased), accused Shesh Badan Singh instigated the

other accused to kill the informant and others declaring

that, by that time they had already killed the deceased –

Gupteshwar Singh. Immediately, thereafter, the deceased

stopped moaning.       All the accused lifted and took the

deceased towards the railways yard situated to the east of

the place of occurrence. PW6, PW11 and PW14 being

frightened by the threats given by the accused – Shesh

Badan Singh, rushed to their house. Thereafter, PW11

went   to   Kudra    Police   Station   in   the   morning    of

15.10.1973 to lodge a complaint, wherein there was a

huge assembly of persons in connection with the auction

of cement, which was being carried out by an Assistant

Sub-Inspector of Police. As such, she could not lodge the

information then. Since she was an illiterate rural lady,

and as one of the person from the mob advised her to go
                               5


     to Dehri Police Station to lodge the complaint, she went

     to Dehri Police Station on 15.10.1973 wherein the

     information was not received by the officer at Dehri Police

     Station.    Immediately, thereafter she boarded the train

     and came back to Kudra and reached Kudra Police

     Station in the midnight, i.e., the intervening night of

     15.10.1973 and 16.10.1973. As the police officer was not

     immediately available and was taking rest, the first

     information report came to be recorded at 4:00 a.m. on

     16.10.1973     at   the   said   police   station   by    PW15

     (Sub-Inspector of Police). The crime was registered and

     thereafter the investigation took off.
5.   During the course of investigation, the police recovered

     the dead body of Gupteshwar Singh in two pieces. His

     head was found out in a gunny bag along with a big stone

     from the well, which was located at a deserted place and

     which belonged to one Rameshish Singh.              The   other

     portion of the body was also found tied in a gunny

     bag and was lying in a bogie of a goods train.

     PW11 – informant identified not only the face of the dead

     body but also the wearing clothes and apparel of the

     deceased.
                             6
6.   In sum and substance, the accused were charge-sheeted,

     and tried, convicted and sentenced, as mentioned supra.

     However, in the meanwhile, two of the accused died. The

     High Court, by its impugned judgment, has affirmed the

     judgment of conviction and sentence rendered by the trial

     Court, so far as the five appellants are concerned. Hence,

     these two appeals are filed by the convicted accused.
7.   The prosecution, in all, examined 16 witnesses; out of

     them PW1-Muni Lal and PW5-Rameshwar Singh have

     turned hostile. PW6-Shambhu Singh, PW11-Surajbansi

     Kuer and PW14-Muneshwar Singh are the three eye

     witnesses.   PW2-Kapildeo Singh gave evidence on the

     recovery of the head from the well and preparation of the

     inquest report.   PW4-Badri Narayan Pandey was the

     official of Railway Protection Force. He was on his duty

     during the night of 14.10.1973 at Pusauli Railway Station

     along with other constable Surendra Singh. He heard the

     moaning sound – ‘Aah-Aah’ at about 11:30 p.m., which

     was coming from Koiri-tola of village Baraon, which was

     only about 60 to 70 yards to the north of Pusauli Railway

     Station.   He further deposed that he heard someone’s

     voice twice and it matched the voice of a dying person.
                         7


The voice was once in a loud volume and a second time in

a low volume.       PW9-Ravindra Nath Singh was the

officer-in-charge   of       Railway   Protection   Force,

Dehri-on-Sone in the year 1972-73. He deposed that he

had registered a case on 12.10.1972 under section 3 of

The Railway Protection (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966,

and also another case in the same section of the same

Act, wherein Kameshwar Singh (appellant in criminal

appeal no. 903 of 2012) was an accused in both the cases

along with certain other persons.      He further deposed

that the statement of the deceased – Gupteshwar Singh,

who was a witness in both the cases, was recorded in

both the cases in Hindi and the said statements were

produced before the trial Court and marked as Exhibits 4

and 4/1. In one of the two cases, Suresh Koiri, son of

Chhabi Koiri, (who is one of the genitive brothers of

Nagina Koiri, one of the accused in criminal appeal no.

904/2012), was also an accused.        PW9-Ravindra Nath

Singh, being an independent officer of the State, has

deposed in respect of the motive for the commission of

the offence.   PW12-J.B. Singh is the guard of a goods
                               8


     train. He along with another guard T.P.Sinha, PW13, saw

     the bag lying in the open boxes of goods train from which

     the legs of a dead body were peeping through. The

     evidence of PW11 is also of the same effect.                 The

     post-mortem on the head of the deceased was conducted

     by Dr. Mirza Hussain. It seems the said doctor could not

     be examined before the trial Court, either in view of the

     death of the said doctor, or the non-availability of the

     said   doctor   during    the    relevant      point   of   time.

     PW15-Gopal Krishna Jha was the investigating officer.
8.   To satisfy our conscience, we have carefully gone through

     the evidence of all the witnesses, more particularly, the

     evidence of the three eye witnesses, PWs 6, 11 and 14,

     and the evidence of PW15, the investigating officer. The

     supporting witnesses such as the officials of Railway

     Protection Force fully support the case of the prosecution

     to prove the recovery of the dead body in two pieces and

     to prove the motive for commission of the offence.
9.   The evidence of three eye witnesses is consistent, cogent

     and reliable    insofar   it    relates   to    the accused –

     Kameshwar Singh.      At the inception itself, PW11, the

     step-mother of the deceased (PW11 had fostered the
                         9


deceased) had stated in her first information that when

she went to the spot of the incident along with PW6 and

PW14 during the night of 14.10.1973, she not only heard

the moaning sound of the deceased but also saw

Kameshwar Singh throttling the neck of the deceased.

Other accused were said to be holding the deceased.

Among other accused, one accused, namely Shesh Badan

Singh (since deceased) was holding a gun and the other

accused were holding lathis. Thereafter, all the accused

took the deceased, who fell down because of the

throttling, towards the railway station. Such fact, which

has come into existence at the initial stage in the form of

first information lodged by PW11 is fully supported by the

evidence of all the three eye witnesses. We do not find

any reason to suspect the versions of the three eye

witnesses with regard to the part played by the accused -

Kameshwar Singh in the commission of the offence. As

mentioned supra, all the three witnesses, without any

hesitation, have deposed that the accused – Kameshwar

Singh was throttling the deceased.          Even in the

cross-examination, their version could not be shaken by
                              10


      the defence.    As a matter of fact, there was a scanty

      cross-examination by the defence in respect of the actual

      incident.      The defence in their cross examination

      concentrated mainly on other factors and not on the

      main incident. The defence could not shake the versions

      and credibility of the three eye witnesses regarding the

      actual incident of throttling the deceased by the accused

      – Kameshwar Singh.
10.   It is no doubt true that the conduct of PWs 6, 11 and 14

      appears to be artificial after the incident, inasmuch as

      they came home without trying to save the life of the

      deceased by raising hue and cry in the village. However,

      we will have to keep in mind the actual realities of life,

      particularly having regard to the material on record. It

      has come in evidence that Shesh Badan Singh and

      Kameshwar Singh were powerful persons in the village.

      They had got licenced guns.        When the three eye

      witnesses flashed the torch towards the accused to see

      the incident and the plight of the deceased, the accused –

      Shesh Badan Singh pronounced that they have just then

      killed Gupteshwar Singh and now they should kill the

      three eye witnesses.    Being frightened, the three eye
                                   11


      witnesses fled from the scene.               At that point of time, it

      was about 11:30 p.m., during which time generally the

      villagers would be fast asleep. However, the evidence of

      these eye witnesses discloses that they have told 3-4

      persons in the village about the incident, but such

      persons did not come to the spot and help the deceased.

11.   It must further be kept in mind that the reactions of

      these witnesses in running away from the site of

      occurrence appears to be a natural human reaction

      under     the    facts    and     circumstances        of   the    case.

      Behaviour of the witnesses or their reactions would differ

      from situation to situation and individual to individual.

      Expecting       uniformity      in   their     reactions    would     be

      unrealistic, and no hard and fast rule can be laid down

      as to the uniformity of the human reaction. The evidence

      of the three eyewitnesses cannot be faulted merely

      because     they    ran    away.        This      Court     in    similar

      circumstances in the case of Rana Partap v. State of

      Haryana, (1983) 3 SCC 327, observed as follows:

      “6….Every person who witnesses a murder reacts in
      his own way. Some are stunned, become speechless
      and stand rooted to the spot. Some become hysteric
      and start wailing. Some start shouting for help.
                                 12


        Others run away to keep themselves as far removed
        from the spot as possible. Yet others rush to the
        rescue of the victim, even going to the extent of
        counter- attacking the assailants. Every one reacts
        in his own special way. There is no set rule of
        natural reaction. To discard the evidence of a
        witness on the ground that he did not react in any
        particular manner is to appreciate evidence in a
        wholly unrealistic and unimaginative way.”
The aforementioned observations aptly apply to the matter on

hand.

  12.   We hasten to add here itself that the presence of the

        three eye witnesses cannot be doubted. PW6-Shambhu

        Singh went along with the deceased – Gupteshwar Singh

        to provide meals for the farm worker of the deceased. At

        that point of time, he was caught hold of by the accused

        and others.      Being frightened, PW6-Shambhu Singh

        started running back to the village and at that point of

        time, PW11 and PW14 came from their house towards the

        place of the incident, in order to give the torch to the

        deceased. The said torch was seized during the course of

        investigation,   which   was   found   to   be   in   working

        condition.    As the mother of the deceased and as a

        brother of the deceased, PW11 and PW14 immediately

        proceeded towards the deceased along with PW6 in order
                               13


      to give him a torch light, since it was pitch-dark. Even in

      cross-examination, the defence was not successful in

      proving that the presence of the three eye witnesses on

      the spot of the incident was doubtful.
13.   Learned advocates appearing for the accused argued that

      much can be commented on the evidence of PWs 6, 11

      and 14; so also, much can be commented on the aspect

      of delay and the conduct of PW11 before lodging the first

      information. It is no doubt true that there is a delay of

      about 30 hours in lodging the first information.       The

      incident had taken place at 11:30 p.m. on 14.10.1973

      and the first information was lodged at 4:00 a.m. on

      16.10.1973. In our considered opinion, the prosecution

      has fully and satisfactorily explained the delay in lodging

      the first information.   PW11 is a resident of a remote

      village and she was an illiterate and poor lady. Besides,

      she had personally seen her son being throttled and

      being taken away by the accused persons.         She was

      threatened with dire consequences by one of the accused,

      namely Shesh Badan Singh, who was holding a gun. Not

      even a suggestion is made by the defence that the family

      of the deceased was powerful or influential.       Even a
                              14


      suggestion is not made that they are rich people. Under

      such circumstances, the trial Court and the High Court

      are justified in taking into consideration all the relevant

      factors including the explanation offered by the informant

      as well as PW15 to conclude that the prosecution had

      proved satisfactorily the reasons for delay in lodging the

      first information.
14.   As mentioned supra, the case of the prosecution is

      further supported by the evidence of PWs 2, 12 and 13,

      who are none other than the officials of Railway

      Protection Force regarding the recovery of the dead body

      in two pieces. Identity of the dead body was not in doubt,

      inasmuch as the head of the dead body was identified by

      PW11, who is none other than the step mother of the

      deceased.
15.   The aspect of motive also points towards the accused –

      Kameshwar Singh. PW9 – Ravinder Nath Singh, who is

      the inspector of Railway Protection Force has deposed

      that the two cases were lodged against the accused –

      Kameshwar Singh in the years 1972 and 1973 with

      regard to theft of railway property and in both these cases

      the deceased-Gupteshwar Singh was a witness.           The
                               15


        evidence of this witness cannot be doubted, inasmuch as

        he has produced the statements of Gupteshwar Singh in

        both the criminal cases before the trial Court and the

        same are marked as Exhibits 4 and 4/1.         PW9 has

        identified the accused – Kameshwar Singh, who was

        present in the dock by saying that he was a man against

        whom cases under the Railway Protection (Unlawful

        Possession) Act, 1966 were lodged and were pending.

      PW11 has supported the evidence of PW9 by deposing that

just prior to the incident, Kameshwar Singh had threatened the

deceased – Gupteshwar Singh by telling him not to give evidence

against him in the criminal cases.   Accused Kameshwar Singh

had said that the deceased would be done to death in case he

deposes against him.

16.   From the entire evidence, including the ocular testimony of

PWs 6, 11 and 14, in our considered opinion, it can be concluded

that the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable

doubt as against the accused – Kameshwar Singh. However,

omnibus and vague evidence is forthcoming as against the other

appellants. The incident had taken place abutting the cattle shed

of Nagina Koiri, accused no.7. Certain articles were seized from
                                 16


the cattle shed of Nagina Koiri. Two iron rods from the window

shutter were found to be cut, which were presumably used for

the commission of the offence.        However, there is no specific

evidence which points towards the guilt of other persons or the

participation of Nagina Koiri in the commission of the offence. It

is no doubt true that the evidence on record creates suspicion in

the mind of the Court about the participation of the other

accused, but any amount of suspicion may not take the place of

proof.

17.   The maxim falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus (false in one

thing, false in everything) is not being used in India. Virtually, it

is not applicable to the Indian scenario. Hence, the said maxim

is treated as neither a sound rule of law nor a rule of practice in

India. Hardly, one comes across a witness whose evidence does

not contain a grain of untruth or at any rate exaggerations,

embroideries or embellishments. It is the duty of the Court to

scrutinise the evidence carefully and, in terms of felicitous

metaphor, separate the grain from the chaff.         But, it cannot

obviously disbelieve the substratum of the prosecution case or

the material parts of the evidence and reconstruct a story of its

own out of the rest. Efforts should be made to find the truth.
                                   17


This is the very object for which Courts are created. To search it

out, the Court has to disperse the suspicious cloud and dust out

the smear of dust, as all these things clog the very truth. So long

as chaff, cloud and dust remain, the criminals are clothed with

this protective layer to receive the benefit of doubt. So, it is a

solemn duty of the Courts, not to merely conclude and leave the

case the moment suspicions are created. It is the onerous duty

of the Court, within permissible limits to find out the truth. It

means, on one hand that no innocent man should be punished,

but on the other hand to see no person committing an offence

should go scot free.      If in spite of such effort suspicion is not

dissolved, it remains writ at large, benefit of doubt has to be

credited to the accused. The evidence is to be considered from

the point of view of trustworthiness and once the same stands

satisfied, it ought to inspire confidence in the mind of the Court

to accept the evidence.

18.   The evidence on record points towards the guilt of

Kameshwar Singh. It is no doubt true that one man alone could

not have committed such a ghastly crime by separating the dead

body into two pieces.       He must have taken the assistance of

others.   The prosecution has come out with seven names
                                 18


including Kameshwar Singh, but so far as the other accused are

concerned, particularly in respect of the other appellants (except

Kameshwar Singh), except the omnibus and vague evidence that

they were also present and they also joined hands with the

accused - Kameshwar Singh, no other specific and reliable

material has come on record. Common object is also not proved.

As mentioned supra, any amount of suspicion will not take the

place of proof and hence after removing the grain from the chaff,

we are of the opinion that the judgment of conviction passed

against the accused Kameshwar Singh needs to be confirmed,

and the same is hereby confirmed.

      Insofar as other appellants are concerned, since there is no

reliable evidence on record, the benefit of doubt needs to be given

to the other appellants.

19.   Accordingly, Criminal Appeal No. 903 of 2012 filed by the

accused – Kameshwar Singh stands dismissed, and the judgment

dated 24.05.1988 passed by the VIII Additional Sessions Judge,

Sasaram in Sessions Trial No. 192/117 of 1977/1983, convicting

and   sentencing   the     accused    –   Kameshwar   Singh   to   life

imprisonment under Section 302 IPC and three years rigorous

imprisonment under Section 201 IPC, as confirmed by the High
                                    19


Court by the impugned judgment, stands confirmed.              Record

reveals that the accused – Kameshwar Singh is in custody. He is

directed to serve out the sentence imposed upon him by the trial

Court, and as confirmed by the High Court.

20.   Insofar     as   the   accused-appellants   Tarkeshwar   Singh,

Bahadur Ram Kahar, Bikarma Dusadh and Nagina Koiri in

Criminal Appeal No. 904 of 2012 are concerned, they are being

given the benefit of doubt. Accordingly, the judgment of the trial

Court     convicting     them   under    Sections 302/149, IPC     and

Section    201,    IPC    and   sentencing   them   to   undergo   life

imprisonment on the first count and rigorous imprisonment for

three years on the second count, as confirmed by the High Court

by the impugned judgment, stands set aside, by giving them the

benefit of doubt. The accused Tarkeshwar Singh, Bahadur Ram

Kahar, Bikarama Dusadh and Nagina Koiri (appellants in

Criminal Appeal No. 904 of 2012) be released forthwith, if not

required in any other case. Criminal appeal no. 904 of 2012 is

allowed accordingly.


                                   …………………………………….….J.
                                   [RANJAN GOGOI]
                 20




                 ………………………………………..J.
                 [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]

New Delhi;
April 9, 2018.

