
Supreme Court of India
Sudhir vs State Of Haryana on 28 September, 2010Author: ......
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, R.M. Lodha
           Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                 1





                                                                NON-REPORTABLE


                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                          CRIMINAL APPEAL  NO. 472 OF 2007


Sudhir                                                                ...Appellant


                                   Versus

 

State of Haryana                                                    ...Respondent


                                         WITH


                          CRIMINAL APPEAL  NO. 666 OF 2007





                                    JUDGEMENT 

            These two appeals,  one by Sudhir (A-1) and the other by Jagdev 


(A-2), arise out of the judgment of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana 


at   Chandigarh   confirming   the   convictions   and   sentences   passed   up   on 


them   by  the  Sessions   Judge,   Bhiwani.   The  appellants   were  indicted     for 


the murder of Prabhu Ram and for disappearance of the evidence in order 


to   screen   them   from   legal   punishment.   The   Sessions   Judge,   Bhiwani 


convicted   them   for   the   offences   under   Sections   302   and   201   read   with 


Section 34, IPC and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                       2





life and other sentences.   The High Court concurred with the view of the 


trial court. 


2.          We heard the counsel for the parties and at the conclusion of the 


arguments,  we pronounced,      `Both appeals  are allowed'.     We  indicate  


            the reasons therefor. 


3.          Prabhu   Ram   (aged   about   65   years)   was   unmarried   and   resided 


with his cousin Ram Chander (PW-4) in   village Palri (P.S. Sadar, Dadri), 


although he occupied a separate room.  He used to deal with the purchase 


and sale of goats.  PW-4 has three sons, Satbir,  Dhillu Ram and Madan. 


Satbir   is   employed   as   clerk   in   the   Cooperative   Bank,   Mahendergarh. 


Prabhu   Ram   had   given   his   landed     property   to   the   sons   of   PW-4.   On 


January 9, 2001 at about 8.00 a.m., the dead body of Prabhu Ram   was 


spotted       by     Sarpanch   Rishi   Pal   (PW-3)   lying   in   the   pit   near     the   firni 


(circular  road of the village) in front  of the   house of Vidya Nand.   PW-3 


went  to   the   house   of   PW-4   and   informed   him     as   to   what  he   had   seen. 


PW-4 then reached the spot and found   Prabhu Ram's   body lying in the 


pit.     He   did   not   go   to   the     Police   Station   immediately   but   called   his   son 


Satbir   from   Mahendergarh.     The   first   information   report   (F.I.R)     in   this 


regard was lodged by him at Police Station, Sadar Dadri, sometime at 2.30 


p.m. He suspected that Prabhu Ram has been murdered by A-1 and A-2. 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                   3





It  was stated  in the  FIR that  the previous  night,  i.e.  on January 8, 2001, 


Prabhu Ram left the house at about 7.00 p.m. to collect payment of goats 


from   Satbir     son   of   Suraj   Bhan.   When   Prabhu   Ram   reached   near   the 


house of Sher Singh,    A-1 and  A-2, who were coming from the opposite 


side pushed Prabhu Ram against the wall. Babu Lal (PW-5) who was also 


coming from Budhwana  intervened.  A-1 and A-2 were under the influence 


of   liquor   and   they   were   saying     that   they   would   not   spare   him   (Prabhu 


Ram). Due  to intervention of PW-5, Prabhu Ram went towards the firni; A-


1 and A-2 went towards the village pond and PW-5 went to his house.  





4.           At about 3.30 p.m. or so on January 9, 2001, Amar Singh (PW-14) 


started investigation  and reached the spot.  The photographs  of the dead 


body were taken; inquest  report was prepared;  the place of incident was 


inspected and a rough site plan was prepared; the blood stained earth and 


the   brickbats   were   taken   into   possession.   The   dead   body   was   sent   for 


post-mortem   examination   and   statements   of   the   witnesses   viz.,     PW-5, 


Sube Singh (PW-6) and Suresh (PW-7) were recorded. A-1 and A-2 were 


arrested   on   January  12,   2001;   their     clothes     were   taken   possession   of 


and  sent to Forensic Science Laboratory along with stained earth and the 


brickbats. 


5.          The   Sessions   Judge   as   well   as   High   Court   accepted   the 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                        4





prosecution case and rejected the plea of the accused. 





6.          The prosecution case mainly rests  on the   evidence of PW-6 and 


PW-7.  But before we consider their evidence as well as evidence of PW-


5, we think it is appropriate to have a     look at the medical evidence.   Dr. 


Ishwar   Singh   (PW-1)   conducted   the   post-mortem   of   the   dead   body   of 


Prabhu Ram on January 10, 2001 at 10.30 a.m.   He found   the following 


injuries on the person of the deceased:


                   1.       A lacerated wound 4 cm x 2 cm into               bone       

                            deep on left side of posterior aspect of parietal 

                   region. On        further dissection, echyomosis  was 

                   present.


                   2.       A lacerated wound 1.5cm x 1cm into bone deep 

                            on the right side of parietal region just above the 

                            right ear. On further dissection, underlying bone 

                            was   fractured   and   there   was   subdural              

                            haemotoma          present under the bone.


                   3.       A   lacerated   wound   on   the   right   eye   brow   size 

                   1cm      x 5cm. On dissection, echymosis was present.

                   4.       A   contusion   around   the   right   eye.   On            

                            dissection         echymosis was present.


                   PW-1 also made the following observations :


                   "Scalp, skull and vertebrae already described. Vertebrae 

                   was  not  opened.  Membrances,  brain      and  spinal  cord 

                   were congested. Walls ribs and cartilages were healthy. 

                   Plourea was congested. Larynx and trachea; Fine froth 

                   was present and fine mud was also present. Right lung: 

                   oedematous   and   bulky.   On   dissection,   blood   stained 

                   frothy fluid came out. Left lung: Oedematous and bulky. 

                   On   dissection,   blood   stained   frothy   fluid   came   out. 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                       5





                   Pericardium, heart and large vessels were healthy. Left 

                   side   of   heart   was   empty.   Right   side   was   containing 

                   some blood. ABDOMEN : were healthy. Peritoneum was 

                   congested.   Mouth,     pharynx   and   oesophagus   were 

                   congested   and   mud   was   present.   Stomach   and   its 

                   contents   distended.  Fluid   and   mud   was  present.  Small 

                   intestines   and   large  intestines   were  distaned  and   semi 

                   digested   food   was   present   in   small   intestines   and 

                   faecalmatter   was  present  in   large   intestines.  Liver   was 

                   congested   and   healthy.   Spleen   was   congested   and 

                   healthy.  Kidneys  were  congested   and   healthy.  Bladder 

                   was empty. Organs of generation were healthy."


According to PW-1, the cause of death was asphyxia due to drowning and 


the death took place about 18 to 48 hours before the post-mortem. In his 


cross-examination,   he     stated   that   none   of   the   injuries   was   bleeding   as 


these were either lacerated wounds or contusions.   He also stated that if 


the aforesaid injuries were caused with brickbats then these brickbats may 


or may not have blood stains. PW-1 also stated that the deceased  had no 


sign of intoxication;  he might  be semi-conscious when he breathed last.





7.          The question presented before us is whether indictment of A-1 and 


A-2   for   the   murder   of   Prabhu   Ram   is   established   beyond   reasonable 


doubt.     The   story   set   up   by  the   prosecution   is   that   on   January  8,   2001, 


Prabhu   Ram   left   his   house   at   about   7.00   p.m.,   after   taking   meals,   to 


collect payment from Satbir, son of Suraj Bhan. At about 7.30 p.m. while 


PW-5 was going to his house, he saw the accused A-1 and A-2 giving fist 


and slap blows to Prabhu Ram.     This incident happened near the house 


of Sher Singh.  PW-5 intervened; Prabhu Ram then went towards the firni 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                    6





whereas  A-1 and A-2 went towards the  village pond.   Although,  PW-5 is 


related   to   Prabhu   Ram,   he   did   not   inform   PW-4   immediately   about   the 


beating   given by A-1 and A-2 to Prabhu Ram. After all Prabhu Ram was 


an elderly person while A-1 and A-2   were young men and ordinarily  such 


incident   would   not   have   been   taken   lightly   by  any   relative   of   the   victim. 


Then in his cross-examination, few material omissions have been brought 


out.  In any case,  his evidence does not help the prosecution  much in so 


far as charge of murder is concerned. 


8.           Now we turn to the evidence of  PW-6 and PW-7.  PW-6 deposed 


that   on January 8, 2001  at about  8.00 p.m.   he  was coming  from village 


Jat-Bhurjat   to   village Palri.   At that time,   near the tubewell of   Sanwat, 


son   of   Dhan   Singh,   he   saw   A-1   and   A-2   beating   Prabhu   Ram   with 


brickbats; Prabhu Ram fell down. He asked A-1 and A-2 to leave Prabhu 


Ram but A-1 and A-2 threatened him that he would meet the same fate if 


he opened his mouth. He has stated that   Prabhu Ram was bleeding and 


A-1   and   A-2   were   under   the   influence   of   liquor.   Little   terrified,   he   went 


home. The next morning, i.e. on January 9, 2001, he went to work at his 


tubewell and  in the evening when he came back, he was told by his family 


members   that   Prabhu   Ram   has   been   murdered.   It   was  then   that   on   the 


next day, i.e. January 10, 2001 he went to the residence of PW-3 where 


PW-4   and   his   son     Satbir   were   already   there.   Apart   from     material 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                   7





omissions that have been brought out in his cross-examination, on its face, 


serious     doubt   arises   regarding   his     evidence.     He   is   a   chance   witness. 


That he is related to Prabhu Ram and PW-4 is not in dispute. Had he seen 


A-1   and   A-2   beating   Prabhu   Ram  with  brickbats   and   as   a   result   thereof 


Prabhu   Ram   fell   down   and   was   bleeding,     he   would   have   gone   to   the 


house  of PW-4  with whom Prabhu Ram used to live  and told him about 


the   incident.     Not   only   that   he   did   not   inform   PW-4   of   the     incident 


immediately   but   also   he   kept   quiet   for   more   than   24   hours.     His 


explanation that in the morning  on January 9, 2001, he went to work at his 


tubewell  and when he returned back in the evening that he came to know 


that Prabhu Ram has been murdered,  then he went to PW-4's house  and 


told him about the incident hardly merits acceptance. 





9.          Insofar as PW-7 is concerned, he deposed that on January 8, 2001 


at   about   10.00   to10.30   p.m.   when   he   reached   near   the   house   of   Vidya 


Nand,   he   saw   A-1   and   A-2   carrying     Prabhu   Ram.     He   did   not   know 


whether Prabhu Ram was dead or alive.   Prabhu Ram was bleeding and 


A-1 and A-2 threw the dead body in the pit which fed  water.  According to 


him, he was on his scooter and  the lights were on. He stopped  and asked 


A-1 and A-2   why they were throwing Prabhu  Ram in the pit but he was 


threatened by them to keep quiet otherwise he would meet the same fate. 


PW-7   stated   that   he   got   scared   and   went   home.     In   the   morning   on 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                   8





January   9,   2001,   he   went   to   his   shop   at   Mahendergarh   and   when   he 


returned in the evening at about 8.00 or 9.00 p.m., he came to know from 


his wife that Prabhu Ram has been  murdered.  On the next morning, i.e., 


January 10, 2001 he went to the house   of PW-3 where he found PW-4, 


his son Satbir and PW-6  and there he disclosed what he witnessed on the 


night of January 8, 2001. Had he seen the incident like this, he would have 


immediately gone to the house   of PW-4 and told him about the incident. 


He would not have waited for more than 36 hours. Palri is a small village 


where  everyone is   familiar  with  everyone.       He   was  riding  his  own  two 


wheeler  and it would have hardly taken any time in reaching the house of 


PW-4.               Was it sheer coincidence that in the morning on January 10, 


2001, first PW-4 and his son Satbir reached the house of Sarpanch (PW-


3), then PW-6 reached that place followed by PW-7?  We do not think so. 


They   all   gathered   at   the   house   of   PW-3   to   set   up   PW-6   and   PW-7   as 


eyewitnesses.     Incidentally,   the   names   of   PW-6   and   PW-7   do     not   find 


mention at all in the F.I.R. On a   consideration of the matter we find that 


PW-6 and PW-7 have been planted as eyewitnesses. Both of them stated 


that   they  saw  Prabhu   Ram  bleeding.   However,   PW-1   (Dr.   Ishwar  Singh) 


has categorically stated that the deceased had  four injuries and   none of 


the injuries was bleeding.  This also casts serious doubt whether brickbats 


at   all   could   have   blood   stains.     Moreover,   F.I.R.     was   not   lodged   with 


promptness   inasmuch as, although, PW-3 saw the dead body of Prabhu 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                     9





Ram   lying   in   the   pit   on   January   9,   2001   at   about   8.00   a.m.   and   he 


informed   the   same   to   PW-4   immediately   but   PW-4   went   to   the   Police 


Station at about 2.30 p.m. The time between 8.00 a.m. to 2.30 p.m. seems 


to have been used for consultations and deliberations and for introducing a 


false  story. The explanation by PW-4 that on coming to know the murder 


of   Prabhu   Ram,   he   phoned   his   son   Satbir   at   Mahendergarh   and   it   was 


only   after   he   reached   the   village   that   he   went   to   the   police   station   and 


lodged   the   F.I.R.   does   not   merit   acceptance   in   view   of   the   overall 


circumstances   that   have  come   on   record.     The  conduct   of   PW-4  is   also 


little   unnatural.     Prabhu   Ram   used   to   reside   with   him;   he   left   the   house 


after having meals at about 7.00 p.m.  If he did not return home after some 


time,   the   least   expected   of   PW-4   was   to   find   his   whereabouts.     It   was 


month of January and nights are extremely cold.  But until PW-3 informed 


PW-4 in the morning at about 8.00 a.m. or so on the next day, he did not 


care   to   find   out   where   Prabhu   Ram   was.       PW-4   sought   to   give   an 


explanation   that   Prabhu   Ram   would   not   return   home   in   the   night   some 


time.   To our mind, this explanation is not acceptable as he even did not 


lodge the FIR immediately after coming to know about the death of Prabhu 


Ram.     The   dead   body  was   found   lying  in   a   pit   near   the   house   of   Vidya 


Nand but Vidya Nand has not been examined by the prosecution at all; his 


statement   was   not   recorded   under   Section   161   Cr.P.C.   nor   he   was 


tendered in evidence before the Court.   The enmity of PW-4 and his son 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                           10





Satbir   with  A-1  is   clearly  established   on  record.     On  a  close   and  severe 


scrutiny of the entire evidence let in by the prosecution, there appears to 


be     likelihood   of   attempt   to   falsely   implicate   A-1   and   A-2.   The   several 


factors   noticed   above   cast   serious   doubts   about   the   truth   of   the 


prosecution case. 


10.         The present case turns on its own facts and the  evidence let in by 


the prosecution has to be seen in that light and it  is not necessary to cite 


decisions  of this  Court  but   reference  to two decisions  of this  Court may 


not be out of place. In the case of Surinder Singh v. State of Punjab1, this 


Court observed as follows :


                  "3. PW 2 went back to his house and dozed off for some 

                  time and thereafter went and informed PW 3 at his house 

                  as to what had happened. PW 3 went to the New Market 

                  along with PW 2 and saw the dead body of Manjit Singh 

                  lying there. He advised PW 2 to inform the matter to one 

                  Jagan Nath and on PW  2 informing Jagan Nath he was 

                  asked by the latter to inform one Kartar Chand, Municipal 

                  Commissioner about the occurrence and accordingly PW 

                  2 went and informed Kartar Chand. Thereafter it  is said 

                  that Kartar Chand took PW 2 to the police station and PW 

                  2 lodged the first information report.
                  12.  The conduct of PW 2 after the occurrence had taken 

                  place has certainly to be viewed with suspicion. If he had 

                  been a witness to the murderous attack on Manjit Singh, 

                  it   would   be   natural   to   expect   him   to   go   and   inform   the 

                  parents   and   relations   of   Manjit   Singh   of   the   occurrence 

                  and   also   the   police   authorities.  On   the   other  hand  what 

                  PW   2   had   done   was   to   go   to   his   house   and   sleep   for 

                  some   time   and   then   go   and   inform  the   matter   to   PW   3 

                  and some others. The story of PW 2 that because of the 


1     1989 Suppl. (2) SCC 21


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                          11





                  threats of the appellant he did not go and inform anyone 

                  forthwith   cannot   be   readily   accepted.   If   he   was   so 

                  frightened   at   that   time   to   go   and   tell   others   about   the 

                  occurrence, it is not known how he was able to get over 

                  his fears a few hours later and go and inform PW  3 and 

                  others about what had happened."


11.         This   Court   in  Surinder   Singh,1    thus,   held   the   conduct   of   an 


eyewitness   suspicious   who   after   seeing   the   occurrence     did   not   go   to 


inform  parents   and  relatives  of  the deceased   but  went  to  his  own house 


and after  some time informed  other  persons.  His  explanation  that  he did 


not inform anyone because of threats  was found not acceptable.





12.                       In  Jaisingh   and   Ors.  v.  State   of   Karnataka1,   this   Court 


observed as follows :


                  "5.  As   already   observed   above,   the   entire   prosecution 

                  story hinges on the evidence of PWs  30 and 33. A bare 

                  reading of their evidence however shows that it cannot be 

                  relied upon. Clearly the two were  chance witnesses and 

                  have   not   been   able   to   explain   the   circumstances   which 

                  brought them to the place of incident at 6.30 a.m. PW 30 

                  Kishore deposed that he had seen the incident along with 

                  PW  33 Dhanaji Tukaram Mane from a distance of about 

                  50   feet   while   he   was   one   kilometre   away   from   Village 

                  Veeravade on Pakani-Veeravade road. Concededly all the 

                  accused,   the   deceased   and   the   two   eyewitnesses 

                  belonged to Village Veeravade and were thus co-villagers 

                  known to each other. The conduct of this witness is truly 

                  amazing.   As   per   his   evidence   he   reached   Veeravade 

                  about half an hour after the incident but he did not inform 

                  anybody as to what had transpired till 18-1-1997 or 19-1-

                  1997   when   his   statement   under   Section   161   CrPC   was 

                  recorded   by   the   police.   He   further   stated   in   his   cross-
                  examination that he had gone to the police voluntarily and 

                  had   not   been   summoned.   The   statement   of   PW   33   is 



1     (2007) 10 SCC 788


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                          12





                  even   more   unreliable.   He   admitted   that   he   was  the   first 

                  cousin   of   the   deceased   and   that   after   witnessing   the 

                  murder   had   gone   on   to   Village   Akola   to   meet   his   sister 

                  and had returned to Village Veeravade after several days. 

                  He also admitted in his cross-examination that the house 

                  of the deceased was only 150 ft away from his house and 

                  that he had not informed anybody about the murder till the 

                  19-1-1997 on which he was confronted with his statement 

                  under   Section   161   CrPC   wherein  he   had   stated   that   he 

                  had   returned   to   Village   Veeravade   on   the   day   after   the 

                  incident.   We   find   it   absolutely  impossible   to   accept   that 

                  this witness could have gone to Village Akola after having 

                  been a witness to the brutal murder of his cousin and had 

                  not even informed anyone from the family of the deceased 

                  living only 150 ft away about the incident till 19-1-1997.


                  6.  It   is   true,   as   has   been   contended   by   Mr   Hegde,   that 

                  some   allowance   must   be   made   for   the   fact   that   the 

                  incident   had   spilt   over   to   two   States   or   that   the   two 

                  witnesses  had  been  so  overtaken by  fear  on  account  of 

                  the   two   warring   political   groups   in   the   village.   We   find, 

                  however  that   PW   30   gave   no   explanation  as   to   why  he 

                  had kept quiet for almost six days whereas PW 33 did, in 

                  a stray sentence, depose that he had been scared to talk 

                  to anyone about the murder. To our mind, this explanation 

                  is unacceptable as this witness had tried to hide the fact 

                  that   he   had   returned   to   Village   Veeravade   from   Village 

                  Akola the day after the incident, and being the first cousin 

                  of   the   deceased,   and   living   only   100   ft   away   from   the 

                  latter's house, still did not inform the family or anybody in 

                  the village about the murder for a period of six days. This 

                  bespeaks of absolutely unnatural conduct.


13.         In   our   considered   view   the   evidence   of   PW-6   and   PW-7   suffers 


from   inherent   improbabilities   and   we   do   not   find   it   safe   to   rest   the 


conviction of A-1 and A-2 on their evidence.   It is true that the findings of 


the   two   courts   are   concurrent     but   in   view   of   unreliability   of   two 


eyewitnesses (PW-6 and PW-7), the whole prosecution case is rendered 


inherently impossible of belief. 


Crl.A. No. 472 of 2007

                                                         13
14.                       In   the   result,   both   appeals   are  allowed  and   the     judgment 


and order dated August 21, 2006 passed by the High Court of Punjab and 


Haryana   affirming   the   judgment   of   Sessions   Judge,   Bhiwani   dated 


September   5,   2003     is   set   aside.   The   appellants   are   acquitted   of   the 


offences   under   Sections   302   and   201   read   with   Section   34,   IPC.   They 


shall be released forthwith,  if not required in any other case.





                                                                                   ..................

                                                                                           ...... J.

                                                                            (Harjit Singh Bedi)





                                                                                   ..................

                                                                                          ....... J.

New Delhi,                                                                       (R.M. Lodha)

September 28, 2010



