
Supreme Court of India
K.R.J. Sarma vs R.V. Surya Rao & Anr on 1 April, 2013Bench: A.K. Patnaik, Sudhansu Jyoti Mukhopadhaya
                                                                         NON-REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 1605 OF 2007

      K.R.J. SARMA                               Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

      R.V. SURYA RAO & ANR.                      Respondent(s)

                                    WITH

                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 1604 OF 2007




      THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,                     Appellant (s)
      HIGH COURT OF ANDHRA PRADESH

                 VERSUS

      R.V. SURYA RAO                          Respondent(s)




                                  JUDGMENT

           These are appeals against the judgment dated 25-11-2002  of  the
      Andhra Pradesh High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 1207 of 2002.
      2.          The facts very briefly are that the respondent was married
      to Vijaya Bala. Vijaya Bala died on 27-06-1994 by consuming poison and
      committing suicide at her residential apartment  in  Soverign  Shelter
      Apartments, Hyderabad. After investigation, a charge-sheet  was  filed
      against the respondent under Sections 306 and  498A,  IPC.  The  Trial
      Court, however, found that the deceased Vijaya Bala had left a suicide
      note (Ext.P1) addressed to the police to the effect that  no  one  was
      responsible for the death of the deceased and there  was  no  pressure
      either from her parents, husband (respondent), children or friends and
      relatives and that the decision to commit suicide was taken by her  on
      her own will and the suicide note was also signed by the deceased. The
      Trial Court, after considering the  contents  of  Ext.  P1  and  after
      considering all other evidence, held that the prosecution  has  failed
      to prove beyond reasonable doubt  that the respondent had abetted  the
      deceased to commit suicide and accordingly acquitted the respondent of
      the charges under Sections 498A and 306, IPC.
      3.          Aggrieved, the State carried Criminal Appeal No.  1207  of
      2002 and by the impugned  judgment,  the  High  Court  held  that  the
      suicide note said to have been left behind by the  deceased  wife  and
      marked as Ext.P1, obviously exonerates  the  respondent  on  both  the
      charges under Sections 498A and 306, IPC. The High Court further  held
      that it was discernible from the evidence  that  the  deceased  had  a
      suicidal tendency which was  expressed on several occasions and except
      the only circumstance that the door was bolted from outside there  was
      no other evidence that was available on record against the  respondent
      and there was also no evidence that the respondent had  subjected  the
      deceased to any harassment or cruelty. Accordingly, the High Court did
      not interfere with the order of acquittal.
      4.          So far as Criminal Appeal No. 1605 of 2007  is  concerned,
      the same was filed by the complainant and it has been brought  to  our
      notice by the learned counsel for the parties that the complainant has
      expired during  the  pendency  of  the  criminal  appeal.  Hence  this
      criminal appeal abates.
      5.          In support of Criminal Appeal No. 1604 of  2007  filed  by
      the State, learned  counsel  for  the  State     Mr.  D.  Mahesh  Babu
      submitted that there was evidence of PW 1, the son of the deceased, to
      show that there were quarrels between the  deceased  and  the  accused
      over the innumerable loans taken by the accused and that  the  accused
      used to take away the salary of the deceased who  was  employed  as  a
      teacher. He further submitted that there was also  evidence  of  PW  1
      that the accused used to lock the house from outside and keep with him
      the keys with the deceased  inside  the  house.  He  argued  that  the
      aforesaid evidence makes out  the  case  of  harassment,  cruelty  and
      abetment of suicide and therefore, the respondent was  guilty  of  the
      charges under Sections 498A and 306, IPC.
      6.          We have perused the evidence of PW 1 and we find that  the
      respondent had taken PW 1 and his younger brother for a movie when the
      deceased committed suicide. This is  what  PW  1  has  stated  in  his
      evidence with  regard  to  what  happened  on  the  day  the  deceased
      committed suicide:
                 “...On the  fateful  day,  neither  myself  nor  my  father
                 requested my mother to accompany us to  see  movie,  as  my
                 mother was in a disturbed mood and my father asked  us  not
                 to press her to come along with  us.  It  is  not  true  to
                 suggest that there were no quarrel on that day and  that  I
                 am saying for the first time  contradictory  statement.  My
                 father did not quarrel with us on that day. Myself  and  my
                 brother accompanied my father to watch movie willfully,  my
                 mother did not oppose for us to go to  movie  and  did  not
                 oppose for being the main door locked from outside  of  the
                 home. My mother did not put the lock from outside  or  that
                 she would bolt the door from inside by herself. At the time
                 when we were leaving from our flat my mother was well awake
                 and saw us going for movie. My mother knows  that  we  were
                 going to movie. My brother also told my mother that we  are
                 all going to movie. My mother did not show any interest  to
                 accompany us. Neither my father nor myself  or  my  brother
                 ever had any thought  that  she  would  attempt  to  commit
                 suicide.”


      It is clear from the aforesaid evidence of  PW  1  that  the  deceased
      herself opted not to go to the  movie  on  that  day  along  with  the
      respondent and their two sons and neither the respondent nor  the  two
      sons had any thought that the deceased would commit suicide when  they
      have gone to the movie. This being the  evidence  of  the  prosecution
      witness (PW 1), we fail to see how the case for abetment of suicide by
      the respondent could be made out, particularly when the  deceased  had
      left behind a suicide note (Ext. P1) absolving the respondent and  all
      others from the responsibility for the step taken  by  her  to  commit
      suicide by taking poison.
      7.         Also from the evidence of PW 1 we do not find  any  act  of
      cruelty or harassment as such committed by the respondent  within  the
      meaning of Clauses (a)    and (b) of the Explanation to Section  498A,
      IPC. Clause (a) of the Explanation to Section 498A,  IPC  states  that
      any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is  likely  to  drive
      the woman to commit suicide or to cause  grave  injury  or  danger  to
      life, limb or health, whether mental or physical of the woman  amounts
      to 'cruelty'. We have noticed from the evidence of PW 1  that  on  the
      day the deceased committed suicide, the respondent was not in any  way
      guilty of any willful conduct which was likely to drive  the  deceased
      to commit suicide, nor did the respondent cause any  grave  injury  to
      the deceased. Clause (b) of  the  Explanation  to  Section  498A,  IPC
      states that harassment of a woman with a view to coercing her  or  any
      person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property  or
      valuable security or is on account of failure by  her  or  any  person
      related to her to meet such demand amounts to 'cruelty'.  Though PW  1
      has stated that the respondent used to take away  the  salary  of  the
      deceased, he has very fairly conceded in cross examination that he had
      not stated before the police that the respondent used to take away the
      salary of the deceased. Considering this evidence of PW 1, we  are  of
      the view that the concurrent findings of the Trial Court and the  High
      Court that the  respondent  was  not  guilty  of  the  offences  under
      Sections 498A and 306, IPC should not be  interfered  with  by  us  in
      exercise of our powers under Article 136 of the Constitution.
      8.         The appeals are accordingly dismissed.

                                              ............................J.
                                                              (A.K. PATNAIK)




                                              ............................J.
                                               (SUDHANSU JYOTI MUKHOPADHAYA)
     NEW DELHI,
     APRIL 01, 2013


