
Supreme Court of India
Pawan Kumar vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 6 March, 2019Author: ......................J.
Bench: [ Shah], [ Sinha]
                                                                      NON-REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S)442 OF 2019

     (Arising out                   of    Special   Leave   Petition(Crl.)     No(s).
     7713/2017)


     PAWAN KUMAR & ORS.                                            APPELLANT(s)


                                                         VERSUS


     THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                                RESPONDENT(s)


                                            J U D G M E N T

     1.                  None appears for the appellants. We have gone through

     the records with the assistance of the learned counsel

     for the respondent.


     2.                  Leave granted.


     3.                  The   appellants    were   apprehended    with   a   vehicle

     carrying 22 logs of Khair wood.                        They did not produce any

     authorization or permit with regard to the same.                          Their
Signature Not Verified


     prosecution under Section 379, IPC read with Sections 41
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.12
12:37:04 IST
Reason:


     and 42 of the Indian Forest Act culminated in acquittal

                                                     1
under Section 379, IPC by the Magistrate.                The conviction

under the Forest Act was for six months.



4.   The   conviction    under     the   Forest    Act    was   assailed

before the Sessions Judge in appeal.              The appellants were

acquitted as neither the Khair wood logs nor the lorry in

which it was being transported were produced as exhibits.

The independent witness of seizure also did not support.



5.   In the appeal against acquittal by the State, the

High Court held that the independent witness did not deny

his signatures on the seizure memo.             In view of a sample

of the log having been produced, non-production of the

vehicle    was   not   relevant,    reversing     the    acquittal   and

sentencing the appellants under Sections 41 and 42 of the

Forest Act for three months with fine of Rs.500/- with a

default stipulation of one month.



6.   We have heard the learned counsel for the respondent

in opposition to the appeal and considered the nature of

evidence available.        Non-production of the seized wood

and the vehicle, the primary evidence of the offence,


                                   2
renders the prosecution case fragile and unsustainable.

Mere production of the seizure memo does not tantamount

to the production of the seized woods and the lorry.

Unless the seized wood was produced, mere production of a

sample, and there is no material in support that the

sample was out of the same 22 logs, we are unable to

sustain the conviction of the appellants.



7.     Since we do not have the benefit of the presence of

the appellants, the status of the sentence is not known.

Even    while   we   acquit   the       appellants,   if   they    have

undergone the sentence, they shall stand acquitted of the

charge.

8.     The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.




                                        ......................J.
                                            [NAVIN SINHA]


                                        ......................J.
                                             [M.R. SHAH]
NEW DELHI;
MARCH 06, 2019.


                                    3

