
Supreme Court of India
Karampal Kaur vs State Of Punjab & Anr on 24 August, 2009Bench: Mukundakam Sharma, Mukundakam Sharma
                                               1


                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CRIMINAL    APPELLATE JURISDICTION


            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1605     OF 2009
          [Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 1678/2009]


KARAMPAL KAUR                                         ... APPELLANT(S)

                                :VERSUS:

STATE OF PUNJAB AND ANR.                              ... RESPONDENT(S)




                                O R D E R

          Leave granted.

          During the pendency of the trial in a dowry case

 filed under Section 498-A of I.P.C., an application

 under Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was

 moved by the prosecution for summoning Karampal Kaur as

 an accused.       The said application was dismissed by the

 Chief Judicial Magistrate, Muktsar vide his order dated

 31.8.2007.


          Against      the   aforesaid        order   of     the    Chief

 Judicial Magistrate, Muktsar, a criminal revision was

 filed    by   the    complainant       -   respondent     No.2    herein,

 before    the       Sessions    Judge,      Muktsar.      The     learned
                                    2

Additional District and Sessions Judge, Muktsar while

accepting the revision petition, set aside the order

dated 31.8.2007 passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate

and allowed the application under Section 319 Cr.P.C.



       Against the aforesaid order, the appellant filed

a revision before the High Court. The High Court upheld

the   order   dated      1.4.2008       passed    by    the    Additional

District and Sessions Judge, Muktsar and dismissed the

revision petition.


       Aggrieved      by    and   dissatisfied          with   the   order

passed by the High Court, the appellant has preferred

this appeal by special leave.


       This    Court     issued     notice       on    2.3.2009     and   in

pursuance     of   the     said   notice,    Mr.       Vivek   K.    Goyal,

learned counsel has appeared for the State of Punjab

and Mr. Arvinder Singh, learned counsel appeared for

respondent No.2.

       We have heard the learned counsel appearing for

the parties.


       In the entire statement of PW-1 Jagwinder Kaur,
                                    3

the   only    allegations      against   the    appellant    is     that

goods, like suits, utensils, bedding etc. were kept by

her in box and Almirah. There is no other allegation

against the appellant in this case. This allegation, in

our   opinion,      is     hardly   sufficient     to   convict     the

appellant     for    the     offence    under    Section    498-A    of

Cr.P.C.      Compelling the appellant to face the criminal

trial on the basis of this allegation would be an abuse

of the process.


       The impugned order of the High Court is totally

devoid of any merit and it is accordingly set aside.

Consequently, the summoning order passed under Section

319 Cr.P.C. against the appellant is quashed.



       The appeal is allowed and disposed of with the

aforementioned observations.


                                          ....................J
                                          (DALVEER BHANDARI)




                                          ....................J
                                          (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)

NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 24, 2009.

