
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Naveen Kumar on 4 October, 2018Author: N V Ramana
                                                   NON-REPORTABLE


                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                     Criminal Appeal No. 567 of 2017




     STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                         Appellant(s)



                                VERSUS



     NAVEEN KUMAR                                  Respondent(s)




                              JUDGMENT

 N. V. RAMANA, J.


1.    Heard counsels for both the parties.


2.    The present appeal is preferred by the State against the

      impugned order dated 08.09.2009 passed by the High Court of

      Himachal Pradesh, Shimla, wherein the High Court while

      accepting the appeal preferred by the accused-Respondent, set

                                    1
     aside the earlier order of conviction passed by the trial court and

     acquitted the accused-Respondent from all charges.


3.   The brief case of the prosecution necessary for the adjudication

     of the matter is as follows. On 10.09.1999, around eight persons

     including the accused-Respondent were alleged to have formed

     an unlawful assembly with a common object of causing deadly

     assault upon PW-1 Ashwani Kumar, PW-2 Ram Pal and three

     other deceased persons. The accused persons allegedly armed

     with deadly weapons such as, swords, gandasis, hockey sticks,

     clutch wire, etc. blocked the roads and around 9:30p.m, the

     victims reached the place of occurrence, the accused persons

     attacked them and the intended criminal act was accomplished

     within 3-4 minutes. The alleged persons fled the scene of crime

     before the injured and the deceased could raise an alarm.

     Thereafter, the police were informed by 9:35 p.m., through the

     telephone and an entry was made in the Rojnamacha, at the

     Police Station, regarding the aforesaid incident.


4.   Thereafter, the injured persons were taken to the hospital. But,

     while the deceased persons, Rajiv Kumar, Raj Kumar and

     Santokh Singh were undergoing treatment, they succumbed to

     their injuries. In the meanwhile, P.W 29-ASI recorded the
                                    2
     statement of PW-1 Ashwani Kumar. During the course of

     investigation, the accused persons, including the present

     accused-Respondent were arrested. Allegedly, the accused-

     Respondent made a disclosure statement, which led to the

     recovery of the clutch wire. After the completion of the

     investigation, seven more accused persons were challaned along

     with the present Respondent for screening the accused persons

     and helping them in the obstruction of evidence.

5.   The trial court after relying upon the statements of two injured

     eye-witnesses, PW-1 Ashwani Kumar and PW-2 Ram Kumar,

     concluded that, the accused-Respondent along with seven

     others are guilty under Sections 302, 324, 323, 341, 148 read

     with Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred

     as “IPC”). Accordingly, the sessions court awarded the following

     sentence; Imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs.50,000/- in

     default of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

     a further period of two years, for offence under Section 302, read

     with   Section   149   of   the       Indian   Penal   Code;   rigorous

     imprisonment for three years and fine of Rs.10,000/-, in default

     of payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a

     further period of six months, for offence under Section 324, read


                                       3
     with   Section   149   of   the       Indian   Penal   Code;   rigorous

     imprisonment for one year and a fine of Rs.5,000/- in default of

     payment of fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further

     period of two months, for offence under Section 323, read with

     Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code; simple imprisonment for

     one month and a fine of Rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine

     to undergo simple imprisonment for a further period of seven

     days, for offence under Section 341 read with Section 149 of the

     Indian Penal Code; and rigorous imprisonment for three years

     and a fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default of payment of fine to undergo

     rigorous imprisonment for a further period of six months, for

     offence under Section 148, read with Section 149 of the Indian

     Penal Code.

6.   Aggrieved by the above order of conviction, the accused persons

     preferred an appeal before High Court. The High Court, upon

     finding lack of evidence against the accused-Respondent and

     four other accused persons, allowed their appeal and acquitted

     them, while upholding the conviction of the other two accused

     persons. It may be noted that, since accused no.5, Ashok Kumar

     passed away during the trial, the proceedings against him

     stands abated.


                                       4
7.   The State has preferred the present appeal against aforesaid

     order of acquittal.


8.   The counsel on behalf of the appellant-State, while supporting

     the order of conviction passed by the Sessions Court, submitted

     that, this ocular version of the natural witness is supported

     other medical and forensic evidences, hence, the high court

     erred while passing the impugned order of acquittal.


9.   Whereas, the counsel on behalf of the Accused-Respondent

     supported the order of acquittal passed by the High Court as the

     prosecution failed to provide conclusive evidence, so as to

     implicate the accused-Respondent for the commission of the

     alleged offence.


10. Having heard learned counsels for both the parties and after

     perusing the record, we find that, the Respondent was not

     named as one of the accused in the FIR registered at the instance

     of P.W 1-Ashwani Kumar. It was only in the subsequent

     statement under Section 161 of the CrPC, that PW1-Ashwani

     Kumar improved upon his earlier statement and named two

     more persons including the accused-Respondent herein. But,

     PW 1-Ashwani Kumar, failed to provide any plausible reason as


                                   5
     to why these two persons, including the present Respondent

     were not named in the earlier statement, wherein he had ample

     opportunity to name the accused persons without any

     deliberation. Therefore, the High Court correctly observed that,

     in the such circumstances, the accused-Respondent cannot be

     convicted in the absence of corroboration of independent

     evidences to prove his involvement in the alleged crime.


11. In the present case, the counsel for the State has argued that,

     pursuant to the disclosure made by the accused-Respondent, a

     clutch wire was recovered. But it is pertinent to note here that,

     firstly, the alleged confessional statement was given while the

     accused-Respondent was in the police custody. Secondly, the

     fact of recovery of the clutch wire is not enough to prove the

     culpability of the accused-Respondent as, a clutch wire is a

     commonly available material in the market and there was no

     specific mark on the recovered clutch wire to associate it with

     the offence. Further, postmortem report reveals that the injuries

     can be attributed to Gandasis or Khukhri. Therefore, apart from

     the subsequent statement made of PW 1-Ashwini Kumar, there

     is no other evidence to prove the culpability of the accused-

     Respondent.

                                    6
12. Having observed the above facts and circumstances, we are of

    the considered opinion that, the High Court has rightfully

    acquitted the accused-Respondent, as the case of the present

    respondent cannot be equated with that of the convicted accused

    persons. In our opinion, there exists no perversity in the

    judgment of the High Court. Further, in the absence of

    compelling reasons, this court is not keen to entertain this

    appeal challenging the order of acquittal.


13. The appeal is accordingly dismissed. Pending applications, if

    any, shall also stand disposed of.


                                            ……………………………..J.
                                                (N. V. Ramana)




                                            ……………………………..J.
                                         (Mohan M. Shantanagoudar)



 NEW DELHI,

 OCTOBER 04, 2018




                                   7

