
Supreme Court of India
Prabhu Dayal vs The State Of Rajasthan on 4 July, 2018Author: M M Shantanagoudar
                                 1




                                               NON-REPORTABLE
                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2324 OF 2014


Prabhu Dayal                                          ...Appellant
                              Versus


The State of Rajasthan                              ...Respondent




                           JUDGMENT

MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.


     The judgment and order of conviction dated 17.09.2013

passed by the High Court of Judicature at Rajasthan, Bench at

Jaipur in D.B. Criminal Appeal No. 659 of 2003, insofar as it

relates to the conviction of the appellant, is the subject matter of

this appeal. By the impugned judgment, the High Court has

affirmed the judgment of conviction passed by the Additional
                                2


Sessions Judge (Fast Track) Court No. 2, Bharatpur, Rajasthan

in Sessions Case No. 53/2001.

2.   The case of the prosecution in brief is that on the night of

01.05.1997, the informant Vikram Singh, who was sleeping at a

distance of 15 to 20 yards from his brother Gopal in his house,

heard the sound of a fired gun shot and got up at 1:00 a.m. in

the intervening night between 01.05.1997 and 02.05.1997; he

saw Prabhu (the appellant herein), Indal, Rajveer, Gyan, and

Shiv Singh armed with weapons and standing near the cot on

which his brother Gopal was lying, shouting that Prabhu (the

appellant herein) fired on his chest; then Prabhu told Shiv Singh

to kill his bhabhi Smt. Devi; thereupon, Shiv Singh opened fire

and injured her; Prabhu, Rajveer, Indal and Shiv Singh were

having kattas (country made pistol) in their hands and Gyan was

armed with farsa (axe); 4 to 5 other persons were also standing

outside the compound but he could not identify them because of

the darkness; the appellant-Prabhu was shouting that they have

killed Gopal on that day and they will see who dares to oppose

them in the future; the informant raised a hue and cry and at

that point of time, Surjan, Ramesh, Subhash, Pappu and other

neighbours reached on the spot. Based on these allegations, the
                                3


first information came to be lodged by Vikram Singh as per

Exhibit P14 on 02.05.1997.

     Totally, ten accused were tried, including the appellant

herein, for the offences punishable under Sections 147, 148, 307,

302, 459, 460, 120B, 118, and 176 read with Section 149 of the

Indian Penal Code, and Sections 3/25 of the Arms Act.

3.   The Trial Court acquitted accused nos. 7 to 10 and

convicted accused nos. 1 to 5, viz., Gyan Singh, Shiv Singh,

Indal, Rajveer and Prabhu Dayal (the appellant herein) (Accused

No.6 – Babu expired during investigation). Gyan Singh was

convicted under S. 302, IPC simpliciter, and was sentenced to life

imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 1,000/-. Shiv Singh was

convicted under Section 307, IPC, and sentenced to simple

imprisonment of 4 years with fine. The rest of the accused,

including Indal, Rajveer, and Prabhu Dayal, were convicted

under Ss. 302/149, IPC and given the same sentence as Gyan

Singh. During the pendency of the appeal before the High Court,

one of the accused – Indal expired. Thus, the appeal was heard

by the High Court against four accused, namely, Gyan Singh,

Shiv Singh, Rajveer and Prabhu Dayal.        The High Court on

hearing, while acquitting the accused – Rajveer, has confirmed
                                 4


the judgment of conviction passed by the trial Court in respect of

Gyan Singh, Shiv Singh and Prabhu Dayal.

       The accused – Gyan Singh has served the sentence of

imprisonment and he has not filed an appeal in this Court. The

accused – Shiv Singh did not choose to file an appeal and

consequently has accepted the judgment of conviction and

sentence passed against him.         Hence, the accused – Prabhu

Dayal is the only person who is before this Court in this appeal,

questioning the judgment and order of conviction passed against

him.

4.     Shri Nagendra Rai, learned Senior Advocate, took us to the

material on record and submitted that the High Court is not

justified in affirming the judgment of conviction passed by the

Trial Court. The names of the accused, including the appellant,

were not disclosed by the alleged eye witnesses when they went

to the police station immediately after the incident, i.e., at 2:00

a.m. on 02.05.1997, and hence it is clear that the so-called eye

witnesses are not actually the eye witnesses of the incident; the

prosecution witnesses had been changing the story of the

prosecution stage by stage inasmuch as the first information

report, Exhibit P14, named the appellant as the only assailant
                                5


who fired at the deceased Gopal; during the course of evidence,

such story of the prosecution is improved upon by deposing that

Prabhu Dayal and Gyan Singh together fired at Gopal; at some

point of time, the eye witnesses have deposed that it is only Gyan

Singh who fired on the deceased; the post mortem report

discloses that the deceased has sustained only an entry wound

and an exit wound, meaning thereby that only one bullet was

shot by one of the firers, and two persons were not involved in

firing on the deceased.    He further submitted that the FIR,

Exhibit P14, is hit by Section 162 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, inasmuch as the first information was lodged at 2:00

a.m. on 02.05.1997 itself when Vikram Singh, Lakshmi Karan

and one more person came to the police station on the motor

cycle and went away after saying that some miscreants have

come in the village Ikran and started open firing.        As the

information was entered by the police in the Rozanama at No. 29

and in view of such entry in the Rozanama in the police station,

the so called first information report, Exhibit P14, cannot be

treated as the first information; it can be treated as only second

information and is therefore hit by the provisions of Section 162

of the Code of Criminal Procedure. He further submitted that the
                                  6


place of occurrence is not proved, inasmuch as no blood stain

material was seized from the scene of occurrence; and the place

of incident was washed by the witnesses even prior to the police

visiting the spot and the said fact is clear from the evidence of the

investigating officer. On these, among other things, he prayed for

allowing the appeal.     Per contra, Shri Jayant Bhatt, learned

advocate appearing on behalf of the State of Rajasthan, argued in

support of the judgments of the courts below.

5.   PW30, the Station House Officer of the concerned police

station has admitted in the cross-examination that at 2:00 a.m.

on 02.05.1997, Vikram Singh, Lakshmi Karan and one more

person came on a motor cycle to the police station at Chiksana

and went away after saying that some miscreants have come in

village Ikran and started open firing.      Such information was

entered in the Rozanama of the case diary at no. 29. At that point

of time, none of the afore-mentioned three persons had given the

name of any person who had opened firing.           Based on such

information, the appellant contends that the afore-mentioned

information would be the first information, and as such

information does not contain any of the names of the assailants,

it can be said that none of the eye witnesses knew the names of
                                7


the assailants at 2:00 a.m. i.e., immediately after the incident.

Since the accused and the witnesses are near relatives, they

should have given the names in the police station at 2:00 a.m.

itself when they visited the police station immediately after the

incident.   Though, such submission on behalf of the defence

seems to be attractive at the first instance, the same cannot be

accepted in the facts and circumstances of the case.          The

witnesses, namely, Vikram Singh, Lakshmi Karan and Ramesh

who had come to police station at 2:00 a.m., being the close

relatives of the deceased and injured Devi, are expected to first

give treatment to the injured than to complete the formalities of

lodging the complaint in detail.    It is not in dispute that the

afore-mentioned three witnesses did not stop at the police station

at 2:00 a.m., on the other hand, they hurriedly came on a motor

cycle and informed the police while staying on the motor cycle

itself and went away immediately disclosing that the incident has

taken place. Immediately thereafter, PW30 – Station House

Officer went to the village in a jeep. By the time he reached the

water tank, Vikram Singh, Lakshmi Karan and others were

bringing the wounded Gopal and his wife Devi, who had

sustained grievous injuries, in the tractor; both the injured were
                                 8


shifted from the tractor to a jeep and were taken to the hospital

by PW30. By the time they reached the hospital, it was 3:00 a.m.

on 02.05.1997. After giving first aid to the injured, the written

report as per Exhibit P14 was given at 5:35 a.m. in the hospital.

Thus, virtually, there is no delay on the part of the witnesses who

lodged the first information about the incident. The first

information, Exhibit P14, in our considered opinion, is not hit by

Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, inasmuch as it is

a detailed addendum to the earlier information given at 2:00 a.m.

Exhibit P14 is not inconsistent with the information recorded at

2:00 a.m. in the Rozanama of the police station. As mentioned

supra, the first priority of the witnesses was to save the lives of

the injured. Hence, the Trial Court as well as the High Court is

justified in concluding that there is no delay in lodging the first

information report, Exhibit P14, and that it cannot be discarded

on the ground that it is hit by Section 162 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure.

6.   In the first information, it is clearly mentioned that the

appellant fired on the deceased.     However, the first informant

(PW13), namely Vikram Singh, has deposed that immediately

after hearing the sounds of fire he came to the spot and saw the
                                9


appellant – Prabhu Dayal, Gyan Singh, Shiv Singh, Indal and

Rajveer, and at that point of time the injured Gopal was crying

that Prabhu and Gyan Singh had fired at him. At that point of

time, Prabhu said to Shiv Singh that the wife of Gopal is also

crying and that she should also be fired at. Immediately

thereafter, Shiv Singh fired at Devi while running away. Thus,

there is a slight improvement in the evidence of the informant to

the effect that Gyan Singh and Prabhu together fired on the

deceased Gopal, and Shiv Singh fired on Devi.

7.   PW11, injured Devi, whose evidence is important because

her presence on the spot is not doubted, and who has also

sustained gunshot injuries, has deposed about the incident in a

most natural way that it had happened during night till early

hours of the day. She has deposed that on the previous night,

Gyan Singh and the deceased Gopal had drinks together and

then had dinner; Devi (PW11) was having fever; when she was

sleeping along with her husband, the accused Prabhu, Gyan

Singh, Shiv Singh, Indal and Rajveer came at 1:00 a.m. and they

all were armed with weapons; Gyan Singh had a pistol and an

axe and the others were armed with pistols; at the first instance,

the appellant fired with a pistol on the deceased but no one got
                                10


injured, inasmuch as it was misfired. At that point of time, Gyan

Singh fired a gunshot from a country made pistol which entered

from the back of the deceased and went out of the stomach of the

deceased. Immediately thereafter, the appellant – Prabhu shouted

and told Shiv Singh that Devi should also be killed, and

consequently Shiv Singh fired a gunshot at Devi also.

8.   Though, it appears that the evidence of these witnesses, as

mentioned supra, has improved the case of the prosecution to a

certain extent from the first information, the fact remains that all

the five accused including the appellant were very much present

on the scene of the occurrence. Four of them were having country

made pistols and one was having an axe; the appellant as well as

Gyan Singh fired on the deceased Gopal and Shiv Singh fired at

Devi; all of them collectively came to the house of the deceased

with the common object of committing murder of Gopal. Merely

because the gunshot fired by the appellant did not enter the body

of the deceased or was misfired, the accused – Prabhu cannot be

said to be innocent, and it will not be possible for the witnesses

to meticulously specify the overt acts of each of the accused,

particularly when the incident had taken place at 1:00 a.m. Devi

opened her eyes immediately after hearing the sound of a
                                 11


gunshot, and therefore she will naturally not be in a position to

identify who was the first assailant or the second assailant.

However, the evidence clarifies that the appellant was having a

country made pistol and he also fired, consequent to which Gopal

lost his life.

9. It is settled law that the FIR need not contain an exhaustive

account of the incident. This Court in Om Prakash v. State of

Uttaranchal, (2003) 1 SCC 648, observed as follows:

         “10. …It is axiomatic that the FIR need not contain
      an exhaustive account of the incident. It is to be noted
      that the report was given to the police within
      one-and-a-half hours after the incident. PW 8, a
      known person, had drafted the report that she
      dictated. She had given all essential and relevant
      details of the incident naming the accused as culprit.
      We cannot expect a person injured and overtaken by
      grief to give better particulars. The possibility of PW 1
      inventing a story at that juncture trying to implicate
      the accused is absolutely ruled out. The contents of
      the FIR, broadly and in material particulars, conform
      to the version given by PW 1 in her deposition...”

      A FIR is not an encyclopaedia of the case. This Court in

Surjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993 Supp (1) SCC 208,

observed as follows:

      “8. …In      this     situation     the       aforesaid
      misdescriptions/omissions in the FIR about the
      number of shots fired and the absence of Taljit Singh's
      injuries or the appellant being not described as a
      military man become of lesser importance. First
                               12


     Information Report is not an encyclopaedia of the
     entire case and is even not a substantive piece of
     evidence. It has value, no doubt, but only for the
     purpose of corroborating or contradicting the maker.
     Here the maker was a young woman who had lost her
     husband before her very eyes. The omission or
     misdescription of these details in the FIR which was
     recorded most promptly, within three hours of the
     occurrence, would not tell on the prosecution case or
     the statements of the eyewitnesses with regard to the
     participation of the appellant in the crime. He had
     taken a leading and prominent part in spearheading
     and committing it. For these reasons, we are of the
     view that the High Court was right in convicting the
     appellant on giving cogent reasons to demolish the
     reasoning of the Trial Judge and adding thereto
     reasons of its own.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)

     A witness’ testimony need not be disbelieved only because it

did not find mention in the FIR. In State of M.P. v. Dhirendra

Kumar, (1997) 1 SCC 93, this Court discussed and applied the

principle as follows:

        “11. It was very emphatically contended by Shri
     Gambhir that as in the first information report (FIR)
     there is no mention about the dying declaration, we
     should discard the evidence of PW 1 and PW 2
     regarding dying declaration, because of what has been
     pointed    out   by   this    Court  in Ram    Kumar
     Pandey v. State of M.P. [(1975) 3 SCC 815 : 1975 SCC
     (Cri) 225 : AIR 1975 SC 1026] We do not, however,
     agree with Shri Gambhir, for the reason that what was
     observed in Ram Kumar case [(1975) 3 SCC 815 : 1975
     SCC (Cri) 225 : AIR 1975 SC 1026] after noting the
     broad facts, was that material omission in the FIR
     would cast doubt on the veracity of the prosecution
     case, despite the general law being that statements
     made in the FIR can be used to corroborate or
                                  13


     contradict its maker. This view owes its origin to the
     thinking that if there be material departure in the
     prosecution case as unfolded in the FIR, which would
     be so if material facts not mentioned in the FIR are
     deposed to by prosecution witnesses in the court, the
     same would cause dent to the edifice on which the
     prosecution case is built, as the substratum of the
     prosecution case then gets altered. It is apparent that
     prosecution cannot project two entirely different
     versions of a case. This is entirely different from
     thinking that some omission in the FIR would require
     disbelieving of the witnesses who depose about the fact
     not mentioned in the FIR. Evidence of witnesses has to
     be tested on its own strength or weakness. While doing
     so, if the fact deposed be a material part of prosecution
     case, about which, however, no mention was made in
     the FIR, the same would be borne in mind while
     deciding about the credibility of the evidence given by
     the witness in question.”
                                          (emphasis supplied)

    Recently, in Mukesh v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2017) 6 SCC 1,

this Court observed as follows:

     “57. As far as the argument that the FIR does not
     contain the names of all the accused persons is
     concerned, it has to be kept in mind that it is settled
     law that FIR is not an encyclopaedia of facts and it is
     not expected from a victim to give details of the
     incident either in the FIR or in the brief history given
     to the doctors. FIR is not an encyclopaedia which is
     expected to contain all the details of the prosecution
     case; it may be sufficient if the broad facts of the
     prosecution case alone appear. If any overt act is
     attributed to a particular accused among the
     assailants, it must be given greater assurance. In this
     context, reference to certain authorities would be
     fruitful.”
                                 14
10. It is a common phenomenon that the witnesses are rustic

and can develop a tendency to exaggerate. This, however, does

not mean that the entire testimony of such witnesses is

falsehood. Minor contradictions in the testimony of the witnesses

are not fatal to the case of the prosecution. This Court, in State

of U.P. v. M.K. Anthony, (1985) 1 SCC 505, held that

inconsistencies and discrepancies alone do not merit the

rejection of the evidence as a whole. It stated as follows:

     “10. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the
     approach must be whether the evidence of the witness
     read as a whole appears to have a ring of truth. Once
     that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary
     for the court to scrutinise the evidence more
     particularly keeping in view the deficiencies,
     drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the evidence
     as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is
     against the general tenor of the evidence given by the
     witness and whether the earlier evaluation of the
     evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief.
     Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the
     core of the case, hyper-technical approach by taking
     sentences torn out of context here or there from the
     evidence, attaching importance to some technical error
     committed by the investigating officer not going to the
     root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection
     of the evidence as a whole. If the court before whom
     the witness gives evidence had the opportunity to form
     the opinion about the general tenor of evidence given
     by the witness, the appellate court which had not this
     benefit will have to attach due weight to the
     appreciation of evidence by the trial court and unless
     there are reasons weighty and formidable it would not
     be proper to reject the evidence on the ground of minor
     variations or infirmities in the matter of trivial details.
                                15
     Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ in some
     details unrelated to the main incident because power
     of observation, retention and reproduction differ with
     individuals. Cross-examination is an unequal duel
     between a rustic and refined lawyer. Having examined
     the evidence of this witness, a friend and well-wisher of
     the family carefully giving due weight to the comments
     made by the learned counsel for the respondent and
     the reasons assigned to by the High Court for rejecting
     his evidence simultaneously keeping in view the
     appreciation of the evidence of this witness by the trial
     court, we have no hesitation in holding that the High
     Court was in error in rejecting the testimony of witness
     Nair whose evidence appears to us trustworthy and
     credible.”
                                          (emphasis supplied)

  In State of U.P. v. Anil Singh, 1988 Supp SCC 686, this

Court observed that:

     “17. ...invariably the witnesses add embroidery to
     prosecution story, perhaps for the fear of being
     disbelieved. But that is no ground to throw the case
     overboard, if true, in the main. If there is a ring of
     truth in the main, the case should not be rejected. It is
     the duty of the court to cull out the nuggets of truth
     from the evidence unless there is reason to believe that
     the inconsistencies or falsehood are so glaring as
     utterly to destroy confidence in the witnesses.”

  The Court can separate the truth from the false statements in

the witnesses’ testimony. In Leela Ram v. State of Haryana,

(1999) 9 SCC 525, this Court held as follows:
        “12. It is indeed necessary to note that one hardly
     comes across a witness whose evidence does not
     contain some exaggeration or embellishment —
     sometimes there could even be a deliberate attempt to
     offer embellishment and sometimes in their
                                16


     overanxiety they may give a slightly exaggerated
     account. The court can sift the chaff from the grain
     and find out the truth from the testimony of the
     witnesses. Total repulsion of the evidence is
     unnecessary. The evidence is to be considered from the
     point of view of trustworthiness. If this element is
     satisfied, it ought to inspire confidence in the mind of
     the court to accept the stated evidence though not
     however in the absence of the same.”

     Moreover, it is not necessary that the entire testimony of a

witness be disregarded because one portion of such testimony is

false. This Court observed thus in Gangadhar Behera v. State

of Orissa, (2002) 8 SCC 381:

     “15. To the same effect is the decision in State of
     Punjab v. Jagir Singh [(1974) 3 SCC 277 : 1973 SCC
     (Cri) 886 : AIR 1973 SC 2407] and Lehna v. State of
     Haryana [(2002) 3 SCC 76 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 526] .
     Stress was laid by the accused-appellants on the
     non-acceptance of evidence tendered by some
     witnesses to contend about desirability to throw out
     the entire prosecution case. In essence prayer is to
     apply the principle of “falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus”
     (false in one thing, false in everything). This plea is
     clearly untenable. Even if a major portion of the
     evidence is found to be deficient, in case residue is
     sufficient to prove guilt of an accused, notwithstanding
     acquittal of a number of other co-accused persons, his
     conviction can be maintained. It is the duty of the
     court to separate the grain from the chaff. Where chaff
     can be separated from the grain, it would be open to
     the court to convict an accused notwithstanding the
     fact that evidence has been found to be deficient to
     prove guilt of other accused persons. Falsity of a
     particular material witness or material particular
     would not ruin it from the beginning to end. The
     maxim “falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus” has no
     application in India and the witnesses cannot be
                                 17


     branded as liars. The maxim “falsus in uno, falsus in
     omnibus” has not received general acceptance nor has
     this maxim come to occupy the status of rule of law. It
     is merely a rule of caution. All that it amounts to, is
     that in such cases testimony may be disregarded, and
     not that it must be disregarded.”

11. In our considered opinion, the Trial Court as well as the High

Court is also justified in concluding that the appellant is liable to

be convicted under Section 149 of the IPC, inasmuch as he is one

of the members of the unlawful assembly who had come to the

scene of occurrence with the common object of committing the

murder of Gopal.
 In Masalti v. State of U.P., AIR 1965 SC 202, it was

observed that any member of the unlawful assembly can be

prosecuted for the criminal act; it need not to be proved that he

had committed an overt act:

     “17. ...what has to be proved against a person who is
     alleged to be a member of an unlawful assembly is that
     he was one of the persons constituting the assembly
     and he entertained along with the other members of
     the assembly the common object as defined by Section
     141 IPC. Section 142 provides that however, being
     aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful
     assembly, intentionally joins that assembly, or
     continue in it, is said to be a member of an unlawful
     assembly. In other words, an assembly of five or more
     persons actuated by, and entertaining one or more of
     the common objects specified by the five clauses of
     Section 141, is an unlawful assembly. The crucial
     question to determine in such a case is whether the
     assembly consisted of five or more persons and
                                18


     whether the said persons entertained one or more of
     the common objects as specified in Section 141. While
     determining this question, it becomes relevant to
     consider whether the assembly consisted of some
     persons who were merely passive witnesses and had
     joined the assembly as a matter of idle curiosity
     without intending to entertain the common object of
     the assembly. It is in that context that the
     observations made by this Court in the case
     of Baladin [Baladin v. State of U.P., AIR 1956 SC 181 :
     1956 Cri LJ 345] assume significance; otherwise, in
     law, it would not be correct to say that before a person
     is held to be a member of an unlawful assembly, it
     must be shown that he had committed some illegal
     overt act or had been guilty of some illegal omission in
     pursuance of the common object of the assembly. In
     fact, Section 149 makes it clear that if an offence is
     committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in
     prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or
     such as the members of that assembly knew to be
     likely to be committed in prosecution of that object,
     every person who, at the time of the committing of that
     offence, is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of
     that offence; and that emphatically brings out the
     principle that the punishment prescribed by Section
     149 is in a sense vicarious and does not always
     proceed on the basis that the offence has been actually
     committed by every member of the unlawful assembly.”

This Court in Lalji v. State of U.P., (1989) 1 SCC 437, observed

as follows:

        “9. Section 149 makes every member of an unlawful
     assembly at the time of committing of the offence guilty
     of that offence. Thus this section created a specific and
     distinct offence. In other words, it created a
     constructive or vicarious liability of the members of the
     unlawful assembly for the unlawful acts committed
     pursuant to the common object by any other member
     of that assembly. However, the vicarious liability of the
     members of the unlawful assembly extends only to the
                                  19


       acts done in pursuance of the common object of the
       unlawful assembly, or to such offences as the
       members of the unlawful assembly knew to be likely to
       be committed in prosecution of that object. Once the
       case of a person falls within the ingredients of the
       section the question that he did nothing with his own
       hands would be immaterial. He cannot put forward the
       defence that he did not with his own hands commit the
       offence committed in prosecution of the common object
       of the unlawful assembly or such as the members of
       the assembly knew to be likely to be committed in
       prosecution of that object. Everyone must be taken to
       have intended the probable and natural results of the
       combination of the acts in which he joined. It is not
       necessary that all the persons forming an unlawful
       assembly must do some overt act. When the accused
       persons assembled together, armed with lathis, and
       were parties to the assault on the complainant party,
       the prosecution is not obliged to prove which specific
       overt act was done by which of the accused. This
       section makes a member of the unlawful assembly
       responsible as a principal for the acts of each, and all,
       merely because he is a member of an unlawful
       assembly. While overt act and active participation may
       indicate common intention of the person perpetrating
       the crime, the mere presence in the unlawful assembly
       may fasten vicariously criminal liability under Section
       149. It must be noted that the basis of the constructive
       guilt under Section 149 is mere membership of the
       unlawful assembly, with the requisite common object
       or knowledge.”

       These cases were followed in many subsequent cases,

including Shamshul Kanwar v. State of U.P., (1995) 4 SCC

430.

12.    The reports of the Forensic Science Laboratory as well as

those of the Ballistic Experts have been perused by us.            The
                                20


Forensic Science Laboratory report discloses that the samples

collected from the scene of the offence had bloodstains of human

origin. However, since the bloodstains were disintegrated by the

time the bloodstains were examined by the Forensic Science

Laboratory, the blood group could not be determined. For the

same, the accused cannot be unpunished, more particularly

when the bloodstains were found of human origin.

  In State of Rajasthan v. Teja Ram, (1999) 3 SCC 507, this

Court concluded that even when the origin of the blood cannot be

determined, it does not necessarily prove fatal to the case of the

prosecution. In that case, the murder weapons had been

recovered with blood on them, and the origin of the blood on one

of the weapons could not be determined. Therein, the Court held

as follows:

        “25. Failure of the serologist to detect the origin of
     the blood due to disintegration of the serum in the
     meanwhile does not mean that the blood stuck on the
     axe would not have been human blood at all.
     Sometimes it happens, either because the stain is too
     insufficient or due to haematological changes and
     plasmatic coagulation that a serologist might fail to
     detect the origin of the blood. Will it then mean that
     the blood would be of some other origin? Such
     guesswork that blood on the other axe would have
     been animal blood is unrealistic and far-fetched in the
     broad spectrum of this case. The effort of the criminal
     court should not be to prowl for imaginative doubts.
     Unless the doubt is of a reasonable dimension which a
                                21


     judicially conscientious mind entertains with some
     objectivity, no benefit can be claimed by the accused.
        26. Learned counsel for the accused made an effort
     to sustain the rejection of the abovesaid evidence for
     which he cited the decisions in Prabhu Babaji
     Navle v. State of Bombay [AIR 1956 SC 51 : 1956 Cri
     LJ 147] and Raghav Prapanna Tripathi v. State of
     U.P. [AIR 1963 SC 74 : (1963) 1 Cri LJ 70] In the
     former, Vivian Bose, J. has observed that the chemical
     examiner's duty is to indicate the number of
     bloodstains found by him on each exhibit and the
     extent of each stain unless they are too minute or too
     numerous to be described in detail. It was a case in
     which one circumstance projected by the prosecution
     was just one spot of blood on a dhoti. Their Lordships
     felt that “blood could equally have spurted on the dhoti
     of a wholly innocent person passing through in the
     circumstances described by us earlier in the
     judgment”. In the latter decision, this Court observed
     regarding the certificate of a chemical examiner that
     inasmuch as the bloodstain is not proved to be of
     human origin the circumstance has no evidentiary
     value “in the circumstances” connecting the accused
     with the murder. The further part of the circumstance
     in that case showed that a shirt was seized from a
     drycleaning establishment and the proprietor of the
     said establishment had testified that when the shirt
     was given to him for drycleaning, it was not
     bloodstained.
        27. We are unable to find out from the aforesaid
     decisions any legal ratio that in all cases where there
     was failure of detecting the origin of the blood, the
     circumstance arising from recovery of the weapon
     would stand relegated to disutility. The observations in
     the aforesaid cases were made on the fact situation
     existing therein. They cannot be imported to a case
     where the facts are materially different.”

13. The misfired cartridge, the fired cartridge, and the country

made pistols were subjected to the examination of the Forensic
                                22


Science Laboratory.      It was clearly stated in the Forensic

Laboratory’s Reports that the country made pistol contained in

packet ‘H’ was in working order. However, it has a tendency to

mis-fire the ammunition.     It is also stated that the cartridge

found in the very packet was fireworthy ammunition. The report

of the Ballistic Expert further makes it clear that based on stereo

and comparison microscopic examination, the 12-bore cartridge

case from packet ‘G’ could have been fired from a 12-bore

country made pistol. Hence, it is clear that out of the two pistols

seized, one pistol had got a tendency to mis-fire and the other

had fireworthy ammunition. Thus, the reports of the Forensic

Science Laboratory fully support the case of the prosecution,

inasmuch as it is the evidence of the witnesses including Devi

that Gopal was fired at by Gyan Singh as well as the appellant

herein.      Among the shots fired, one of the gunshots was

mis-fired.    Be that as it may, the fact remains, as mentioned

supra, that all the five members including the appellant were

members of the unlawful assembly which had the common object

of committing the murder of the deceased.          Hence, in our

considered opinion, the trial Court and the High Court are
                                 23


justified in convicting the accused having regard to the evidence

on record.

14.    Accordingly, the appeal stands dismissed and the sentence

of    life   imprisonment   imposed   upon   the   appellant   stands

confirmed.


                                      .……………………………………J.
                                      (L. Nageswara Rao)



                                      …………………………………….J.
                                      (Mohan M. Shantanagoudar)
New Delhi,
Dated: July 04, 2018

