
Supreme Court of India
Ram Ji vs The State Of Punjab on 27 November, 2018Author: ……………………………..J.
                                                      1


                                                                          NON REPORTABLE


                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CRIMINAL APPEAL Nos. 1478­1479 OF 2011

             RAMJI                                                     …   Appellant(s)

                                                VERSUS

             STATE OF PUNJAB                                           …   Respondent(s)


                                        JUDGMENT

          N. V. RAMANA, J. 


                         These   appeals   arise   out   of   common   judgment   and

         order   dated   21st  January,   2011   passed   by   the   High   Court   of

         Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal Nos. 775­

         SB   of   1997   and   101­SB   of   1998,   whereby   the   High   Court   set

         aside   the   judgment   passed   by   the   trial   Court   and   altered   the

         conviction and sentence against the appellant—accused from an

         offence under Section 304 Part II, IPC to that of under Section

         302, IPC.
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2018.11.27


         2.              The   prosecution   case,   in   brief,   is   that   on   21 st  July,
16:30:09 IST
Reason:


         1995 at about 9 p.m. when the complainant Darshan Lal (PW 5)
                                           2

and his mother were sitting in the compound of their house, his

brother Som Raj (deceased) went upstairs. Soon thereafter, their

neighboring  residents Sukhdev Singh (A1), Sandeep Singh (A2),

Ramesh   Singh   (A3)   and   Lali   @   Tarlok   Singh   (A4)   armed   with

deadly   weapons   came   from  the  upstairs dragging  Som  Raj and

beating him with the weapons alleging that he had thrown stones

into   their   house.   The   complainant   and   his   mother   though

requested the accused not to beat the deceased, the accused did

not pay any heed to their request and took away Som Raj to the

flour   mill   of   one   Tara   Singh   and   tore   off   his   clothes.   In   the

commotion, Som Raj managed to escape from their clutches and

ran  into  the  house   of   Bansi Lal in nude form  itself and bolted

from inside. The accused again caught hold of Som Raj and given

severe beatings to him and brought him near the bus stop of the

village. At that point of time, the appellant herein Ramji (A5), who

appeared there in his SPO uniform repeatedly gave kick blows to

Som   Raj   on   his   head,   chest   and   neck.   By   applying   full   force,

Ramji   (A5)   pressed   the   neck   of   Som   Raj   till   he   became

unconscious.   Thereafter,   all   the   accused   lifted   Som   Raj   and

thrown him in front of his house and fled away. The complainant

took him to Civil Hospital, Mukerian where he succumbed to the
                                           3

injuries at about 12.30 a.m. on 22.7.1995.

3.           Upon informing by  the hospital authorities, Inspector

Ram   Prakash   (PW   9)   went   to   the   hospital   and   recorded   the

statement of complainant and registered FIR against the accused.

After   preparing   inquest   report   and   recording   statements   of

witnesses,   the   I.O.   visited   the   spot,   prepared   site   plan.   It   was

followed   by   the   arrest   of   the   accused   and   recovery   of   weapons

used   in   the   offence.   All   the   accused   were   challanned   for   the

offence under Section 302/34, IPC. The case was then committed

to the Court of learned Sessions Judge for trial.

4.           The learned trial Judge, at the end of trial, formed the

opinion that all the accused were guilty of offence under Section

304 read with Section 149, IPC and accordingly convicted them

and sentenced to suffer seven years rigorous imprisonment and

to   pay   a   fine   of   Rs.2,000/­   each,   in   default,   to   further   suffer

rigorous imprisonment for a period of six months.

5.           All the accused persons aggrieved by the judgment of

the   trial   Court   approached   the   High   Court   in   appeal   while   the

complainant   preferred   Criminal   Revision   Petition   and   the   State

has filed separate appeal before the High Court. By the judgment

impugned herein, the High Court while dismissing the appeals of
                                           4

the   accused,   allowed   the   State   appeal   and   disposed   of   the

Criminal Revision filed by the complainant by setting aside the

judgment of the trial Court and altered the conviction of accused

from the offence under Section 304, Part II to the offence under

Section   302,   IPC   and   sentenced   to   suffer   imprisonment   for   life

and to pay a fine of Rs.20,000/­ each, in default to suffer rigorous

imprisonment for one year. Assailing his conviction and sentence,

the appellant (A5) is in appeal before us.

6.           We   have   heard   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant   as

also learned senior counsel appearing for the State.

7.           Learned counsel appearing for the appellant contended

that at the time of offence, the appellant was not armed with any

deadly weapon and his presence was only at the bus stand and

well before that circumstance, the deceased had already received

severe injuries including one on forehead at the hands of other

accused Nos. 1 to 4. There was no intention of the appellant to

kill the deceased but he acted only with a view to teach a lesson

to   the   deceased   to   prevent   him   from   creating   nuisance   by

throwing stones into others houses.The injuries attributed to the

appellant do not find corroboration from the post mortem report

or   medical   legal   report   as   there   was   no   injury   on   the   neck   or
                                           5

chest   of   the   deceased.   There   were   contradictions   in   the

statements of prosecution witnesses and the High Court without

proper application of mind ignored the factum of role played by

the   appellant   and   wrongly   convicted   him   along   with   other

accused   which   approach   of   the   High   Court   is   highly   perverse.

Learned counsel finally submitted that particularly when the trial

Court has convicted the appellant under Section 304, Part II only

on a plausible finding, the High Court ought not have altered the

conviction to Section 302, IPC and pleaded for intervention of this

Court.

8.           The case put forth by learned senior counsel appearing

for the State is to the effect that the role played by the appellant—

accused in the offence cannot be taken simply as has been done

in   a   sudden   provocation.   It   is   not   a   case   of   inflicting   normal

injuries   or   teaching   a   lesson   to   the   victim   so   as   not   to   throw

stones   into   other’s   house.   The   accused   chased   the   victim   and

repeatedly  assaulted   mercilessly which exhibits his intention to

cause   death   of   Som   Raj.   The   entire   crime   executed   by   the

accused was witnessed by bystanders and their statements were

duly corroborated with the medical evidence.The accused, in spite

of   knowing   fully   that   the   deceased   was   not   mentally   stable,
                                       6

beaten him cruelly. The extent of bodily injuries suffered by the

deceased and the way in which the accused gave beatings to the

deceased at the bus stop leads to the definite inference without

any iota of doubt that the accused acted clearly knowing the fact

that such bodily injuries shall cause death of the deceased.

9.          Having heard learned counsel on either side, we have

carefully gone through the material on record.

10.         It is abundantly clear from the record and there is also

no denial to the factum that the crime leading to the death of a

helpless young man of 22 years age, namely, Som Raj had taken

place in four stages first at the hands of accused Nos. 1 to 4 at

the house of the deceased, secondly at the floor mill of one Tara

Singh,   thirdly   in   the   house   of   Bimla   Devi   (PW6)   where   the

deceased hid for a while and finally at the bus stand where the

appellant   herein   joined   the   other   accused   and   actively

participated in the commission of crime.

11.         To analyze the guilt of the appellant in the offence, it is

unfortunate and degrading of honor that the appellant—accused

No. 5, despite being in the uniform of SPO and expected to protect

the law and order, took the law into his own hands and exhibited

unruly behavior in a public place (bus stop) and gave kick blows
                                           7

with his shoes on the head, chest and neck of a desperate man,

who   was   by   then   already   beaten   black   and   blue   by   the   other

accused. Apart from this, the accused—appellant had also put his

weight over Som Raj (deceased) and compressed his neck with full

force leading to unconscious stage of Som Raj.

12.          Darshan Lal—PW5, the complainant and author of FIR

in clear terms deposed that the appellant—accused appeared at

the bus stop in uniform and gave kick blows to the deceased with

his shoes when the deceased was lying on the ground. The blows

given   by   the   accused—appellant   hit   the   head   of   the   deceased,

arms and other parts of the body. Later, the accused had put his

weight on the chest and neck of Som Raj (deceased), as a result of

which Som Raj became unconscious. Then all the accused lifted

the   body   of   Som   Raj   and  threw   it  in   front   of   the  house  of   his

brother and ran away from there.

13.          Besides   the   testimony   of   the   complainant   (PW5),   the

evidence led by Asha Devi (PW7) who was another eyewitness to

the   incident,   clearly   demonstrates   and   proves   the   guilt   of   the

appellant.   Further,   the   evidence   of   Bimla   Devi   (PW6)   makes   it

clear   that   the   deceased   entered   into   her   house   in   injured   and

naked condition and bolted the room from inside and only when
                                         8

PW4—Panchayat   Member,   reached   there   and   persuaded   the

victim,   he   opened   the   door.   We   find   from   the   record   that   the

evidences   of   prosecution   witnesses   particularly   eyewitnesses

corroborate with each other to establish the chain of events and

the guilt of the accused. There is also nothing to perceive any ill­

motive   on   the   part   of   complainant   to   falsely   implicate   the

accused.

14.          The   medical   evidence   of   Dr.   V.P.   Singh   (PW2)   who

examined the deceased in the Civil Hospital at 11.15 pm on the

date of incident and the evidence of Dr. Jagdish Singh (PW3) who

conducted postmortem on the body of Som Raj, also supports the

prosecution case. The medical evidence reveals that the deceased

had suffered as many as 15 injuries on his person which were

caused   by   blunt   objects.   The   Doctor’s   opinion   clearly   indicates

that the deceased was unconscious when brought to the hospital

and   the   injuries   sustained   on   his   person   could   be   possible   by

dragging him on hard surface. The recoveries of towel, pant and

torn   shirt   near   the   bus   stand   prove   the   incriminating

circumstance against the appellant.

15.          Looking at the material on record, it can safely be said

without any doubt that the entire occurrence had taken place not
                                             9

    at the spur of the moment. It can also be said that the appellant,

    stated to be holding the post of SPO, was not ignorant but well

    aware of the fact that the death of Som Raj was likely to ensue,

    for   the   beatings   he   received.   After   careful   consideration   of   the

    facts   of   the   case,   we   are   of   the   considered   opinion   that   the

    circumstances   concluding   the   guilt   of   the   appellant   are   clearly

    established.   In   other   words,   from   the   established   facts   and

    circumstances, the only inference that could be drawn is that the

    High Court has not committed any error of law in convicting and

    sentencing   the   accused   for   an   offence   under   Section   302,   IPC.

    Therefore,   we   are   in   agreement   with   the   judgment   of   the   High

    Court and do not find any merit in these appeals.

    16.          The appeals are accordingly dismissed.



                                                      ……………………………..J.
                                                           (N. V. Ramana)


                                                    ……………………………..J.
                                                 (Mohan M. Shantanagoudar)



                                                      ……………………………..J.
                                                             (M.R. Shah)
                                                                        
NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 27, 2018
10

