
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Gangabishan @ Vishnu on 27 July, 2018Author: J S.Abdul Nazeer
                                                        1


                                                     

                                                                              REPORTABLE



                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2393 OF 2009
                                                         




          STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                    …APPELLANT 

                                                    VERSUS

          GANGABISHAN @ VISHNU & ORS.                                   …RESPONDENTS
                                           J U D G M E N T




          S.ABDUL NAZEER, J.


          1.             This appeal by special leave is preferred against the judgment
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND

          dated 06.12.2006 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at
Date: 2018.07.27
16:39:13 IST
Reason:


          Indore in Criminal Appeal No. 1370 of 2001 arising out of Sessions
                                         2


Trial   No.   197   of   2000   passed   by   the   Additional   Sessions   Judge,

Shajapur, Madhya Pradesh, dated 4th December, 2001, wherein the

High Court has set aside the judgment and order of conviction of

the respondents under Sections 302/149 and 325/129 IPC against

all the respondents except respondent No.1.   The respondent No.1

has been held guilty under Section 304 (Part­I) IPC and sentenced

to undergo ten years R.I. and fine of Rs.25,000/­ and in default  to

undergo three years further R.I. 

2.    Briefly stated the prosecution case is that Dinesh (PW­1) and

his   brother   Rajesh   (deceased)   were   in   their   field   situated   in   the

forest, for the purpose of watching the crops.  At that juncture, the

accused   persons   reached   over   there   having   lathis   and   swords   in

their   possession   except   accused   No.1   Gangabishan   alias   Vishnu,

who  was   having   12   bore   gun and  started assaulting   Rajesh  with

their respective weapons.   Accused No.1 caused gunshot injury on

the left thigh of the deceased by 12 bore gun because of which he

fell down on the ground.  Dinesh raised cry.  However, no one came

to their rescue.  Somehow he managed to run away from the scene

of   occurrence   and   disclosed   about   the   incident   to   Sidhnath,
                                       3


Ramsingh, Gopal Khati and Laxminarayan Khati.  They all brought

the deceased Rajesh on a cot from the field and thereafter took him

in a mini truck.   The deceased Rajesh became unconscious.   The

accused persons were also causing damage to the standing crops of

PW­1 by grazing their cattle and the incident occurred because of

the objection being raised by PW­1 in the morning of the same day.

3.    The police after registration of the crime and recording of the

FIR (Ex. P/1) prepared the inquest.   Post mortem examination of

the deceased was conducted by Dr. Kapil Sahay (PW­7).   The post

mortem report is Ex. P/10.  Dr. Vijaysingh, PW­8 initially examined

the   deceased   Rajesh,   the   same   day   and   also   PW­1.     Their   MLC

reports are Exhibits P/11 and P/12 respectively.  Dying declaration

(Ex.   P/4)   of   the   deceased   was   also   recorded   by   Tehsildar   Shri

Purshottam   Sharma   (PW­2).     After   investigation,   accused   were

charge   sheeted   for   the   commission   of   offences   under   Sections

302/149, 325/149, 147, 148 and 440 of the IPC.     Accused No.1

was also charge sheeted under Section 30 of the Arms Act.

4.    The trial court after undertaking a full­fledged trial found the

accused guilty under Sections 302/149 of IPC and sentenced them
                                        4


to undergo life imprisonment and Rs.20,000/­ fine and on default

additional   three   years   of   R.I.,   two   years   of   imprisonment   under

Section 325/149 of IPC and fine of Rs.2000/­ and on default one

year additional R.I, three years of R.I under Section 440 of IPC and

fine   of   Rs.5000/­   and   on   default   six   months   additional   R.I   and

except accused No.1, rest of the accused were sentenced to one year

of R.I under Section 147 IPC and fine of Rs.500/­ and on default

two months of additional R.I. Accused No. 1 was further convicted

under Section 148 IPC   and Section 30 of the Arms Act and was

sentenced to suffer two years of R.I and fine of Rs.1000/­ and on

default four months of additional R.I. and four months of R.I and a

fine   of   Rs.1000/­   and   on   default   four   months   of   additional   R.I

respectively. 

5.    Feeling aggrieved, the accused approached the High Court by

filing an appeal.  By the impugned judgment herein, the High Court

set aside the judgment and order of conviction of accused Nos.2 to

9 (respondent Nos.2 to 9).  However, respondent No.1 has been held

guilty under Section 304 (Part I) IPC and sentenced to undergo ten
                                         5


years R.I and fine of Rs.20,000/­ and in default to undergo three

years R.I in addition.

6.    We   have   heard   learned   counsel   for   the   parties.     Learned

counsel for the appellant submits that the High Court has failed to

appreciate the findings of the trial court that the respondents who

were nine in number and were armed with sharp edged weapons,

lathis and one of them had a 12 bore gun had come to the spot of

the incident with premeditation and common intention to assault

and kill the complainant and his brother and in this transaction of

violence the brother of complainant succumbed to gunshot injury

inflicted   by   accused   No.1.     Therefore,   the   court   below   was   not

justified in setting aside the sentence and conviction of respondent

Nos. 2 to 9.   It is further submitted that the High Court was also

not   justified   in   setting   aside   the   conviction   and   sentence   of   the

respondent   No.1   under   Section   302   IPC   and   imposing   lesser

punishment of ten years of R.I under Section 304 (Part I) IPC.  On

the other hand, learned advocate appearing for the respondents has

sought to justify the impugned judgment of the High Court.
                                          6
7.    We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned

counsel appearing for the appellant­State and the learned advocate

appearing   for   the   respondents.     It   is   clear   from   the   evidence   on

record that the deceased Rajesh suffered only one injury on interior

aspect   of   thigh,   which   was   an   exit   wound.     Injury   No.   2   was   a

gunshot   entry   wound   on   the   back   side   of   left   thigh.     There   was

haematoma  and   fracture   of   thigh   bone.     Dr.   Vijaysingh   (PW­8)

examined the deceased and issued MLC report (Ex. P/11).  He also

examined  PW­1  Dinesh,  brother  of the deceased and found three

contusions and one lacerated wound.  In the opinion of the doctor

all the injuries were simple in nature except injury No.1 on the left

forearm.  PW­1, Dinesh is an eye­witness.  PW­2 recorded the dying

declaration of the deceased Rajesh (Ex. P/4).   It is evident from the

statement   of   PW­1,   that   he   has   given   a   general   and   omnibus

statement about the assault upon the deceased and himself by the

accused.  Accused No.1 was having a twelve bore gun and the other

accused   were   armed   with   lathis.     However,   the   doctor's   report

shows that deceased had sustained only one injury on the left thigh

caused by accused No.1.   Neither the deceased nor PW­1 had any
                                           7


injury caused by sharp edged weapon.   PW­1 suffered fracture of

left ulna bone and three simple injuries caused by hard and blunt

object but he has not pointed out as to which accused did cause

injuries to him.  His general statement regarding participation of all

the   accused   with   different   weapons   and   causing   injury   to   the

deceased as well as to himself is not duly corroborated by medical

evidence of PW­8 and autopsy surgeon PW­7, Dr. Kapil Sahay.  The

version   of   PW­1   is   belied   by   medical   evidence.     In   the   dying

declaration   the   deceased   has   deposed   that   except  Vishnu   Prasad

(accused No.1) he was not knowing as to who had assaulted him

but in the same breath he has stated that he was assaulted by lathi

by   Chaturbhuj   (accused   No.3)   and   Laxmichand   (accused   No.2).

However, his version is not corroborated by medical evidence as he

did   not   suffer   even   a   single   scratch   on   his   body   except   fire   arm

injury.  

8.    It   is   necessary   to   notice   here   that   the   dispute   between   the

parties arose on account of entrance of cattle and causing damage

to the crops, as well as use of way in which deceased and PW­1

sustained   injuries.     Taking   overall   view   of   the   matter,   the   High
                                        8


Court has acquitted accused Nos.2 to 9.  Insofar as accused No.1 is

concerned,   his   overt   act   is   fully   corroborated   by   the   medical

evidence, as well as the dying declaration (Ex.P/4).  Though, PW­1

sustained injuries caused by hard and blunt object but according to

his   version,   he   was   assaulted   by   all   the   appellants,   whereas   he

sustained only four injuries and no injury was sustained by him by

fire arm or sharp edged weapon.  Therefore, it would be difficult to

fix   the   liability   for   causing   injuries   to   this   witness   by   the

respondents.  

9.    Insofar   as   the   deceased   Rajesh   is   concerned,   he   suffered

gunshot injury and entry wound was on back of his left thigh.  This

shows that the shot was fired from his back side.   There was no

blackening, charring on exit wound.  Blackening and charring were

present on entry wound  which shows that the gunshot was fired

within the range of 6 to 8 feet.  In view of the medical evidence, it

would be easy to infer that if accused No.1 was having intention to

commit murder of the deceased and used fire arm for that purpose,

the injury could have been caused on upper limb, above waist of the

deceased   but   the   part   chosen   for   causing   injury   was   the   back
                                          9


portion of left thigh.  Thus, though the accused No.1 was not having

intention   to   commit   murder   of   the   deceased   but   the   act   was   to

cause bodily injury which was likely to cause death.  Therefore, the

High Court found that he would be responsible for commission of

culpable   homicide   not   amounting   to   murder   punishable   under

Section   304   (Part   I)   of   IPC.     The   High   Court   after   scanning   the

entire evidence also held that the respondents were not having an

intention to commit murder of the deceased Rajesh.  We do not find

any infirmity in the judgment of the High Court.

10. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.


                                              …………………………………….J.
                                              (ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE)




                                                         
                                              …………………………………….J.
                                              (S. ABDUL NAZEER)

New Delhi;
July 27, 2018.

