
Supreme Court of India
Nevada Properties Pvt. Ltd. ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 24 September, 2019Author: Sanjiv Khanna
Bench: S Khanna, D Gupta, R Gogoi
                                                                                             REPORTABLE


                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                   1481         OF 2019
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 1513 OF 2011)


               NEVADA PROPERTIES PRIVATE LIMITED
               THROUGH ITS DIRECTORS                                                …..      APPELLANT(S)

                                                    VERSUS

               STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ANOTHER                                     …..    RESPONDENT(S)


                                                                 WITH


                                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1122 OF 2011


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.                1482-1485           OF 2019
                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NOS.891-894 OF 2011)


                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                   1486         OF 2019
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 4360 OF 2011)



                                                                  AND


                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                  1487               OF 2019
Signature Not Verified
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 3958 OF 2013)
Digitally signed by
MEENAKSHI KOHLI
Date: 2019.09.24
14:30:02 IST
Reason:




                         Criminal Appeal arising out of
                         SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                          Page 1 of 39
                                 JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.

               Leave granted in Special Leave Petitions.


2.     A Division Bench of this Court (Jagdish Singh Khehar and Arun

       Mishra, JJ.) vide order dated November 18, 2014, noticing that the

       issues that arise have far reaching and serious consequences,

       had referred the aforesaid appeals to be heard by a Bench of at

       least three Judges. After obtaining appropriate directions from

       Hon’ble the Chief Justice, these appeals have been listed before

       the present Bench.


3.     For the sake of convenience, we have treated the Criminal Appeal

       arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No. 1513 of 2011,

       filed by Nevada Properties Pvt. Ltd., as the lead case.         This

       appeal arises from judgment of the High Court of Judicature at

       Bombay dated November 29, 2010 wherein the majority judgment

       has held that the expression ‘any property’ used in sub-section (1)

       of Section 102 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

       (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Code’) does not include immovable

       property and, consequently, a police officer investigating a criminal

       case cannot take custody of and seize any immovable property
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                 Page 2 of 39
       which may be found under circumstances which create suspicion

       of the commission of any offence.            According to the majority

       judgment, earlier decision of the Division Bench of the same High

       Court in Kishore Shankar Signapurkar v. State of Maharashtra

       and Others1 lays down the correct ratio and the contrary view

       expressed in M/s. Bombay Science and Research Education

       Institute v. The State of Maharashtra and Others 2 does not lay

       down the correct law. The minority view holds that the police

       officer has power to seize any property, whether movable or

       immovable, under Section 102 of the Code and the decision of the

       Division Bench in M/s. Bombay Science and Research

       Education Institute (supra) lays down the correct law and the

       ratio in Kishore Shankar Signapurkar (supra) is not good law.


4.     In order to decide the present controversy which is primarily legal,

       we would begin by reproducing Section 102 of the Code, which

       reads as under:

                 “S.102 Power of police officer to seize certain
                 property.

                 (1) Any police officer may seize any property which
                 may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or
                 which may be found under circumstances which create
                 suspicion of the commission of any offence.

1
 1997 Vol.IV L J 793
2
 2008 All M.R.(Crl.) 2133
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                   Page 3 of 39
                 (2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the office in
                 charge of a police station, shall forthwith report the
                 seizure to that officer.

                 (3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1)
                 shall forthwith report the seizure to the Magistrate
                 having jurisdiction and where the property seized is
                 such that it cannot be conveniently transported to the
                 Court, or where there is difficulty in securing proper
                 accommodation for the custody of such property, or
                 where the continued retention of the property in police
                 custody may not be considered necessary for the
                 purpose of investigation, he may give custody thereof
                 to any person on his executing a bond undertaking to
                 produce the property before the Court as and when
                 required and to give effect to the further orders of the
                 Court as to the disposal of the same.

                 Provided that where the property seized under sub-
                 section (1) is subject to speedy and natural decay and
                 if the person entitled to the possession of such property
                 is unknown or absent and the value of such property is
                 less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold
                 by auction under the orders of the Superintendent of
                 Police and the provisions of Sections 457 and 458
                 shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net
                 proceeds of such sale.”


5.     Section 102 of the Code is part of a fasciculus of provisions under

       Chapter VII – ‘Process to Compel the Production of Things’. Part

       A of the said Chapter deals with Summons to produce; Part B

       deals with Search-warrants; Part C deals with General provisions

       relating to searches; and Part D, of which Section 102 is the first

       Section, falls under the part described as Miscellaneous. The

       marginal note of Section 102 states – “Power of police officer to

       seize certain property”. Sub-section (3) of Section 102 was

Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                      Page 4 of 39
       inserted by Act No. 45 of 1978. It was later amended by section

       13(a) of the Cr.P.C. Amendment Act, 2005 (Act 25 of 2005) by

       adding the expression “or where there is difficulty in securing

       proper accommodation for the custody of such property, or where

       the continued retention of the property in police custody may not

       be considered necessary for the purpose of investigation.” Proviso

       to sub-section (3) was also added by the Amendment Act, 2005.

       Sub-section (3) to Section 102 is intended to give greater

       discretion to the police officer for releasing seized property, where

       there is a difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the

       custody of the property or where the continued retention of the

       property in police custody is not considered necessary for the

       purpose of investigation. Proviso states that if the seized property

       is of perishable nature and the value of such property is less than

       five hundred rupees and if the person entitled to the possession of

       such property is unknown or absent, the police is empowered to

       sell such property by auction under orders of the Superintendent

       of Police.


6.     The minority judgment and the contention of the appellant is

       substantially predicated on the words ‘any property’ in sub-section

       (1) of Section 102. Reference was made to the decision of this

Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                 Page 5 of 39
       Court in State of Maharashtra v. Tapas D. Neogy3. To avoid

       prolixity, we are not referring to the contentions raised by both

       sides as the same would be referred to and examined during the

       course of our reasoning. At the outset, we must begin by referring

       to the decision in Tapas D. Neogy (supra), a case arising from

       three First Information Reports under Sections 120-B, 467, 468,

       471 and 420 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred

       to as the ‘IPC’) and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the

       Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The question was whether a

       bank account of an accused or any relation of the accused was

       ‘property’ within the meaning of Section 102 of the Code and if so,

       whether the Investigating Officer has the power to seize the bank

       account or issue a prohibitory order restraining operation of the

       bank account. Reference was made to several judgments of the

       High Courts, some of which would be discussed later, to hold as

       under:

                 “12. Having considered the divergent views taken by
                 different High Courts with regard to the power of
                 seizure under Section 102 of the Code of Criminal
                 Procedure, and whether the bank account can be held
                 to be “property” within the meaning of the said Section
                 102(1), we see no justification to give any narrow
                 interpretation to the provisions of the Criminal
                 Procedure Code. It is well known that corruption in
                 public offices has become so rampant that it has
                 become difficult to cope up with the same. Then again
                 the time consumed by the courts in concluding the
3
 (1999) 7 SCC 685
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                    Page 6 of 39
                 trials is another factor which should be borne in mind in
                 interpreting the provisions of Section 102 of the
                 Criminal Procedure Code and the underlying object
                 engrafted therein, inasmuch as if there can be no order
                 of seizure of the bank account of the accused then the
                 entire money deposited in a bank which is ultimately
                 held in the trial to be the outcome of the illegal
                 gratification, could be withdrawn by the accused and
                 the courts would be powerless to get the said money
                 which has any direct link with the commission of the
                 offence committed by the accused as a public officer.
                 We are, therefore, persuaded to take the view that the
                 bank account of the accused or any of his relations is
                 “property” within the meaning of Section 102 of the
                 Criminal Procedure Code and a police officer in course
                 of investigation can seize or prohibit the operation of
                 the said account if such assets have direct links with
                 the commission of the offence for which the police
                 officer is investigating into. The contrary view
                 expressed by the Karnataka, Gauhati and Allahabad
                 High Courts, does not represent the correct law. It may
                 also be seen that under the Prevention of Corruption
                 Act, 1988, in the matter of imposition of fine under sub-
                 section (2) of Section 13, the legislatures have
                 provided that the courts in fixing the amount of fine
                 shall take into consideration the amount or the value of
                 the property which the accused person has obtained by
                 committing the offence or where the conviction is for an
                 offence referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of
                 Section 13, the pecuniary resources or property for
                 which the accused person is unable to account
                 satisfactorily. The interpretation given by us in respect
                 of the power of seizure under Section 102 of the
                 Criminal Procedure Code is in accordance with the
                 intention of the legislature engrafted in Section 16 of
                 the Prevention of Corruption Act referred to above. In
                 the aforesaid premises, we have no hesitation to come
                 to the conclusion that the High Court of Bombay
                 committed error in holding that the police officer could
                 not have seized the bank account or could not have
                 issued any direction to the bank officer, prohibiting the
                 account of the accused from being operated upon.
                 Though we have laid down the law, but so far as the
                 present case is concerned, the order impugned has
                 already been given effect to and the accused has been

Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                      Page 7 of 39
                 operating his account, and so, we do not interfere with
                 the same.”


7.     Money, as per clause (7) of Section 2 of the Sales of Goods Act,

       1930, is neither goods nor movable property, albeit Section 22 of

       the IPC defines the term ‘movable property’ to include corporeal

       property of every description, except land and things attached to

       the earth or permanently fastened to anything which is attached to

       the earth. The expression ‘movable property’ has not been

       specifically defined in the Code. In terms of Section 2(y) of the

       Code, words and meanings defined in the IPC would equally be

       applicable to the Code. Money, therefore, would be property for

       the purposes of the Code. Money is not an immovable property.


8.     Decision of this Court in Tapas D. Neogy (supra) was in respect

       of the bank accounts and it did not examine and answer the

       question whether the expression ‘any property’ would include

       immovable property. This question was, however, noticed in

       paragraph 6 in Tapas D. Neogy (supra), which had made

       reference to a decision of the Delhi High Court in Ms. Swaran

       Sabharwal v. Commissioner of Police4 in which it was held that

       Section 102 requires that the seized property by itself should lead

       to the suspicion that some offence has been committed. In other
4
 1988 CriLJ 241 (Del) (DB)
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                     Page 8 of 39
          words, the discovery of the offence should be a sequel to the

          discovery of that property and not the other way around.

          Reference in this regard can also be made to Jagdish Chander

          and Others v. State and Others5, wherein the petitioner had

          challenged the seizure action of the police on the ground that the

          word ‘seizure’ appearing in Section 102 of the Code would imply

          actual taking of possession and, therefore, would not include

          immovable property. This contention was not answered and left

          open as the Delhi High Court came to the conclusion that the

          seizure order therein under Section 102 of the Code was not in

          accordance with the statutory requirement as the property should

          be discovered under circumstances which create a suspicion of

          the commission of an offence, that is, the police officer should

          come across certain property in circumstances which create in his

          mind a suspicion that an offence has been committed. Section

          102, it was held, would not be attracted where the property has

          not been traced or discovered which leads to a suspicion of an

          offence having been committed. Discovery of property should

          precede the detection of crime. This ratio was subsequently

          followed in P.K. Parmar and Others v. Union of India and

          Another6 in which the Delhi High Court had reiterated that unless
5
    40 (199) DLT 233
6
 1992 CriLJ 2499 (Del)
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                  Page 9 of 39
       discovery of the property leads to a suspicion of an offence having

       been committed, Section 102 of the Code cannot be invoked for

       seizing such properties. The Delhi High Court examined the

       question; whether the discovery of the bank accounts had

       preceded the suspicion of the offences having been committed

       and held that there were good reasons, in view of the attending

       circumstances, which had led Central Bureau of Investigation

       (hereinafter referred to as the ‘CBI’) to be suspicious of an offence

       having been committed in relation to such accounts. The accounts

       were found either in the name of non-existent persons or in bogus

       names and all such accounts were allegedly being maintained by

       the principal accused. There was sufficient cause for the CBI to

       set the criminal law into motion. In this case, the allegation was

       that subsidies were obtained illegally and without entitlement from

       the Government of India, and the amounts so received were

       deposited in the bank accounts that had prima facie linked the

       accused with various offences with which they were charged. The

       cause of action, therefore, for seizing the bank accounts arose

       when a suspicion was created relating to the multiple and spurious

       handling of bank accounts.




Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 10 of 39
9.     Tapas D. Neogy (supra) had also referred to the judgment of a

       Single Judge of the Madras High Court in Bharat Overseas Bank

       v. Minu Publication7, which had made reference to Sections 451,

       452, 453, 456 and 457 of the Code to observe that these

       provisions seek to reimburse or compensate victims of crime and

       bring about restoration of the property or its restitution. The

       provision empowering seizure was necessary to preserve the

       property for the purpose of enabling the Criminal Court to pass

       suitable orders under the aforesaid provisions at the conclusion of

       the trial. The judgment also refers to restoration of immovable

       property under certain circumstances dealt with under Section 456

       of the Code.


10.    The reason why we have referred to the two decisions in P.K.

       Parmar (supra) and Bharat Overseas Bank (supra) is to notice

       the wide range of issues and contentions with reference to the

       term ‘property’ that could arise for consideration while interpreting

       the power of the police officer to effect seizure under Section 102

       of the Code, albeit this Court did not deal with and express an

       opinion on several issues in Tapas D. Neogy (supra) and the

       judgment was confined and limited to the question; whether bank

       accounts would fall within the category of ‘any property’. Holding
7
 1988 MLW (Cri) 106
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 11 of 39
       that the bank accounts would fall under the expression ‘any

       property’ under Section 102 of the Code, it was observed that

       there was no justification or reason to give a narrow interpretation

       to the words to exclude bank accounts, elucidating that corruption

       in public offices has become rampant and this aspect has to be

       borne in mind while interpreting the provisions of Section 102 of

       the Code and the underlying object engrafted in the provision.


11.    It follows from the aforesaid discussion that the decision in Tapas

       D. Neogy (supra) did not go into and decide the issue; whether

       immovable property would fall under the expression ‘any property’

       under Section 102 of the Code. We say so by applying the

       inversion test as referred to in State of Gujarat and Others v.

       Utility Users’ Welfare Association and Others 8, which states

       that the Court must first carefully frame the supposed proposition

       of law and then insert in the proposition a word reversing its

       meaning to get the answer whether or not a decision is a

       precedent for that proposition. If the answer is in the affirmative,

       the case is not a precedent for that proposition. If the answer is in

       the negative, the case is a precedent for the original proposition

       and possibly for other propositions also. This is one of the tests

       applied to decide what can be regarded and treated as ratio
8
 (2018) 6 SCC 21
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 12 of 39
         decidendi of a decision. Reference in this regard can also be

         made to the decisions of this Court in U.P. State Electricity

         Board v. Pooran Chandra Pandey and Others 9, Commissioner

         of Income Tax v. Sun Engineering Works (P) Ltd.10 and other

         cases which hold that a decision is only an authority for what it

         actually decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio.

         Not every observation found therein nor what logically flows from

         those observations is the ratio decidendi. Judgment in question

         has to be read as a whole and the observations have to be

         considered in light of the instances which were before the Court.

         This is the way to ascertain the true principles laid down by a

         decision. Ratio decidendi cannot be decided by picking out words

         or sentences averse to the context under question from the

         judgment. It is, therefore, clear to us that Tapas D. Neogy (supra)

         did not decide the issue in question; whether or not an immovable

         property will fall within the expression ‘any property’ in Section 102

         of the Code. We will have to, therefore, examine the issue and

         answer the same.


12.      This Court in R.K. Dalmia etc. v. Delhi Administration11 had

         interpreted the word ‘property’ in Section 405 and other sections
9
    (2007) 11 SCC 92
10
     (1992) 4 SCC 363
11
  AIR 1962 SC 1821
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                   Page 13 of 39
       of the IPC to opine that there was no good reason to restrict the

       meaning of the word ‘property’ to movable property when the word

       was used without any qualification in Section 405 or in other

       sections of the IPC. At the same time, this Court had cautioned

       that whether an offence defined in a particular section of the IPC

       can be committed in respect of any particular kind of property, will

       depend not on the interpretation of the word ‘property’ but on the

       fact that whether that particular kind of property can be subject to

       acts covered by that section. In that sense, it can be said that the

       word ‘property’ in a particular section covers only that type of

       property in respect of which the offence contemplated in that

       section can be committed. This, we would observe, is the central

       and core principle which would have to be applied when we

       interpret the expression ‘any property’ used in Section 102 of the

       Code, which as noticed above and elucidated below is a power

       conferred upon the police officer and relates to the stage of

       investigation and collection of evidence to be produced in the

       Court during trial.


13.    Before we proceed further, we would like to refer to the Criminal

       Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944 (No. XXXVIII of 1944) which

       was promulgated in exercise of powers conferred under Section

Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 14 of 39
       72 of the Ninth Schedule of the Government of India Act, 1935 to

       prevent disposal or concealment of property procured by means of

       offences specified in its Schedule, which include offences

       punishable under Sections 406, 408, 409, 411 and 414 of the IPC

       in respect of Government property, property of local authority or a

       Corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State

       Act, etc., and an offence punishable under the Prevention of

       Corruption Act, 1988, an insertion made by the Prevention of

       Corruption Act, 1988. It sets out the procedure when the Central/

       State Government has a reason to believe that a person has

       committed any scheduled offence, whether or not the Court has

       taken cognisance of the said offence, by attachment of money or

       other property which the Central/State Government believes that

       the person has procured by means of the scheduled offence, and

       if such money or property cannot for any reason be attached, any

       other property of the said person of value as nearly as may be

       equivalent to that of the aforesaid money or property. This

       enactment mandates application of provisions of Order XXVII of

       the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 with a provision for filing an

       application before the District Judge who is entitled to pass an ad

       interim attachment order after following the prescribed procedure

       including      examination       and     investigation   of   objections   to
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                        Page 15 of 39
       attachment of the property. The District Judge can pass an order

       either making the interim attachment absolute or varying it by

       releasing the property or portion thereof or withdrawing the order

       on satisfaction of certain conditions. Other sections contained in

       the Ordinance provide for attachment of property of mala fide

       transferees, execution of orders of attachment, security in lieu of

       attachment, administration of attached property, duration of

       attachment, appeals, power of Criminal Court to evaluate property

       procured by scheduled offences and disposal of attached property

       upon termination of criminal proceedings. Section 14 bars legal

       proceedings in other Courts in respect of the property attached

       under the Ordinance. The Ordinance is a permanent Ordinance

       which was promulgated during the Second World War. It was

       adopted by the Presidential Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950

       issued under the powers conferred by clause (2) of Article 372 of

       the Constitution, thus, making it effective in the territory of India

       and, therefore, continues to remain in force.


14.    Similarly, there are provisions in the form of Sections 145, 146,

       165 amongst others in the Code which specifically relate to

       immovable properties. Chapter VIIA – ‘Reciprocal Arrangements

       for Assistance in Certain Matters and Procedure for Attachment

Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 16 of 39
       and Forfeiture of Property’ specifically includes immovable

       properties under the expression ‘property’ for the purpose of the

       said Chapter unless the context otherwise requires. Similarly, we

       have specific provisions relating to and dealing with immovable

       property under the Narcotics, Drugs and Psychotropic Substances

       Act, 1985.


15.    We would now refer to Chapter XXXIV of the Code, which has the

       heading ‘Disposal of Property’ and consists of Sections 451 to

       459. We would like to reproduce Sections 451, 452, 453, 454,

       456 and 457 of the Code, which read as under:

                 “451. Order for custody and disposal of property
                 pending trial in certain cases.— When any property
                 is produced before any Criminal Court during any
                 inquiry or trial, the Court may make such order as it
                 thinks fit for the proper custody of such property
                 pending the conclusion of the inquiry or trial, and, if the
                 property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if it
                 is otherwise expedient so to do, the Court may, after
                 recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order it
                 to be sold or otherwise disposed of.

                 Explanation.– For the purposes of this section,
                 "property" includes –

                 (a) property of any kind or document which is produced
                 before the Court or which is in its custody,

                 (b) any property regarding which an offence appears to
                 have been committed or which appears to have been
                 used for the commission of any offence.

                 452.Order for disposal of property at conclusion of
                 trial.-

Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                       Page 17 of 39
                 (1) When an inquiry or trial in any Criminal Court is
                 concluded, the Court may make such order as it thinks
                 fit for the disposal, by destruction, confiscation or
                 delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to
                 possession thereof or otherwise, of any property or
                 document produced before it or in its custody, or
                 regarding which any offence appears to have been
                 committed, or which has been used for the commission
                 of any offence.

                 (2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) for the
                 delivery of any property to any person claiming to be
                 entitled to the possession thereof, without any
                 condition or on condition that he executes a bond, with
                 or without sureties, to the satisfaction of the Court,
                 engaging to restore such property to the Court if the
                 order made under sub-section (1) is modified or set
                 aside on appeal or revision.

                 (3) A Court of Session may, instead of itself making an
                 order under sub-section (1), direct the property to be
                 delivered to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, who shall
                 thereupon deal with it in the manner provided in
                 sections 457, 458 and 459.

                 (4) Except where the property is livestock or is subject
                 to speedy and natural decay, or where a bond has
                 been executed in pursuance of sub-section (2), an
                 order made under sub-section (1) shall not be carried
                 out for two months, or when an appeal is presented,
                 until such appeal has been disposed of.

                 (5) In this section, the term "property" includes, in the
                 case of property regarding which an offence appears to
                 have been committed, not only such property as has
                 been originally in the possession or under the control of
                 any party, but also any property into or for which the
                 same may have been converted or exchanged, and
                 anything acquired by such conversion or exchange,
                 whether immediately or otherwise.

                 453.Payment to innocent purchaser of money
                 found on accused.-

                 When any person is convicted of any offence which
                 includes, or amounts to, theft or receiving stolen
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                     Page 18 of 39
                 property, and it is proved that any other person bought
                 the stolen property from him without knowing or having
                 reason to believe that the same was stolen, and that
                 any money has on his arrest been taken out of the
                 possession of the convicted person, the Court may, on
                 the application of such purchaser and on the restitution
                 of the stolen property to the person entitled to the
                 possession thereof, order that out of such money a
                 sum not exceeding the price paid by such purchaser be
                 delivered to him.

                 454.Appeal against orders under section 452 or
                 section 453.-

                 (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a Court
                 under section 452 or section 453, may appeal against it
                 to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from
                 convictions by the former Court.

                 (2) On such appeal, the Appellate Court may direct the
                 order to be stayed pending disposal of the appeal, or
                 may modify, alter or annul the order and make any
                 further orders that may be just.

                 (3) The powers referred to in sub-section (2) may also
                 be exercised by a Court of appeal, confirmation or
                 revision while dealing with the case in which the order
                 referred to in sub-section (1) was made.

                                   xx          xx       xx

                 456.Power to restore possession of immovable
                 property.-

                 (1) When a person is convicted of an offence attended
                 by criminal force or show of force or by criminal
                 intimidation, and it appears to the Court that, by such
                 force or show of force or intimidation, any person has
                 been dispossessed of any immovable property, the
                 Court may, if it thinks fit, order that possession of the
                 same be restored to that person after evicting by force,
                 if necessary, any other person who may be in
                 possession of the property:

                 Provided that no such order shall be made by the Court
                 more than one month after the date of the conviction.
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                     Page 19 of 39
                 (2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an
                 order under sub-section (1), the Court of appeal,
                 confirmation or revision may, if it thinks fit, make such
                 order while disposing of the appeal, reference or
                 revision, as the case may be.

                 (3) Where an order has been made under sub-section
                 (1), the provisions of section 454 shall apply in relation
                 thereto as they apply in relation to an order under
                 section 453.

                 (4) No order made under this section shall prejudice
                 any right or interest to or in such immovable property
                 which any person may be able to establish in a civil
                 suit.

                 457.Procedure by police upon seizure of property.-

                 (1) Whenever the seizure of property by any police
                 officer is reported to a Magistrate under the provisions
                 of this Code, and such property is not produced before
                 a Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the
                 Magistrate may make such order as he thinks fit
                 respecting the disposal of such property or the delivery
                 of such property to the person entitled to the
                 possession thereof, or if such person cannot be
                 ascertained, respecting the custody and production of
                 such property.

                 (2) If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate
                 may order the property to be delivered to him on such
                 conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if
                 such person is unknown, the Magistrate may detain it
                 and shall, in such case, issue a proclamation
                 specifying the articles of which such property consists,
                 and requiring any person who may have a claim
                 thereto, to appear before him and establish his claim
                 within six months from the date of such proclamation.”


16.    Section 451 empowers the Criminal Court to pass an order of

       proper custody of ‘any property’ pending trial or inquiry. The Court

       can also direct disposal in certain circumstances. Explanation to
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                      Page 20 of 39
Section 451 states that for the purpose of the said Section,

       ‘property’ includes property of any kind or document which is

       produced before the Court or which is in its custody or any

       property regarding which an offence appears to have been

       committed or which appears to have been used for the

       commission of any offence. Section 451 applies during or pending

       trial, or inquiry (the expression ‘inquiry’ is defined in Section 2(g) of

       the Code). There are judgments that hold that the expression

       ‘property’ for the purpose of Section 451 includes immovable

       property. In fact, preponderance of judicial decisions takes this

       view, though there is no direct judgment of this Court. Same is the

       position with regard to Section 452, which in sub-section (5) states

       that the term ‘property’ includes, in case of property regarding

       which an offence appears to have been committed, not only such

       property as was originally in possession or under control of any

       party, but also any property into which the same may have been

       converted or exchanged, and anything acquired by such

       conversion or exchange, whether immediately or otherwise.

       Section 452 states that when an inquiry or trial in a Criminal Court

       concludes, the Court may make an order as it thinks fit for the

       disposal, by destruction, confiscation or delivery to any person

       claiming himself to be entitled to possession thereof or otherwise,
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                    Page 21 of 39
       of any property or document produced before it or in its custody,

       or regarding which an offence appears to have been committed or

       which has been used for the commission of any offence. The

       context is wide, albeit the words, “may make such order as it

       thinks fit” in Section 452 vests the Court with the discretion to

       dispose of the property in any of the three modes specified,

       namely, destruction, confiscation or delivery to the person entitled

       to be in possession thereof or otherwise (see N. Madhavan v.

       State of Kerala12). However, an order under Section 452 is not an

       order determining title or ownership but that of the right to

       possession, and therefore where serious claims to ownership are

       put forward, it would be best if the Criminal Courts directs the

       parties to establish their claim before the Civil Court. The Criminal

       Court can, however, pass appropriate order of interim nature as it

       may be appropriate. What is important and relevant for our

       discussion is that the Sections 451 and 452 are broad and wide

       conferring specific and clear powers upon the Criminal Court, and

       the language indicates that they could equally apply to immovable

       property. These Sections do not make reference to Section 102 of

       the Code relating to the seizure of property by the police officer.

       This is equally true of Section 456 which specifically empowers

12
  (1979) 4 SCC 1
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 22 of 39
       the Criminal Court to restore possession of immovable property

       when a person is convicted of an offence attended by criminal

       force or show of force or by criminal intimidation and it appears to

       the Court that by such force or show of force or intimidation any

       person has been dispossessed of the property. This order can be

       made without prejudice to the right or interest to or in such

       immovable property which any person may be able to establish in

       a civil suit. Section 457 applies when a property has been seized

       by any police officer and is reported to a Magistrate under the

       provisions of the Code and such property is not produced before a

       Criminal Court during the course of inquiry or trial. The expression

       ‘not produced before a Criminal Court’ used in Section 457 of the

       Code is significant. Thus, this provision applies to the property

       seized under Section 102 of the Code, but not produced during

       the trial or inquiry. In common parlance, the word ‘produced’ is an

       expression used to signify actual or physical production which

       would apply to movable property. Immovable property cannot be

       ‘produced’ in a Court.


17.    We have referred to the said provisions under Chapter XXXIV –

       ‘Disposal of Property’, as this would be of significance and,

       addresses the argument and concern expressed by the appellant

Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 23 of 39
       – Nevada Properties Pvt. Ltd. and some of the State

       Governments. These provisions, specifically enable the Court to

       pass orders relating to the properties, both movable and

       immovable. We have referred to Section 451, which does not

       specifically refer to any seizure order under Section 102 of the

       Code but vide Explanation includes such property regarding which

       an offence appears to have been committed or which appears to

       have been used for the commission of any offence. Similarly,

       Section 452 refers to property regarding which an offence appears

       to have been committed as has been originally in possession or

       under control of any party and also such property into or for which

       the same may have been converted or exchanged. Again Section

       452 per se, does not make any reference to Section 102 of the

       Code. This is also true for Section 456 of the Code which relates

       to restoration of possession of immovable property in certain

       circumstances. These provisions, therefore, do not directly define

       the contours and scope of Section 102 of the Code. On the other

       hand, it would show that Section 102 is not the primary or the core

       provision which would make the provisions of Section 451, 452 or

       456 of the Code applicable. The parameters for application of

       these sections are those as are enumerated in the specific

       provisions. Sections 451 and 452 specifically define the
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters               Page 24 of 39
       expression ‘property’ for the purpose of an order of custody and

       disposal by the Court. Section 456 applies to the category or type

       of offences concerning immovable property regardless of whether

       the immovable property is in custody of the Court or has been

       attached. Power of the Criminal Court under these Sections,

       except Section 457 of the Code, is not restricted to property

       seized by the police officer under Section 102 of the Code.

       Section 457, as noticed, applies to properties which have been

       seized by the police officer under the Code but not produced

       during inquiry or trial.


18.    Having held and elucidated on the power of the Criminal Court, we

       find good ground and reason to hold that the expression ‘any

       property’ appearing in Section 102 of the Code would not include

       immovable property. We would elucidate and explain.


19.    The first part of sub-section (1) of Section 102 of the Code relates

       to the property which may be alleged or suspected to have been

       stolen. Immovable property certainly cannot be stolen and cannot

       fall in this part. The second part relates to the property which may

       be found by a police officer under circumstances which create

       suspicion of the commission of any offence. We have already

       referred to the judgments of the Delhi High Court in the case of
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 25 of 39
       P.K. Parmar (supra), Ms. Swaran Sabharwal (supra), and

       Jagdish Chander (supra), which have elucidated and in a

       restricted and narrow manner defined the requirement for invoking

       the second part. However, we have come across a decision of this

       Court in Teesta Atul Setalvad v. State of Gujarat13, on an appeal

       from the judgment of the Gujarat High Court and had dealt with a

       situation when an act of freezing the accounts was a sequel to the

       crime as the crime was detected earlier. The Gujarat High Court

       took a somewhat contrary view, by not interfering and directing

       defreezing, observing that even if the action of the investigating

       agency at the inception to seize may not be regular, the Court

       cannot be oblivious to the collection of substantial material by the

       investigating agency which justifies its action under Section 102 of

       the Code. Further when the investigation had progressed to a

       material point, de-freezing the bank accounts on the basis of such

       arguments would paralyse the investigation which would not be in

       the interest of justice.         After referring to the factual matrix in

       Teesta Atul Setalvad (Supra), this Court observed that the

       Investigating Officer was in possession of material pointing out to

       the circumstances that had created suspicion of the commission

       of an offence, in particular the one under investigation, and

13
  (2018) 2 SCC 372
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                     Page 26 of 39
       therefore exercise of power under Section 102 of the Code would

       be in law legitimate as it was exercised after following the

       procedure prescribed in sub-sections (2) and (3) of the same

       provision.


20.    Section 102 postulates seizure of the property. Immovable

       property cannot, in its strict sense, be seized, though documents

       of title, etc. relating to immovable property can be seized, taken

       into custody and produced. Immovable property can be attached

       and also locked/sealed. It could be argued that the word ‘seize’

       would include such action of attachment and sealing. Seizure of

       immovable property in this sense and manner would in law require

       dispossession of the person in occupation/possession of the

       immovable property, unless there are no claimants, which would

       be rare. Language of Section 102 of the Code does not support

       the interpretation that the police officer has the power to

       dispossess a person in occupation and take possession of an

       immovable property in order to seize it. In the absence of the

       Legislature conferring this express or implied power under Section

       102 of the Code to the police officer, we would hesitate and not

       hold that this power should be inferred and is implicit in the power

       to effect seizure. Equally important, for the purpose of

Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                Page 27 of 39
       interpretation is the scope and object of Section 102 of the Code,

       which is to help and assist investigation and to enable the police

       officer to collect and collate evidence to be produced to prove the

       charge complained of and set up in the charge sheet. The Section

       is a part of the provisions concerning investigation undertaken by

       the police officer. After the charge sheet is filed, the prosecution

       leads and produces evidence to secure conviction. Section 102 is

       not, per se, an enabling provision by which the police officer acts

       to seize the property to do justice and to hand over the property to

       a person whom the police officer feels is the rightful and true

       owner. This is clear from the objective behind Section 102, use of

       the words in the Section and the scope and ambit of the power

       conferred on the Criminal Court vide Sections 451 to 459 of the

       Code. The expression ‘circumstances which create suspicion of

       the commission of any offence’ in Section 102 does not refer to a

       firm opinion or an adjudication/finding by a police officer to

       ascertain whether or not ‘any property’ is required to be seized.

       The word ‘suspicion’ is a weaker and a broader expression than

       ‘reasonable belief’ or ‘satisfaction’. The police officer is an

       investigator and not an adjudicator or a decision maker. This is the

       reason why the Ordinance was enacted to deal with attachment of

       money and immovable properties in cases of scheduled offences.
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters               Page 28 of 39
       In case and if we allow the police officer to ‘seize’ immovable

       property on a mere ‘suspicion of the commission of any offence’, it

       would mean and imply giving a drastic and extreme power to

       dispossess etc. to the police officer on a mere conjecture and

       surmise, that is, on suspicion, which has hitherto not been

       exercised. We have hardly come across any case where

       immovable property was seized vide an attachment order that was

       treated as a seizure order by police officer under Section 102 of

       the Code. The reason is obvious.             Disputes relating to title,

       possession, etc., of immovable property are civil disputes which

       have to be decided and adjudicated in Civil Courts. We must

       discourage and stall any attempt to convert civil disputes into

       criminal cases to put pressure on the other side (See Binod

       Kumar and Others v. State of Bihar and Another14). Thus, it will

       not be proper to hold that Section 102 of the Code empowers a

       police officer to seize immovable property, land, plots, residential

       houses, streets or similar properties. Given the nature of criminal

       litigation, such seizure of an immovable property by the police

       officer in the form of an attachment and dispossession would not

       facilitate investigation to collect evidence/material to be produced

       during inquiry and trial. As far as possession of the immovable

14
  (2014) 10 SCC 663
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                    Page 29 of 39
       property is concerned, specific provisions in the form of Sections

       145 and 146 of the Code can be invoked as per and in

       accordance with law. Section 102 of the Code is not a general

       provision which enables and authorises the police officer to seize

       immovable property for being able to be produced in the Criminal

       Court during trial. This, however, would not bar or prohibit the

       police officer from seizing documents/ papers of title relating to

       immovable property, as it is distinct and different from seizure of

       immovable property. Disputes and matters relating to the physical

       and legal possession and title of the property must be adjudicated

       upon by a Civil Court.


21.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, the Reference is answered by

       holding that the power of a police officer under Section 102 of the

       Code to seize any property, which may be found under

       circumstances that create suspicion of the commission of any

       offence, would not include the power to attach, seize and seal an

       immovable property.




Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters               Page 30 of 39
22.    The Registry is directed to list the individual appeals for disposal

       before the appropriate Bench.


                                                    ..................................CJI.
                                                              (RANJAN GOGOI)



                                                    ......................................J.
                                                              (DEEPAK GUPTA)



                                                    ......................................J.
                                                             (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 24, 2019.




Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                           Page 31 of 39
                                                           REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1481 OF 2019
                    (@ SLP (CRL.) NO.1513 of 2011)

NEVADA PROPERTIES PRIVATE LIMITED
THROUGH ITS DIRECTOR                                     …APPELLANT(S)

                                       VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ANR.                          …RESPONDENT(S)

                                           WITH

                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1122 OF 2011

            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1482­1485 OF 2019
                (@ SLP(CRL.) NOS.891­894 OF 2011)

               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1486      OF 2019
                   (@ SLP(CRL.) NO.4360 OF 2011)
                                AND
               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1487      OF 2019
                   (@ SLP(CRL.) NO.3958 OF 2013)


                                   JUDGMENT


Deepak Gupta, J.

1.     I have gone through the judgment delivered by my brother,

Justice Sanjiv Khanna.                 I agree with the finding in the said



Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters               Page 32 of 39
judgment. However, in view of the nature of the issue involved, I

intend to give a few additional reasons of my own.

2.     Since brother Khanna in his judgment has given elaborate

reasons to hold that in the context of Section 102 the words ‘any

property’ would mean only movable property, I am not repeating

the same for the sake of brevity.


3.     The main issue involved is what is the meaning to be given to

the word ‘property’ occurring in Section 102 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure which reads as follows:­

            “Power of police officer to seize certain property. ­ (1) Any
            police officer may seize any property which may be alleged or
            suspected to have been stolen, or which may be found under
            circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of
            any offence.
            (2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of
            a police station, shall forthwith report the seizure to that
            officer.
            (3) Every police officer acting under sub­section (1) shall
            forthwith report the seizure to the Magistrate having
            jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it
            cannot be conveniently transported to the Court, or where
            there is difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the
            custody of such property, or where the continued retention of
            the property in police custody may not be considered
            necessary for the purpose of investigation, he may give
            custody thereof to any person on his executing a bond
            undertaking to produce the property before the Court as and
            when required and to give effect to the further orders of the
            Court as to the disposal of the same:
                Provided that where the property seized under sub­section
            (1) is subject to speedy and natural decay and if the person
            entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or
            absent and the value of such property is less than five
            hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under
            the orders of the Superintendent of Police and the provisions
            of Sections 457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be
            practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.”
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                            Page 33 of 39
Sub­section (1) of Section 102 empowers a police officer to seize

any property which may be alleged or suspected to have been

stolen or which may be found under circumstances which create

suspicion of the commission of any offence.         On behalf of the

appellant it is urged that the word ‘any property’ is of very wide

amplitude and will cover movable and immovable properties. This

stand is also supported by the State of Maharashtra. On the other

hand, it is contended by the respondents that in the context in

which the word ‘any property’ is used in the Section, it has to be

limited to movable property and cannot be extended to immovable

property.


4.     At first blush, the arguments on behalf of the appellant seem

attractive because normally the words ‘any property’ would mean

property of any kind or description. However, it is a well settled

principle of statutory interpretation that when construing the

words of a statute, they must be read in a manner in which they fit

into the section and in the context of the purpose sought to be

achieved by that particular provision of law.




Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters        Page 34 of 39
5.     Sub­section (1) of Section 102 empowers a police officer to

seize any property which may be alleged or suspected to have been

stolen. Theft can take place only of movable property and not of

immovable property. In my view, the word ‘seized’ has been used

in the sense of taking actual physical custody of the property.

Sub­section 3 of Section 102 provides that where it is difficult to

conveniently transport the property to the court or there is

difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the custody of the

property, then the property can be given to any person on his

executing a bond. This per se indicates that the property must be

capable of production in court and also be capable of being kept

inside some accommodation. This obviously cannot be done with

immovable property.


6.     Section 102 has been in the statute book for more than a

century. Section 102 corresponds to Section 550 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1898.                For more than a century the courts

have read the words ‘any property’ to mean movable property 151617

15


        AIR 1960 AII 405
16


        WP(C) No. 12275 of 2012, Judgment dated 26.07.2012 (Ker HC)
17


        2016(3) PLJR 464
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                     Page 35 of 39
and no decision to the contrary was brought to our notice.

Reliance is only placed on the judgment of this Court in State of

Maharashtra vs. Tapas D. Neogy18. In that case, the question

was totally different and this court only decided that a bank

account of an accused was property within the meaning of Section

102.      The Court did not go into the question of movable or

immovable property and, therefore, this judgment would not be

applicable.


7.     I would also like to point out that in the Code of Criminal

Procedure        itself    the    Legislature       has   in   various    provisions

specifically used the words ‘movable’ and ‘immovable’ property.

Some of those have been dealt with by my learned brother. In this

regard reference may be made to Section 83 of the Cr.P.C. which

relates to seizure of the property of a proclaimed absconder. Sub­

section 1 of Section 83 reads as follows:­


       “(1) The Court issuing a proclamation under section 82 may, for
       reasons to be recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the
       proclamation, order the attachment of any property, movable or
       immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person:...”




18


        (1999) 7 SCC 685
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                        Page 36 of 39
The Legislature in its wisdom uses the words “order the attachment

of any property, movable or immovable or both”.                         This is in

contradistinction to the words ‘any property’ used in Section 102.


8.     Chapter VIIA was introduced in Cr.P.C. vide Act 40 of 1993

w.e.f. 20th July 1994.                  This Chapter deals with reciprocal

arrangements for assistance in certain matters and procedure for

attachment and forfeiture of property. Property has been defined

in Section 105A(d) as follows:­

        “‘Property’ means property and assets of every description whether
        corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or
        intangible and deeds and instruments evidencing title to, or interest
        in, such property or assets derived or used in the commission of an
        offence and includes property obtained through proceeds of crime.”



This would include property of all kinds, movable and immovable.

The Legislature made it clear that property of all kinds can be

attached and forfeited.

 Section 105C (1) reads as follows:­

         “S.105C (1) Where a Court in India has reasonable grounds to
        believe that any property obtained by any person is derived or
        obtained, directly or indirectly, by such person from the commission
        of an offence, it may make an order of attachment or forfeiture of
        such property, as it may deem fit under the provisions of Section
        105D to 105J (both inclusive).”

 Reading all these provisions together, it is clear that when any

 court in India has reasonable grounds to believe that any property

 has been obtained by any person directly or indirectly from the
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters                      Page 37 of 39
 commission of an offence, the Court may make an order for

 attachment or forfeiture of such property.


 9.    This Court is not concerned with the procedure to be followed

 for attachment and forfeiture of the property but only the meaning

 of the word ‘property’. Thus, Section 105C empowers the court to

 order forfeiture of any property which it may feel is derived or

 obtained directly or indirectly by the commission of an offence.


 10. If the argument of the appellant and the State of Maharashtra

 is accepted then there was no need for the legislature to have

 introduced Chapter VIIA. It would also be pertinent to mention

 that the power of attachment and forfeiture is given to courts and

 not to police officer. As pointed out in the judgment of my learned

 brother, if a police officer is given the power to seize immovable

 property it may lead to an absolutely chaotic situation. To give an

 example, if there is a physical fight between the landlord and the

 tenant over the rented premises and if the version of the appellant

 is to be accepted, the police official would be entitled to seize the

 tenanted property. This would make a mockery of rent laws. To

 give another example, if a person forges a will and thereby claims

 property on the basis of the forged will, can the police officer be
Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters         Page 38 of 39
 given the power to seize the entire property, both movable and

 immovable, that may be mentioned in the will? The answer has to

 be in the negative. Otherwise it would lead to an absurd situation

 which could never have been envisaged by the Legislature. The

 power of seizure in Section 102 has to be limited to movable

 property.


 11. As far as the meaning of property in Section 452 of the

 Cr.P.C. is concerned, that is not a question referred to the larger

 Bench and therefore, I would refrain from saying anything about

 that.


 12. In view of the above, I would answer the reference by holding

 that the phrase ‘any property’ in Section 102 will only cover

 moveable property and not immovable property.




                                                    …………………………J.
                                                       (Deepak Gupta)

 New Delhi
 September 24, 2019



Criminal Appeal arising out of
SLP (Crl.) No. 1513 of 2011 and connected matters           Page 39 of 39

