
Supreme Court of India
Ram Chandra Verma vs State Of Uttarakhand on 19 March, 2013Author: .......................J.
Bench: H.L. Dattu, Jagdish Singh Khehar
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.  475    OF 2013
               (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(CRL.)NO.6215 OF 2010)

RAM CHANDRA VERMA                                       APPELLANT

                 VERSUS

STATE OF UTTARAKHAND                             RESPONDENT


                                  O R D E R

1.          Leave granted.

2.          This appeal by special leave is directed against  the  judgment
and order passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital  in  Criminal
Jail Appeal No.243 of 2006, dated 18.11.2009. By the impugned judgment  and
order, the High Court has confirmed the judgment and order  passed  by  the
Additional Sessions Judge/Second  Fast  Track  Court,  Udham  Singh  Nagar,
Uttarakhand in Session Trial No.68 of  2003,  whereby  and  whereunder  the
learned Trial Judge has convicted the accused person under Section  302  of
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short 'the  IPC')  and  sentenced  him  to
undergo imprisonment for life along with  a  fine  of  Rs.5,000/-  and,  in
default of payment of fine, to further undergo imprisonment of one year.

3.          The prosecution case in brief is: On 29.11.2002, the appellant-
accused and one Sunil Kumar Verma (for short ‘the deceased’) were returning
home from work on a bicycle. The appellant was the  pillion  rider  on  the
said bicycle driven by the deceased. On the way, the appellant shot at  the
back of the deceased’s head  by  a  country  made  pistol,  whereafter  the
deceased fell from the bicycle and died on the spot. PW-1, Anil Kumar Verma
and PW-2, Mohd. Sazid  witnessed  the  incident  while  they  were  heading
towards the house of  the  deceased.  They  tried  to  catch  hold  of  the
appellant however he fled away. Thereafter, PW-1  lodged  an  FIR  at  P.S.
Jaspur for offence punishable under Section 302 of the IPC.

4.          Upon investigation, the  appellant  was  charged  for  offences
under Section 302 of the IPC and Section 25 of the Arms Act, 1959  and  the
case was committed for trial.

5.          During the trial, the prosecution relied upon  eight  witnesses
including PW-1, PW-2 and   PW-3 -  Dr.  Madan  Mohan,  who  conducted  post
mortem examination of the deceased.  The Trial Court after due appreciation
of evidence has reached the conclusion that the evidence of  eye-witnesses,
PW-1 and PW-2, corroborates with each  other  on  all  material  facts  and
further that the injuries sustained by the deceased have been  corroborated
by the Post Mortem Report and the evidence of PW-3 and therefore  convicted
and sentenced the appellant for the aforesaid offences.  Aggrieved  by  the
aforesaid judgment and order of the Trial Court, the  appellant  had  filed
Criminal Jail Appeal No. 243 of 2006 before the High Court.
6.          The High Court after  re-appreciation  of  entire  evidence  on
record and analysis of submissions made by the parties  has  dismissed  the
appeal and confirmed the conviction and sentence of the  appellant.  It  is
the correctness or otherwise of the judgment and order passed by  the  High
Court which is in appeal before us in this appeal.

7.          We have heard Ms. Minakshi Vij, learned amicus curiae appearing
for the appellant and Shri Jatinder Kumar Bhatia, learned counsel appearing
for the respondent-State.

8.          We have carefully perused the evidence of  the  two  witnesses,
namely, PW-1, who is none other than the brother of the deceased and  PW-2,
the servant of the deceased person.  We  have  also  seen  the  post-mortem
report prepared by PW-3. We have also carefully perused the judgment(s) and
order(s) passed by the Courts below.

10.         In our considered opinion,  the  impugned  judgment  and  order
passed by the High Court confirming the conviction and sentence awarded  by
the Trial Court does not suffer from any legal infirmity which  would  call
for our consideration and interference and therefore, the  appeal  requires
to be dismissed and stands dismissed accordingly.
11.         Fee of learned amicus is assessed at Rs.7,000/-.
            Ordered accordingly.

                                                   .......................J.
                                                                (H.L. DATTU)


                                                   .......................J.
                                                      (JAGDISH SINGH KHEHAR)
NEW DELHI,
MARCH 19, 2013.

