
Supreme Court of India
Hardeep Singh vs State Of Punjab & Ors on 7 November, 2008Bench: C.K. Thakker, D.K. Jain
                                                       REPORTABLE
          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1750 OF 2008
                ARISING OUT OF
 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 166 OF 2007

HARDEEP SINGH                        ... APPELLANT

VERSUS

STATE OF PUNJAB & ORS.               ... RESPONDENTS

                        WITH

        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1751 OF 2008
                 ARISING OUT OF
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 2051 OF 2007

MANJIT PAL SINGH                     ... APPELLANT

VERSUS

STATE OF PUNJAB & ANR.               ... RESPONDENTS


            J U D G M E N T
C.K. THAKKER, J.


1.       Leave granted.

2.       Both   the   parties   in    the   High     Court

have filed present appeals against the judgment

and order passed by the High Court of Punjab &
                                                                   2

Haryana,      dated   October      23,    2006     in   Criminal

Revision Nos. 773 of 2006 and 1648 of 2006.

3.           To appreciate the contentions raised

by    the    parties,    it   would      be    appropriate    to

narrate few facts.

4.           In the appeal arising out of Special

Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 166 of 2007, the case

of    the    prosecution      is   that       an   auction   for

leasing the land was held by the Gram Panchayat

of village Indrapuri, Tehsil Samana, District

Patiala on April 21, 2004 for cultivation on

yearly basis (Eksali) for the year 2004-05. The

bid of the appellant was accepted and lease was

granted in his favour. The appellant was thus

in possession of the land.

5.           According to the prosecution, on June

24, 2004, the appellant was ploughing the land.

The    accused     persons    went       there     with   deadly

weapons and caused injuries to the appellant as

well    as    other     prosecution       witnesses.       First

Information Report (FIR) was lodged against the

accused      at   Police   Station       Sadar,     Samana   for
                                                                  3

commission       of     offences      punishable          under

Sections     307,     326,    336   and    427    read    with

Sections 120B, 148 and 149 of the Indian Penal

Code,    1860       (IPC)     as    also    for     offences

punishable under Sections 25, 27, 54 and 59 of

the   Arms     Act,   1959.    Accused     were    arrested.

Vijay Preet Singh (respondent No. 2) was one of

them.

6.         It is the allegation of the appellant

that Vijay Preet Singh-respondent No.2 herein

is the son of Sukhvinder Singh, Chairman of

Panchayat Samiti, Samana. The said Sukhvinder

Singh interfered with the investigation. With a

view to get the name of his son Vijay Preet

Singh deleted by exercising influence on Police

Authorities, he made an application on June 26,

2004, i.e. within two days of the incident,

lodging of FIR and arrest of Vijay Preet Singh

to    Senior    Superintendent       of    Police        (SSP),

Patiala, inter alia, stating therein that Vijay

Preet      Singh      was      resident      of      village

Meayalkhurd, was studying in 10+2 class and at
                                                                          4

the time of occurrence he was not there but was

at his residence and was falsely implicated in

the   case.    He,     therefore,         asked        the     Senior

Superintendent        of     Police      (SSP)     to        make   an

inquiry either himself or through some senior

officer so that justice be done to Vijay Preet

Singh.

7.        It   also        appears       that    Jagtar        Singh-

respondent     No.3    herein        also       made    a     similar

application     on         July    03,      2004       to      Deputy

Inspector General (DIG), Patiala asserting that

in an incident dated June 24, 2004, his name

was not mentioned in the FIR, but he had been

falsely   involved         and     he    was     likely       to    be

arrested. His name was given by some persons

due to grudge by the complainant side. There

was a cross-case also. He, therefore, prayed

that an inquiry may be conducted through an

independent officer and the applicant may not

be arrested till he is proved guilty.

8.        It    appears           that      an     inquiry          was

conducted by police and a report was submitted
                                                                          5

by Superintendent of Police (D), Patiala                             to

SSP, Patiala on July 12, 2004 wherein it was

stated that respondent Nos. 2 and 3 i.e. Vijay

Preet Singh and Jagtar Singh had not committed

any offence and they were falsely implicated. A

recommendation            was,     therefore,        made     not    to

initiate proceedings against both of them. Both

the persons were, therefore, discharged.

9.            During the course of trial, however,

depositions          of   witnesses        were     recorded.       PW2

Hardeep Singh, in his deposition, stated that

Vijay        Preet    Singh        as     also    Jagtar       Singh,

respondents Nos. 2 and 3 were present at the

time    of     incident          with     weapons.     So     far    as

respondent No.2-Vijay Preet Singh is concerned,

his     name     was       mentioned        in      the     FIR.     He

participated in the incident and was having a

weapon with him (gandasi). He was also arrested

by     the    police       from     the     place     of     offence.

Similarly,       respondent             No.3-Jagtar        Singh    was

present with soti. He also participated in the

incident by raising lalkaras. In furtherance of
                                                                      6

common object, all the accused assaulted the

complainant party and committed the offences

with which they were charged. It is on the

basis of the report submitted by Superintendent

of Police (D), Patiala to Senior Superintendent

of Police, Patiala that they were discharged.

An    application        was,   therefore,       made     by    the

Addl. Public Prosecutor under Section 319 of

the     Code       of      Criminal         Procedure,         1973

(hereinafter         referred     to   as    `the     Code')     to

include respondent Nos. 2 and 3 as accused and

to summon them for trial.

10.          The Court of the Addl. Sessions Judge,

Patiala, however, by an order dated January 12,

2006 rejected the application observing that he

did   not     find      sufficient     grounds      to    proceed

against Vijay Preet Singh and Jagtar Singh.

11.          Being aggrieved by the said order, the

appellant herein approached the High Court of

Punjab & Haryana by filing Criminal Revision

No.    773    of   2007.    The    High      Court,      however,

dismissed the Revision and confirmed the order
                                                                          7

passed by the trial Court. The said order is

challenged in the present appeal.

12.          In the appeal arising out of Special

Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 2051 of 2007, the

case    of    the       appellant      was      that    the    accused

[complainant party in SLP (Crl.) No. 166 of

2007]        had        formed       unlawful      assembly         and

committed      offences          punishable       under       Sections

307, 326, 336, 447, 427 read with Sections 148

and 149, Indian Penal Code (IPC) as also under

Sections 25, 27, 54 and 59 of the Arms Act,

1959. Cross FIR was, therefore, filed on the

same day i.e. on June 24, 2004.

13.          According to the appellant, respondent

No.2-Kashmir Singh, son of S. Sucha Singh was

very much present but his name was not included

in    the    charge-sheet            and   as    per     the    report

submitted          by    the     Police      Authorities,          said

Kashmir Singh was innocent. During the course

of    trial,       however,         PW5-Jagdeep        Singh   stated

that Kashmir Singh was also present and was one

of     the    members          of    unlawful          assembly.     An
                                                                8

application was, therefore, made to the trial

Court     (Addl.     Sessions      Judge)   by    the   Addl.

Public Prosecutor under Section 319 of the Code

to include the name of Kashmir Singh as an

accused and to issue summons to him. The prayer

was, however, rejected by the trial Court which

was     challenged      by   the    appellant     herein   by

filing Criminal Revision No. 1648 of 2006, but

it was also dismissed by the High Court. The

said order is challenged by the appellant in

this Court.

14.        Notice in SLP (Crl) No. 166 of 2007

was issued on January 22, 2007. In the other

matter, i.e. SLP (Crl) No. 205 of 2007, notice

was issued on April 02, 2007. Both the cases

were ordered to be heard together. The Registry

was   directed     to    list      the   matter   for   final

hearing on a non-miscellaneous day and that is

how the matters have been placed before us.

15.        We have heard learned counsel for the

parties.
                                                               9
16.        The learned counsel for the appellant

in the appeal arising out of SLP (Crl) No. 166

of 2007 submitted that the order passed by the

trial Court and confirmed by the High Court is

clearly erroneous and deserves to be set aside.

It was submitted that so far as Vijay Preet

Singh is concerned, he was very much present at

the time of incident with a weapon (gandasi),

his name was included in the First Information

Report (FIR) and he was also arrested by the

police    from   the   place    of     offence   since    he

actually    participated        in     the    crime.     The

Investigating      Agency     was,     therefore,     wholly

wrong in deleting his name and in reporting

that Vijay Preet Singh was not present at the

time of incident and he reached at the place of

offence    after    the     incident    was   over.     Such

report was made only with a view to oblige

Sukhvinder Singh, father of Vijay Preet Singh

who was Chairman of Panchayat Samiti, Samana.

Even otherwise, during the course of trial, the

prosecution evidence revealed that Vijay Preet
                                                                    1

Singh was present at the time of incident. A

clear case for application of Section 319 of

the Code had been made out and the trial Court

was wrong in rejecting the application to join

Vijay Preet Singh as an accused and to issue

summons to him. Similar error was committed by

the High Court.

17.       Likewise,        the     Investigating           Agency

wrongly recommended deletion of name of Jagtar

Singh.    From    the     examination         of    prosecution

witnesses, it was clear that Jagtar Singh was

also    present      at   the    time    of    incident      with

weapon and he participated in the crime. An

application      under     Section      319    of    the    Code,

hence, ought to have been allowed.

18.       It was submitted that even if name of

a particular person is not mentioned in the FIR

as an accused, he can, later on, be added as an

accused and a summons can be issued by a Court

in exercise of power under Section 319 of the

Code.    It   was,    therefore,        submitted     that    the

order passed by the trial Court and confirmed
                                                              1

by the High Court deserves to be set aside and

the appeal deserves to be allowed.

19.      The    learned    counsel    for       respondent

Nos. 2 and 3, on the other hand, supported the

order passed by the trial Court and confirmed

by the High Court.

20.      It was stated that an inquiry had been

conducted by the Investigating Agency and on

the   basis    of      statements    recorded        during

investigation, it was proved that respondent

Nos.2-Vijay    Preet    Singh    reached   at    the   spot

after the incident was over and hence, he could

not be joined as accused though his name was

found in FIR and he was arrested by police and

accordingly report was made to delete his name.

21.      So far as Jagtar Singh is concerned,

his name was not mentioned in the FIR. During

the   investigation      also,    nobody    stated     that

Jagtar Singh participated in the incident and,

hence, his name was deleted.

22.      According to the counsel, only at the

time of trial, with a view to falsely implicate
                                                                 1

respondent Nos. 2 and 3, prosecution witnesses

had    named    them.    The   trial    Court,     therefore,

rightly rejected the prayer and the High Court

confirmed it. No case for interference by this

Court in exercise of discretionary jurisdiction

under Article 136 of the Constitution has been

made    out     and     the    appeal     deserves    to   be

dismissed.

23.          The learned counsel for the State also

supported       the     respondents       and    prayed    for

dismissal of the appeal.

24.          In the cross-appeal, learned counsel

for the appellant submitted that Kashmir Singh

was present and participated in the incident.

In     the     course    of    trial,     the     prosecution

witnesses expressly stated about the presence

and    participation      of    respondent      No.2-Kashmir

Singh and the action of non-issuance of summons

to respondent No.2-Kashmir Singh by the trial

Court    and     confirmed     by   the    High    Court   is

erroneous       and     the    appeal     deserves    to    be

allowed.
                                                          1
25.       The learned counsel for Kashmir Singh

supported the order and prayed for dismissal of

appeal. The counsel for the State also prayed

for dismissal of appeal.

26.       Now, Section 319 of the Code empowers

a Court to proceed against any person if it

appears from the evidence that such person has

also committed an offence for which he can be

tried   together   with   other   accused.   The   said

section reads as under;

      319. Power to proceed against other
      persons appearing to be guilty of
      offence.--(1) Where, in the course of
      any inquiry into, or trial of, an
      offence, it appears from the evidence
      that any person not being the accused
      had committed any offence for which
      such person could be tried together
      with   the   accused,  the Court  may
      proceed against such person for the
      offence which he appears to have
      committed.

      (2) Where such person is not attending
      the Court he may be arrested or
      summoned, as the circumstances of the
      case may require, for the purpose
      aforesaid.

      (3) Any person attending the Court
      although not under arrest or upon a
      summons, may be detailed by such Court
                                                   1

      for the purpose of the inquiry into,
      or trial of, the offence which he
      appears to have committed.

      (4) Where the Court proceeds against
      any person under sub-section (1) then--

          (a)   the proceedings in respect of
                such    person     shall   be
                commenced      afresh,    and
                witnesses re-heard;

          (b) subject to the provisions of
              clause (a),     the   case  may
              proceed as if such person had
              been an accused person when
              the Court took cognizance of
              the offence upon which the
              inquiry     or     trial    was
              commenced.
                         (emphasis supplied)


27.       Sometimes while hearing a case against

one or more accused, it appears to a Court from

the evidence that some person other than the

accused before it is also involved in that very

offence. It is only proper that a Court should

have power to summon such person by joining him

as an accused in the case.

28.       The primary object underlying Section

319 is that the whole case against all the

accused should be tried and disposed of not
                                                                  1

only   expeditiously       but    also      simultaneously.

Justice   and    convenience         both    require       that

cognizance   against       the    newly     added       accused

should be taken in the same case and in the

same manner as against the original accused.

The power must be conceded as incidental and

ancillary to the main power to take cognizance

as part of normal process in the administration

of criminal justice.

29.       Before     three       decades,     in       Joginder

Singh & Anr. v. State of Punjab & Anr., (1979)

1 SCC 345, charge sheet was submitted against

certain accused.            During       trial,        however,

evidence of some of the witnesses was recorded

who    implicated     the     appellants.          A     Public

Prosecutor, therefore, moved an application to

summon them and to try them along with other

accused. The application was granted. The order

was challenged by the appellants.

30.       This     Court    considered       the       relevant

provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1898 (old Code), Forty-first Report of the Law
                                                                 1

Commission, the amendment made in the present

Code and held that the Court could add any

person, not accused before it, as accused and

direct him to be tried along with the other

accused for the offence or offences the added

accused appears to have committed.

31.        In Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.

Ram Kishan Rohtagi & Ors., (1983) 1 SCC 1, the

Food     Inspector,      noticing      adulteration         in

`Morton Toffees', filed a complaint against the

Company,    its    Managing    Director       as   well     as

Directors     under      the   Prevention          of     Food

Adulteration Act, 1954. The Managing Director

and    Directors     approached     the     High   Court    by

invoking Section 482 of the Code for quashing

of     proceedings    which    was    granted      and     the

proceedings    against     them      were    quashed.      The

question before this Court was whether Section

319 of the Code could be invoked once criminal

proceedings against a person were quashed.

32.        Replying      the      question         in      the

affirmative        and    quoting         with     approval
                                                              1

observations in Joginder Singh, this Court held

that if it appears to the Court that any person

not being the accused before it, but against

whom there appears, during trial, sufficient

evidence    indicating   his    involvement      in     the

offence, he can be summoned.

33.        The Court, however, was conscious of

the   extraordinary   nature    of     the   power    under

Section 319 of the Code and stated;

      "(W)e would hasten to add that this is
      really an extraordinary power which is
      conferred on the Court and should be
      used   very  sparingly   and  only   if
      compelling reasons exist for taking
      cognizance against the other person
      against whom action has not been
      taken. More than this we would not
      like to say anything further at this
      stage. We leave the entire matter to
      the discretion of the court concerned
      so that it may act according to law".
                           (emphasis supplied)



34.        In   Shashikant     Singh    v.    Tarkeshwar

Singh & Anr., (2002) 5 SCC 738, during the

pendency of trial of an accused, another person

was summoned by the trial Court under Section

319 of the Code. But by the time he could be
                                                                  1

brought before the Court, the trial against the

accused was over. It was held by this Court

that the words "could be tried together with

the    accused"    in   Section      319(1)    were   merely

directory and if the trial against the other

accused    is     over,    such      a     person   who     was

subsequently      added    as   an       accused,   could    be

tried after the conclusion of the trial of the

main accused.

35.        In Michael Machado & Anr. V. Central

Bureau of Investigation & Anr., (2000) 3 SCC

262,    considering       the   basic      requirements      of

Section 319 of the Code, this Court said;

       "The basic requirement for invoking
       the above section is that it should
       appear to the Court from the evidence
       collected during trial or in the
       inquiry that some other person, who is
       not arraigned as an accused in that
       case, had committed an offence for
       which that person could be tried
       together with the accused already
       arraigned. It is not enough that the
       Court entertained some doubt, from the
       evidence, about the involvement of
       another person in the offence. In
       other words, the Court must have
       reasonable   satisfaction   from   the
       evidence already collected regarding
       two aspects. First is that the other
                                                   1

      person   has committed   an  offence.
      Second is that for such offence that
      other person could as well be tried
      along   with the   already  arraigned
      accused".

36.       Highlighting the underlying object of

the provision, the Court proceeded to state;

      "But even then, what is conferred on
      the Court is only a discretion as
      could be discerned from the words "the
      Court   may    proceed   against  such
      person". The discretionary power so
      conferred should be exercised only to
      achieve criminal justice. It is not
      that the Court should turn against
      another   person   whenever   it comes
      across    evidence    connecting  that
      another person also with the offence.
      A judicial exercise is called for
      keeping a conspectus of the case,
      including the stage at which the trial
      has proceeded already and the quantum
      of evidence collected till then, and
      also the amount of time which the
      Court had spent for collecting such
      evidence. It must be remembered that
      there is no compelling duty in the
      Court   to    proceed   against  other
      persons".

37.       Observing that there was no reasonable

prospect of conviction of the persons sought to

be arraigned as accused, the Court held that no
                                                                       2

order could be made under Section 319 of the

Code.

38.         In Krishnappa v. State of Karnataka,

(2004) 7 SCC 792, applying Ram Kishan Rohtagi

and Michael Machado, the Court ruled that the

power to summon an accused is an extraordinary

power conferred on the Court and it should be

used    very     sparingly      and    only       if   compelling

reasons exist for taking cognizance against the

person other than the accused.

39.         In   Y.    Saraba       Reddy    v.     Puthur     Rami

Reddy & Anr., (2007) 4 SCC 773 : (2007) 6 SCR

68, a three-Judge Bench of this Court to which

one    of   us   was     a   party    (D.K.       Jain,    J.),   a

similar situation arose. In the FIR, names of

certain        persons       were     mentioned.          On      an

application by those persons, the matter was

investigated by the Deputy Superintendent of

Police and the report was submitted that they

were not present at the time of incident. On

the    basis     of    the   report,        their      names   were

deleted from the array of accused. The case was
                                                                  2

then committed to the Court of Session. PW1, in

his examination involved the said persons and

an application under Section 319 of the Code

was   filed   for    issuing    summons      to    them.    The

trial Court rejected the application primarily

on    the   ground   that   the      plea   of    alibi     was

investigated by the Deputy Superintendent of

Police and was found to be correct. The High

Court did not find infirmity in the order. The

action was challenged in this Court.

40.         Allowing the appeal and setting aside

the order of the High Court, Dr. Pasayat, J.

said; "If the satisfaction of the Investigating

Officer or Supervising Officer is to be treated

as    determinative,    then        the   very    purpose    of

Section 319 of the Code would be frustrated.

Though it cannot always be the satisfaction of

the Investigating Officer which is to prevail,

yet in the instant case the High Court has not

found the evidence of PW-1 to be unworthy of

acceptance.     Whatever       be     the   worth    of     his

evidence for the purposes of Section 319 of the
                                                                   2

Code   it    was    required    to     be   analysed.       The

conclusion that the IO's satisfaction should

be given primacy is unsustainable".

                                  (emphasis supplied)



41.         In Guriya & Ors. v. State of Bihar &

Anr., (2007) 8 SCC 224, appellants were not

arrayed as accused. On the basis of prosecution

evidence, however, an application under Section

319 of the Code was filed which was allowed by

the High Court and appellants were added as

accused. Appellants questioned the legality of

the order.

42.         This   Court     allowed    the    appeal,       set

aside the order of the High Court and dismissed

the application filed under Section 319 of the

Code   observing      that     there    was    no     material

against appellants, their names were not found

in FIR, no overt act had been attributed to

them   and   the    protest    petition       filed    by    the

complainant        against     them     had     also        been

dismissed.
                                                                           2
43.        Very recently, in Bholu Ram v. State

of Punjab & Anr., JT 2008 (9) SC 504, we were

called    upon     to     consider      such        a    situation.

Referring to earlier decisions, we held that

such a course is open to a Court and power

under Section 319 of the Code can be exercised

by the Court to issue summons to a person who

was not originally shown as an accused. Such an

order cannot be said to be illegal, unlawful or

otherwise objectionable.

44.        It is, however, submitted on behalf of

the     accused    that    in     the    instant             case,   an

application was made by the Public Prosecutor

before     the    cross-examination            of       PW2-Hardeep

Singh was over. It was strenuously contended

that for application of Section 319 of the Code

and exercise of power to proceed against person

other    than     the   person     shown   as           an    accused,

there must be an evidence before the Court and

such    satisfaction       can    be    arrived          at    by    the

Court      only     upon         completion             of      cross-

examination.
                                                                        2
45.        In this connection, reference was made

to a two Judge Bench decision of this Court in

Mohd. Shafi v. Mohd. Rafiq & Anr., (2007) 4 SCR

1023. In Mohd. Shafi, an FIR was lodged against

the     accused       alleging       the    commission      of     an

offence punishable under Section 302, IPC. The

police submitted charge-sheet against K but not

against M (appellant). At the trial, PW1 was

examined and in his examination-in-chief, he

asserted       that     M     also    participated         in     the

incident.        An     application          was     filed        for

summoning him under Section 319 of the Code

which    was     rejected       by    the    trial      Court     but

allowed by the High Court. M approached this

Court.

46.        Allowing the appeal and setting aside

the order passed by the High Court, this Court

observed       that    the    order    passed      by     the    High

Court was not sustainable. It was held that

satisfaction          under    Section      319    of    the     Code

could     be      arrived       at     only       after     cross-
                                                           2

examination of the witness is over. The Court

stated;


      "The Trial Judge, as noticed by us, in
      terms of Section 319 of the Code of
      Criminal Procedure was required to
      arrive at his satisfaction. If he
      thought that the matter should receive
      his due consideration only after the
      cross-examination of the witnesses is
      over, no exception thereto could be
      taken far less at the instance of a
      witness and when the State was not
      aggrieved by the same".

                             (emphasis supplied)


47.        The counsel submitted that admittedly

in the instant case, cross-examination of PW2-

Hardeep Singh was not over. In the course of

cross-examination     by     some     of   the   accused

persons,     the    learned         Additional    Public

Prosecutor moved the Court under Section 319 of

the   Code   and   further    cross-examination      was

deferred. It was, therefore, submitted that no

order under Section 319 could be made and the

application was liable to be dismissed.
                                                                          2
48.          The      learned           counsel         for         the

complainant, however, placed reliance on a two

Judge Bench decision in Rakesh & Anr. V. State

of    Haryana,      (2001)    6     SCC    248.    An     identical

issue       was    raised    there.       The    father       of    the

prosecutrix lodged an FIR alleging commission

of offences under Sections 363, 366 and 376,

IPC    by    Rakesh    and    others.         According       to    the

complainant, his daughter was taken by three

persons due to previous enmity with the object

of committing rape. The girl was then found

with P. After the investigation, charges were

framed only against P. At the trial, however,

certain      witnesses       were       examined       and    on    the

basis of their evidence, the Public Prosecutor

filed an application under Section 319 of the

Code    for       arraying    persons         other    than     P    as

additional accused. The prayer was granted. The

order    was      confirmed       by    the     High    Court.      The

appellants approached this Court. The question

before this Court was whether the statement of

a     prosecution-witness              without     such      witness
                                                           2

having      been      cross-examined,       constituted

`evidence' within the meaning of Section 319 of

the Code.

49.       Replying      the     question      in     the

affirmative,       noticing   conflicting    views    of

different High Courts and holding that the term

`evidence' used in sub-section (1) of Section

319 of the Code is comprehensive, the Court

stated;

      "Once the Sessions Court records a
      statement of the witness it would be
      part of the evidence. It is true that
      finally at the time of trial the
      accused is to be given an opportunity
      to cross-examine the witness to test
      its truthfulness. But that stage would
      not arise while exercising court's
      power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. Once
      the deposition is recorded, no doubt
      there being no cross-examination, it
      would be a prima facie material, which
      would enable the sessions court to
      decide whether powers under Section
      319 should be exercised or not. Sub-
      section (1) of Section 319 itself
      provides that in the course of any
      inquiry into, or trial of, an offence,
      it appears from the evidence that any
      persons not being the accused has
      committed any offence for which such
      person could be tried together with
      the accused, the Court may proceed
      against such person for the offence
      which he appears to have committed".
                                                        2
50.       The Court added;

      "Hence, it is difficult to accept the
      contention of the learned counsel for
      the    appellants    that   the    term
      'evidence' as used in Section 319
      Criminal Procedure Code would mean
      evidence which is tested by cross
      examination. The question of testing
      the   evidence    by  cross-examination
      would arise only after addition of the
      accused. There is no question of
      cross-examining the witness prior to
      adding such person as accused. Section
      does not contemplate an additional
      stage of first summoning the person
      and giving him an opportunity of
      cross-examining the witness who has
      deposed against him and thereafter
      deciding whether such person is to be
      added   as   accused   or   not.   Word
      "evidence" occurring in sub-section is
      used in comprehensive and broad sense
      which would also include the material
      collected by the investigating officer
      and the material or evidence which
      comes before the Court and from which
      the Court can prima facie conclude
      that person not arraigned before it is
      involved in the commission of the
      crime".

51.       Thus, once the Sessions Court records

a statement of a witness, it becomes a part of

evidence. It is true that finally at the time

of    trial,   the   accused   must   be   given   an
                                                                        2

opportunity       to    cross-examine         the     witness      to

test truthfulness of such statement. But that

stage would come only after the person is added

as an accused. The Code in such situation has

afforded sufficient protection by enacting sub-

section (4).

52.       When         an     examination-in-chief           of     a

witness     is        over,     there       being     no     cross-

examination,      it        would   be     merely    prima   facie

material.     But      it     would      enable     the    Sessions

Court to decide whether powers under Section

319 of the Code should be exercised or not.

Sub-section (1) of Section 319 itself provides

that in the course of any inquiry into, or

trial   of,      an    offence,       it    appears       from    the

evidence that any person not being the accused

has committed any offence for which such person

could be tried together with the accused, the

Court may proceed against such person for the

offence which he appears to have committed.

53.       In State of H.P. v. Surinder Mohan &

Ors., (2000) 2 SCC 396, this Court negatived
                                                                          3

the   contention           that     before       granting      pardon

under Section 306 of the Code, accused should

be permitted to cross examine such person whose

evidence    is    recorded          by    the    Magistrate.        The

Court held that at the time of investigation or

inquiry    into       an    offence,       the    accused      cannot

claim any right under law to cross-examine the

witness. The right to cross-examine arises only

at the time of trial. During the course of

investigation by the police, the question of

cross-examination             by    the     accused         does    not

arise. Under Section 200 of the Code, when the

Magistrate       before         taking      cognizance        of    the

offence, that is, before issuing process holds

an inquiry, the accused has no locus standi or

right to be heard, and, therefore, there is no

question of cross-examination of the witness.


54.        It    is     thus       difficult      to    accept      the

contention       of     the       learned       counsel      for    the

appellants      that       the     term    'evidence'        used    in

sub-section       (1)      of     Section       319    of   the    Code
                                                              3

would mean evidence which is tested by cross

examination.      The    question    of   testing       the

evidence by cross-examination would arise only

after   addition    of   the   accused.   There    is   no

question of cross-examining the witness prior

to adding such person as accused. Section does

not contemplate an additional stage of first

summoning    the    person     and   giving   him        an

opportunity of cross-examining the witness who

has deposed against him and thereafter deciding

whether such person should or should not be

added as accused. The word "evidence" occurring

in sub-section (1) of Section 319 is used in

comprehensive and broad sense which would also

include     the    material      collected    by        the

investigating officer and the evidence which

comes before the Court and from which the Court

is satisfied that person not arraigned before

it is involved in the commission of the crime.


55.       Rakesh thus ruled that an application

under Section 319 of the Code is maintainable
                                                                         3

even without completion of cross-examination of

a witness. If the Court is satisfied on the

basis of examination-in-chief of a witness that

a person not shown to be an accused appears to

have committed an offence, it can exercise the

power under Section 319 of the Code.

56.         According to Mohd. Shafi, however, no

such    order      can   be    passed     by      a    Court    under

Section 319 unless the cross-examination of the

witness is complete.

57.         Both the cases i.e. Rakesh and Mohd.

Shafi      were    decided      by    a     two       Judge    Bench.

Whereas      Rakesh      was    decided        in     2000,     Mohd.

Shafi      was    decided      in   2007.    In       Mohd.    Shafi,

however, the attention of the Court was not

invited to Rakesh.

58.         We may only observe that it is settled

law that at the stage of issuing summons or

process, a Court has to see whether there is

prima facie case against the person sought to

be summoned or against whom process is sought

to    be    issued.      At    that   stage,          there    is   no
                                                                3

question of giving an opportunity of hearing to

such person. The entire scheme of the Code is

that an accused does not come into picture at

all till process is issued. As held by this

Court    in    several   cases      including     a   leading

decision in Nagavva v. Veeranna, (1976) 3 SCC

736, the accused at pre-process stage has no

locus standi and is not entitled to be heard on

the    question     whether    the    process     should   be

issued against him or not. It may, therefore,

be said that till summons or process is issued

against       the   accused,   he     has    no   right    of

audience and in that case, it cannot be said

that    on     being   satisfied      on    the   basis    of

examination-in-chief,          an     application       under

Section 319 of the Code is not maintainable.

59.          There is yet another reason which is

also very relevant and material. When a person

who is not shown as an accused is sought to be

added on the basis of evidence in exercise of

power under Section 319 of the Code, he is not

before the Court. Other accused against whom
                                                                      3

the trial has commenced are very much before

the Court and generally they are represented by

an    advocate/advocates.       In   the     evidence       of    a

witness, when role of other person i.e. other

than the accused is described by prosecution

witnesses, normally, accused who are already on

record are not affected. Grant or rejection of

application under Section 319 would generally

not    alter    their    position.      In   our   considered

opinion,       therefore,     holding    that      unless    the

cross-examination of a witness by accused who

were already on record is over and complete, no

power under Section 319 of the Code can be

exercised, does not appear to be sound.

60.        The matter can still be looked at from

another    angle.       The   Code   has     taken   care        by

sufficiently      protecting     and     safeguarding        the

interest of such added accused. Sub-section (4)

of Section 319 expressly provides that where

the Court exercises power under sub-section (1)

and proceeds against a person not arrayed as an
                                                                         3

accused, "the proceedings in respect of such

person        shall        be     commenced         afresh,       and

witnesses re-heard". Thus, after exercise of

power by the Court under Section 319(1), such

added    accused          would   be    placed      in     the    same

position       as    other      accused     and     will    get    all

rights an accused can get under the Code. The

proceedings against the added accused shall be

commenced afresh and witnesses will be reheard.

Their    evidence,          prior      to    addition       of     the

accused cannot be used against the accused who

was     not        there     earlier.       The     question        of

prejudice, hence, does not arise at all.

61.           It    was    submitted        on    behalf    of     the

appellants that being a decision of two Judge

Bench, Rakesh was binding upon Mohd. Shafi and

the subsequent decision thus is per incurium.

The accused, on the other hand, submitted that

being    latest       in    point      of   time,    Mohd.       Shafi

should be followed by this Court.
                                                                       3
62.        In our considered opinion, however, in

the   light      of    conflicting          decisions       of   co-

ordinate Benches, (both of two Hon'ble Judges),

it would be appropriate if we refer the matter

to a Bench of three Hon'ble Judges.

63.        In    the     case   on    hand,     in    an     appeal

arising out Special Leave Petition (Crl) No.

2051 of 2007 (Manjit Pal Singh v. State of

Punjab     &    Anr.),      there     was     nothing       against

respondent No.2-Kashmir Singh and the report

submitted by the Investigating Officer had been

accepted by the trial Court as well as by the

High Court and there is no infirmity therein.

64.        Likewise, in an appeal arising out of

Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 166 of 2007

(Hardeep       Singh   v.    State    of     Punjab     &    Ors.),

Jagtar Singh was not charge-sheeted. Both the

Courts         considered       the         report      of       the

Investigating Officer and held that the action

of non-issuing of process against Jagtar Singh

could not be held illegal or unlawful. We are

of the view that the order cannot be termed
                                                                           3

unlawful        or       unwarranted          which             requires

interference.

65.        As      far       as     Vijay     Preet        Singh      is

concerned,       the     matter      stands       on   a    different

footing. His name finds place in the FIR. Not

only   that      he    was        present    at    the      place     of

offence with a weapon (gandasi) but was also

arrested      by      the    police      from      the      scene    of

offence. His name was, however, excluded and

charge sheet was not submitted in pursuance of

an application made by his father. It was the

allegation       of    the    complainant          that     the     said

action     was       taken        with   a    view         to    oblige

Sukhvinder Singh, father of Vijay Preet Singh

who was Chairman of Panchayat Samiti.

66.        We are further of the view that the

final report submitted by the Superintendent of

Police (D), Patiala to Senior Superintendent of

Police, Patiala on July 12, 2004 under Section

173 of the Code is also not in consonance with

law.
                                                                3
67.       The        said     section    provides         for

submission      of    final    report    by   the    Police

Officer on completion of investigation. Sub-

sections (1) and (2) of the said section are

relevant and read thus;

      173. Report of police officer on
      completion   of   investigation.-  (1)
      Every investigation under this Chapter
      shall be completed without unnecessary
      delay.

      (2) (i) As soon as it is completed,
      the officer in charge of the police
      station shall forward to a Magistrate
      empowered to take cognizance of the
      offence on a police report, a report
      in the form prescribed by the State
      Government, stating -

      (a) the names of the parties;

      (b) the nature of the information;

      (c) the names of the persons                  who
      appear to be acquainted with                  the
      circumstances of the case;

      (d) whether any offence appears               to
      have been committed and, if so,               by
      whom;

      (e) whether       the    accused    has   been
      arrested;

      (f) whether he has been released on
      his bond and, if so, whether with or
      without sureties;
                                                              3
      (g) whether he has been forwarded in
      custody under section 170.
      (ii)    The    officer    shall   also
      communicate, in such manner as may be
      prescribed by the State Government,
      the action taken by him, to the
      person,   if    any,   by    whom  the
      information relating to the commission
      of the offence was first given.

68.       Sub-section (1) of Section 173 of the

Code lays down that every investigation must be

completed without unnecessary delay. Slackness

or    inordinate    delay   on     the   part     of   the

investigating      agency    may     result       in   the

disappearance of material evidence which might

otherwise     be    available      and      may    prevent

effective detection of the crime. It may also

result    into     unnecessary     detention      of    the

accused in custody.

69.       Sub-section (2) enacts that as soon as

investigation      is   completed,    the    officer     in

charge of the police station shall forward a

report   to   a    Magistrate      empowered      to   take

cognizance of the offence on a police report in

the form prescribed by the State Government,
                                                                   4

stating (i) the names of the parties;

(ii) the nature of the information; (iii) the

names    of      the   persons        who    appear     to   be

acquainted with the circumstances of the case;

(iv) whether any offence appears to have been

committed and, if so, by whom; (v) whether the

accused has been arrested; (vi) whether he has

been released on his bond and, if so, whether

with or without sureties; (vii) whether he has

been forwarded in custody under section 170. He

shall   also     communicate     to    the    informant      the

action taken by him.

70.       The report contemplated by Section 173

should contain the information required by the

said provision. The Investigating Officer is

not expected to record findings of fact nor to

give clean chit by exercising power of a Court

or    judicial    authority.     In    the    instant    case,

however, the Superintendent of Police not only

refers to investigation made by him and the

statements        recorded       in     the     course       of

investigation but records a `finding' that the
                                                        4

statements were `correct'. Vijay Preet Singh

was not present at the place of offence when

the incident took place but reached after the

occurrence    was   over.   Thereafter   police   had

arrested him. Likewise, Jagtar Singh was not

present at the spot at the time of occurrence.

71.       The report stated;

      "However, Vijay Preet Singh is totally
      innocent because he came there after
      finalizing of the occurrence. The
      police had already been there after
      reaching him and the fight stood
      already   finished.   Moreover,   Balbir
      Singh Dhanoa and Hardeep Singh named
      Jagtar Singh son of Suchha Singh
      resident of Fatehmajri later on. This
      fact is also totally wrong because the
      son-in-law   of   Joginder   Singh   was
      expired a few days earlier. He was
      found to be at the ceremony of taking
      the bones with other men and women.
      Except this, this fact has also come
      in the notice that Hardeep Singh has
      stated in FIR that he was taken this
      land on lease. He went there to
      cultivate but prior to the occurrence
      Davinder   Singh   party   had   already
      cultivated his corn yield and jantars
      in this land,w hich was already 2 feet
      in height. If he wanted to cultivate
      then he could cultivate this land
      alone. What was the necessity to come
      with these group of men. It is evident
      therefrom that these all men armed
      with   their   weapons   came   to   get
      possession of this land forcibly after
                                                                4

      making a plan. The statement which was
      given by Balbir Singh Dhanoa that he
      had deposited his gun at Verma Gun
      House, Model Town, Patiala on 2.6.04
      has been deposited with connivance.
      Because    Inspector   Rajesh  Chijjar
      snatched gun from Balbir Singh Dhanoa
      with the help of his employees. Later
      on   Dhanoa   party  got   the weapons
      forcibly from the police due to a big
      gathering of men. It is recommended to
      take legal action against Verma Gun
      House, Patiala".

72.       We         may     only      state    that      the

Investigating Officer was required to submit

report in terms of Section 173 of the Code and

nothing more. He should not record a finding

nor he can give clean chit which is a function

and power of the Magistrate who will exercise

the said power as provided in the Code.

73.       Prima facie, in the light of factual

scenario,      the    submission       on   behalf   of   the

appellant is well-founded that name of Vijay

Preet Singh ought to have been included in the

charge sheet and the application under Section

319 of the Code deserves to be allowed. The

learned     counsel        for   the   accused,      however,
                                                             4

referring to Mohd. Shafi, submitted that in the

said     decision,     this    Court    held   that    the

jurisdiction under Section 319 of the Code can

be exercised by the Court only if the Court is

satisfied that in all likelihood such person

would be convicted.

74.          The Court in Mohd. Shafi, stated;

       "From the decisions of this Court, as
       noticed above, it is evident that
       before    a    court     exercises    its
       discretionary jurisdiction in terms of
       Section 319 of the Code of Criminal
       Procedure, it must arrive at the
       satisfaction   that    there   exists   a
       possibility   that    the    accused   so
       summoned is in all likelihood would be
       convicted. Such satisfaction can be
       arrived at inter alia upon completion
       of the cross-examination of the said
       witness. For the said purpose, the
       court concerned may also like to
       consider other evidence".
                           (emphasis supplied)
       [see   also   Kailash     v.   State   of
       Rajasthan & Anr., JT 2008 (3) SC 279]


75.          With respect, the above observations

do     not    appear   to     be   in   consonance    with

statutory provisions or previous decisions of

this Court. We have reproduced Section 319 of
                                                               4

the Code in the earlier part of the judgment.

Bare reading of sub-section (1) leaves no room

of doubt what it requires. It states that for

addition    of   accused,    it    must   appear   to    the

Court from the evidence that any person not

being the accused has committed any offence for

which such person should be tried along with

other accused.

76.        In Joginder Singh, a three-Judge Bench

of this Court stated;

          "A plain reading of Section 319(1),
       which occurs in Chapter XXIV dealing
       with   general    provisions   as   to
       inquiries and trials, clearly shows
       that it applies to all the Courts
       including a Sessions Court and as such
       a Sessions Court will have the power
       to add any person, not being the
       accused before it, but against whom
       there appears during trial sufficient
       evidence indicating his involvement in
       the offence, as an accused and direct
       him to be tried along with the other
       accused..."

77.        In    Michael   Mechdo,    this   Court      held

that      the     Court     must     have     reasonable
                                                                   4

satisfaction      from    the      evidence    led   that    the

other person has committed an offence.

78.        In    Krishnappa,       it    was   observed     that

such power should be exercised if there are

compelling      reasons      and    in    Mohd.   Shafi     this

Court has held that such power can be exercised

only if the Court is satisfied that the accused

so    summoned    is    in   all     likelihood      would   be

convicted. The test formulated in Mohd. Shafi

substantially curtails discretionary power of

the    Court    conferred     by    the    Code   under     sub-

section (1) of Section 319. Even on this point,

therefore,        the        matter       requires        fresh

consideration.

79.        We, therefore, refer the following two

questions for the consideration of a Bench of

three Hon'ble Judges;

     (1) When the power under sub-section (1)
         of Section 319 of the Code of addition
         of accused can be exercised by a
         Court?   Whether   application   under
         Section 319 is not maintainable unless
         the cross-examination of the witness
         is complete?
                                                                                         4
  (2)   What is the test and what are the
        guidelines of exercising power under
        sub-section (1) of Section 319 of the
        Code?   Whether  such   power   can be
        exercised   only  if   the    Court is
        satisfied that the accused summoned in
        all likelihood would be convicted?


80.       We direct the Registry to place the

matter before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of

India for taking an appropriate action.

81.       Ordered accordingly.


                           .........................................................J.

                           (C.K. THAKKER)



NEW DELHI,                 .........................................................J.
NOVEMBER 07, 2008.         (D.K. JAIN)

