
Supreme Court of India
Kumar @ Arasakumar vs State Rep.By Insp.Of ... on 20 April, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 1119 of 2008

                                                      1





                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1119 of 2008





             KUMAR @ ARASAKUMAR                                  ..... APPELLANT

                                                   VERSUS
                                                            
             STATE REP. BY INSP. OF POLICE, 
             PONDICHERRY                                      .....       RESPONDENT
                                              





                                                  O R D E R

          1.               Shanthi PW 1  is the elder sister of Ramesh,  the 

          deceased,   and   Janki,   PW2   is   their   mother.   On     10th  of 

          July,   2001   at   about   10:30   or   11:00a.m.   when   the 

          deceased   Ramesh   was   near   the   arrack   shop   in   village 

          Bommiyanpettai   there   was   some   dispute   between   him   and 

          A1 Gopal.  At that time, Ramesh assaulted Gopal who in 

          turn  threatened   him  with   dire  consequences.     This   was 

          also witnessed by PW 2 Janki.  At about 8:00pm the same 

          evening     Ramesh   was   in   his   house,   he   developed   a 

          stomach pain on which PW 1 Shanti took him to the shop 

          for getting a soda to drink.   As they were proceeding 

          to   the   shop   Gopal   came   behind   them,   caught   Ramesh   by 

          his neck with a towel and restrained him from going any 


Crl.A. No. 1119 of 2008

                                                2





          further and tried to drag him to away.   PW 1 followed 

          them   and   saw   that   the   other   five   accused   were   also 

          present.   A   village   boy   on   seeing   this   ran   home   and 

          informed PW 2 who followed him and reached the scene of 

          the   crime.     Ramesh   was   ultimately   dragged   to   the 

          Victoria   Nagar   Crossing     in   front   of   Thirupathi 

          provision   store   where   A3   and   A4   caught   hold   of   his 

          hands   and   A1   Gopal   stabbed   him   in   the   chest   and   A2 

          Kumar took out a pen knife from his pocket and stabbed 

          him   in   the   flank.     The   noise   that   came   about   also 

          attracted   PW   6   Sarasu   to   the   place   of   incident.     The 

          accused   then   ran   away   from   the   spot.     The   injured 

          Ramesh   was   then   taken   to   the   Government   Hospital 

          Pondicherry by PW 1 where he was treated by the doctor. 

          The doctor also informed the police through Exhibit P27 

          that he had been brought to the hospital in an injured 

          condition   and   that   five   persons   A1   Gopal,   and   four 

          others had caused the injuries to him.   On receipt of 

          the   note   Exhibit   P27   the   Sub   Inspector   reached   the 

          place   of   incident   and   recorded   the   statement   of   PW   1 

          and on its basis a case under Sections 342 and 307 read 

          with   Section   34   IPC            was   registered.   Ramesh 

          subsequently died leading to a case of murder as well. 

          All   the   accused   were   ultimately   arrested   and   were 

          brought to trial for offences punishable under Sections 


Crl.A. No. 1119 of 2008

                                                      3





          302/148/149 of the IPC.  The trial court relying on the 

          evidence of PW 1 and 2 acquitted A6 but convicted the 

          other   accused.     The   matter   was   thereafter   taken   in 

          appeal   to   the   High   Court   by   the   accused   who   had   been 

          convicted and the High Court allowed the appeal of A3, 

          A4 and A5 and dismissed the appeal of A1 Gopal and A2 

          Kumar   on   the   murder   charge   but   acquitted   them   of   the 

          offences under Sections 342 and 148 of the IPC.  It is 

          the admitted case that the Special Leave Petition filed 

          by   Gopal   has   been   dismissed   by   this   Court   and   as   of 

          today   the   only   person   who   remains   before   us   is   Kumar 

          A2.  

          2.               The learned counsel for the appellant has argued 

          that   the   High   Court,   having   disbelieved   the   entire 

          evidence with regard to the other accused, it was clear 

          that PW 2 could not be said to be an eye-witness more 

          particularly as her testimony found no support from the 

          medical evidence.  

          3.               Mr.   Kanagaraj,   learned   Senior   Counsel   for   the 

          Union Territory, has however, supported the judgemnt of 

          the   High   Court.     It   is   true   that   the   High   Court   has 

          disbelieved the evidence of PW 2 as she had arrived at 

          the scene after the incident and could not have been an 

          eye   witness.     We   have   no   doubt,   however,     that   her 

          evidence   inspires   full   confidence.     It   has   come   in 


Crl.A. No. 1119 of 2008

                                               4





          evidence that when the doctor had sent the information 

          to the police  by Exhibit P27, the name of only A1 had 

          been   mentioned   therein   but   the   fact   that   there   were 

          other four accused had also been noted.   Likewise, in 

          the   inquest   report   made   soon   after   the   FIR   had   been 

          recorded, the name of A2 figures as one of the accused. 

          It therefore appears that name of A2 had surfaced soon 

          after   the   investigation   had   started   subsequent   to   the 

          registration   of   the   FIR.     Some   doubt   could   have   been 

          created   had   the   medical   evidence   not   supported     the 

          ocular testimony.  We have noticed that the judgment of 

          the trial court and the High Court referred to the fact 

          that the second injury attributed to the appellant had 

          been caused in the right flank.  The 'flank' as per the 

          dictionary meaning   is  the portion of the body which 

          is  between   the  ribs   and  the   hips.    In  other   words  as 

          per the courts below the injury had been caused in the 

          abdominal cavity on the right side.  Mr. Kanagaraj, the 

          learned   Senior   counsel   for   the   respodnent-Union 

          Territory   has,   however,   pointed   out   that   this 

          translation appears to be wrong inasmuch as that PW 2 

          had stated that the injury had been caused on the ribs. 

          To assist us on this argument, we requested the learned 

          counsel   representing   the   parties   as   also   some   others 

          who   were   conversant   with   the   Tamil   language   and   were 


Crl.A. No. 1119 of 2008

                                              5





          present in Court, to help us   appreciate the evidence 

          of PW 1.   It was unanimously agreed that the evidence 

          talks   about   the   second   injury   attributed   to   the 

          appellant was in the ribs and in the chest cavity.  The 

          translation made by the trial court as well as the High 

          Court,   therefore,   finding   that   the   injury   was   in 

          adbominal   area   was   not   correct.     We,   therefore,   find 

          that   the   medical   evidence   supports   the   eye   witness 

          account   of   PW   1.     We   have   absolutely   no   reason   to 

          interfere in the matter.  The appeal is dismissed.




                                              .........................J
                                              [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                              ........................J
                                              [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]
          NEW DELHI
          APRIL 20, 2011.



