
Supreme Court of India
Surain Singh vs State Of Punjab on 27 January, 2009Author: D A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Asok Kumar Ganguly
                                                                        REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                 OF 2009
                  (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 4563 of 2008)



Surain Singh                                              ...Appellant

                                      Vs.

State of Punjab                                           ...Respondent



                               JUDGMENT

DR. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.


1.    Leave granted.


2.    Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a learned Single Judge

of Punjab and Haryana High Court            upholding the conviction of the

appellant for offence punishable under Section 13(2) of the Prevention of

Corruption Act, 1988 (in short the `Act'). According to the prosecution

version the appellant while working as a Patwari of Circle Gudher Dhandi
had demanded illegal gratification of Rs.300/- for entering the mutation on

the basis of a sale deed. Learned Special Judge, Ferozepur, by judgment

dated 28.5.1996 had found him guilty and sentenced him to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for two years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- with

default stipulation.


3.    Prosecution version in a nutshell is as follows:


      On 17.12.1990, Kehar Singh complainant approached the accused in

his office situated near Baghi Hospital, Ferozepur, for entering the mutation

in the names of his sons namely Wasakha Singh and Darshan Singh, on the

basis of the sale deed relating to 4 kanals land purchased by them from one

Ahama Ram son of Mohna Ram resident of Village Gudhar Dhandi for a

consideration of Rs.10,000/-. The accused demanded a sum of Rs.400/- as

illegal gratification for entering the mutation from the complainant, but the

bargain was settled at Rs.300/-. As the complainant was not willing to pay

the money, he approached Sohan Singh (a shadow witness) and both of

them approached the Vigilance Bureau, Ferozepur, where Babu Singh,

Inspector Vigilance Department recorded his statement Ex.PF and took into

possession three currency notes of the denomination of Rs.100/- each and



                                    2
after applying pehnophsthalene powder and after conducting the personal

search of the complainant, handed over to him the said currency notes.

Thereafter, he completed the formalities. Sohan Singh was deployed as

shadow witness and he was directed to indicate after the accused accepts the

illegal gratification. Babu Singh Inspector Vigilance Department, made his

endorsement Ex.PF/ 1 on his statement Ex.PF and sent the same to the

police station, on the basis of which FIR Ex.PR was registered at police

Station City, Ferozepur. On their way to the office of the accused, Hari

Singh, a Government employee was also joined as a witness. When the

complainant reached the office of the accused, then the accused enquired

from the complainant about the bribe money, which was demanded on the

previous day. The complainant responded in positive and handed over the

aforesaid three currency notes to the accused. After the accused put the

same into his pocket, Sohan Singh, the shadow witness gave signal after

going out of the office and the police apprehended the accused red handed.

Inspector Babu Singh after giving his identity arranged a glass tumbler and

put clean water in the same and mixed sodium carbonate and made its

solution. He got washed the hands of Han Singh in the said water but the

colour of the water did not change. Thereafter, when the accused washed his

hands, then the colour of the water turned pinkish. Thereafter, Inspector



                                    3
Babu Singh transferred the said mixture into an empty nip and prepared its

parcel, sealed it and took the same into possession vide memo Ex.PH.

Thereafter, Inspector Babu Singh searched the accused and recovered three

currency notes Ex.P1 to Ex.P3 from the front pocket of the shirt worn by

him. After comparing the numbers of the currency notes with the numbers

recorded in the memo Ex.PG, possession vide memo Ex.PJ of the same was

taken. Personal search of the accused was conducted. Documents recovered

from him were taken into possession vide memo Ex.PK. He completed the

other formalities; after recording the statements of the witnesses; got the

sanction for prosecution of the accused; collected report of the Chemical

Examiner Ex.PT and challaned the accused. The prosecution established its

case by examining Jait Kumar, Naib Sadar Kanungo (PW1), Kehar Singh

complainant (PW2), Sohan Singh (PW3), Inspector Babu Singh (PW4).

After tendering into evidence report of the Chemical Examiner Ex. PT, the

prosecution closed its evidence.


      The accused took the plea that he had not accepted any money and

had not recorded any entry in the mutation register and that the complainant

had a grudge against him.


                                    4
      The trial Court found the prosecution version to be cogent and

credible and as noted above convicted him. In appeal, the stand taken was

relating to alleged animosity. The High Court did not find any substance in

the plea. It was noted that DDR 137 dated 23.11.1989 Ex. DA recorded by

the accused had no relevance. The demarcation had taken place on

23.11.1989 whereas occurrence took place one year after the incident. In

any event, demarcation of the land is not the final verdict regarding

surrender of land. It was also noted that so far as DDR 158 dated 8.12.1990

Ex. DB is concerned, the accused never gave any complaint to his higher

officers regarding alleged threat given by the complainant. DDR has been

recorded by the accused himself. There was nothing to show that the entry

was made on 8.12.1990. During investigation there was reference to it. For

the first time it was brought to light at the time of recording of evidence.

Accordingly, the High Court dismissed the appeal.


4.    In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellant re-iterated

the alleged animosity between the parties. It was also submitted that the

occurrence took place in the year 1990, and more than 19 years have passed,

therefore, the sentence needs to be appropriately reduced.




                                    5
5.    Learned counsel for the respondent-State supported the judgment.



6.    The High Court has analysed in great detail the evidence to show that

the alleged animosity has not been established. Two witnesses PWs 2 and 3

in detail had referred to the factual scenario and nothing discrepant has been

brought on record to cast any doubt on the credibility of their evidence.



7.    Day in and day out the gigantic problem of corruption in the public

servants is on the increase. Large scale corruption retards the nation-

building activities and everyone has to suffer on that count. Corruption is

corroding like cancerous lymph nodes, the vital veins of the body politics,

social fabric of efficiency in the public service and demoralizing the honest

officers. The efficiency in public service would improve only when the

public servant devotes his sincere attention and does the duty diligently,

truthfully, honestly and devotes himself assiduously to the performance of

the duties of his post. (See: Swatantar Singh v. State of Haryana (1997 (4)

SCC 14) and State of M.P. v. Shambhu Dayal Nagar (2002 (1) SCC 1).




                                     6
8.    Considering the peculiar facts of the case, we are of the view that the

custodial sentence of one year, which is minimum prescribed, would meet

the ends of justice.


9.    The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.


                                        ...........................................J.
                                        (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                        ...........................................J.
                                        (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY)
New Delhi,
January 27, 2009




                                    7

