
Supreme Court of India
Swaroop Singh vs State Of M.P on 10 April, 2013Bench: B.S. Chauhan, Fakkir Mohamed Kalifulla
                                                                             Reportable
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 376 OF 2010


SWAROOP SINGH                                     Appellant (s)


                 VERSUS


STATE OF M.P.                                     Respondent(s)




                                  O R D E R

                 This appeal is directed against the judgment of High  Court
      of Madhya Pradesh at  Jabalpur  dated  16.7.2008  in  Criminal  Appeal
      No.301/1994.

      2.         According to the prosecution on 28.9.19992 at  12.30  p.m.,
      the prosecutrix P.W.2 was proceeding to the field for  cutting  grass.
      On the way, the appellant who was roasting Maize/Bhutta in  the  field
      of PyareLal, blocked P.W.2 and asked her to go alongwith him into  the
      field of sugarcane.  When P.W.2 refused, the appellant caught hold  of
      her by hand and forcibly took her to the sugarcane  field,  throw  her
      down, gagged her mouth with  the  saree  of  P.W.2  and  forcibly  had
      intercourse  with  her  by  threatening  her  life  at  knife   point.
      According to her by virtue of the said act  of  the  appellant,  white
      liquid started oozing out from her private parts, that she went to the
      boundary wall (Mound) where a well is situated  and  where  Ram  Singh
      Dada (P.W.4) was cutting grass.  P.W.2 informed Ram Singh Dada  as  to
      what happened, who in turn passed on the  information  to  her  Kakaji
      Hari Prasad.  Thereafter, her Kakaji Hari Prasad took P.W. 2 to  home,
      where she narrated the whole incident.  She stated  to  have  informed
      her sister Chain Bai  as  well  as  her  Kaki  and  Shanta  Bai.   She
      thereafter reported the matter to the Vilkis Ganj Police  Station  and
      after registering the report reached back home.   She  identified  the
      report as Exhibit P2.
      3.         Subsequent to the registration  of  the  case,  the  Police
      inspected the spot, seized the broken bangles  and  prepared  a  rough
      sketch.  She was examined by the doctor who seized her peticoat and X-
      ray was also taken.  The appellant was proceeded against  in  Criminal
      Case No.84/1992 for the offence punishable under Sections 376 and  506
      Part II, IPC.  The appellant having denied comission of  the  offence,
      witnesses were  examined  and  in  his  statement  under  Section  313
      Cr.P.C., the appellant pleaded total ignorance and that he was falsely
      implicated.
      4.         On the side of the prosecution P.W. 1 to 10 were  examined.
      P.W.1 Dr. Manju Saxena, who examined the prosecutrix in  her  evidence
      stated that on internal examination of P.W.2, hymen was  found  to  be
      torn in irregular manner and that two finger could easily be  inserted
      in the vagina.  She also stated that there was no flow of fresh blood.
       Two slides of vagina slabs prepared and sealed and were  handed  over
      to the police  for  forwarding  the   same  for  chemical  examination
      alongwith the Peticoat of the prosecutrix on which spots were present.
      5.         In the course of cross examination, P.W.2 deposed that when
      the appellant threw her on the ground she did not sustain any  injury;
      that she was not assaulted by way of fist blow, though  the  appellant
      threatened her not to raise any alarm by showing a knife.  She further
      deposed that when white fluid was oozing out from her  private  parts,
      blood was also found and that she  washed the stains with  water  when
      she reached the well from the place of occurrence and before  she  met
      Ram Singh.  She also deposed that she  had  swelling  in  her  private
      parts and was suffering from pain for 2-3 days.  A suggestion  put  to
      her as to why she did not object when the appellant pulled her hand to
      go, she categorically denied the said suggestion.
      6.         The trial court after detailed  analysis  of  the  evidence
      placed before it held that there  was  no  reason  to  disbelieve  the
      version of the  prosecutrix,  that  since  the  appellant  had  sexual
      intercourse with the prosecutrix against her consent, the  same  would
      fell within the offence of rape under Section  376  IPC  and   such  a
      gruesome offence was committed under the threat of  knife  point,  the
      offence of criminal intimidation  was  also  made  out  falling  under
      Section 506 Part II, IPC.
      7.         The trial Court after  convicting  the  appellant  for  the
      aforesaid  offences  imposed   punishment   for   7   years   rigorous
      imprisonment alongwith fine of Rs.2000/, in  default,  sentence  of  2
      years rigorous imprisonment for the offence under Section  376(1)  IPC
      and imprisonment of 2 years with fine of Rs.2,000/-,  in  default  six
      months rigorous imprisonment for the offence under  Section  506  Part
      II, IPC.
      8.         The trial court while reaching  the  above  conclusion  and
      while convicting the appellant  has  held  that  the  version  of  the
      prosecutrix was fully supported by the  other  witnesses  namely,  Ram
      Singh (P.W.4), to whom  she  immediately  informed,  her  Kakaji  Hari
      Prasad (P.W.5), Bansi Lal (P.W.3) and Radhey Shyam (P.W.6).  The trial
      court has found that those witnesses fully confirmed  the  version  of
      the prosecutrix.  The  evidence  of  P.W.10  Dr.  V.K.  Chaudhary  who
      examined the appellant on 17.9.1992 gave his  opinion  in  Exhibit  P6
      that the appellant was capable of performing sexual intercourse.

      9.         The sole contention of the appellant before the trial court
      was that even as per the evidence of Dr.  Manju  Saxena  (P.W.1),  who
      examined the prosecutrix,  it  was  clear  that  the  prosecutrix  was
      approximately 17 to 18  years  of  age,  that  since  she  was  having
      frequent sexual intercourse no definite opinion of rape could be given
      and therefore, it cannot be held that the appellant had  any  forcible
      sexual intercourse against the wish of the prosecutrix in order to  be
      convicted for the offence under Section 376 IPC read with Section  506
      Part II, IPC.
      10.        The High Court having considered the judgment of the  trial
      court in extenso found that there was no ground made out to  interfere
      with the judgment and confirmed the conviction and sentence imposed on
      the appellant.
      11.        Heard Mr. Ranbir Singh Kundu, learned counsel appearing for
      the appellant and Ms. Vibha Dutta Makhija, learned  counsel  appearing
      for the State.  We also perused the judgment of  the  trial  court  as
      well as that of the High Court.  In the course of submission,  learned
      counsel for the  appellant  submitted  except  the  version  of  P.W.2
      prosecutrix there was nothing stated before the trial court  to  prove
      that the appellant committed the offence rape on her, that even  going
      by the medical  evidence  as  the  prosecutrix  was  having   frequent
      intercourse though not married, it cannot be a case  of  rape  falling
      under Section 376 IPC.  The learned counsel therefore, submitted  that
      the conviction and sentence imposed on  the  appellant  by  the  trial
      court as affirmed by the appellate court is liable  to  be  interfered
      with.

      12.        As against  the  above  submission,  Ms.  Makhija,  learned
      counsel for the State contended that it is a case of offence  of  rape
      falling under Section 376 IPC,  the question whether it was  with  the
      consent of the women alleged to have been raped  has  to  be  accepted
      based on her simple statement in the court and proceed on that  basis.
      Learned counsel contended that when based on  the  evidence  of  P.W.2
      prosecutrix, it was demonstrated before the court that  the  appellant
      had sexual intercourse with her against her consent, it  was  for  the
      appellant to have proved beyond reasonable doubt that either there was
      no sexual intercourse or was there  a  consent  existed  in  order  to
      relieve the appellant of the offence alleged and found proved  against
      him.

      13.        Therefore, the only question that remains for consideration
      in the case in hand is as to whether the sexual intercourse  committed
      by the appellant on the prosecutrix P.W.2  was  with  her  consent  in
      order to hold that the appellant cannot be convicted under section 376
      IPC.  In that respect, when we examined the evidence let in,  what  is
      noted by us hereinbefore and as found by the trial court as well as by
      the  High  Court,  the  version  of  the  prosecutrix   P.W.   2   was
      unassailable.  She was stated to be 17/18 years of age on the date  of
      occurrence and  she categorically stated that the appellant who was  a
      known person, performed the act of forcible sexual intercourse against
      her wish at knife point.   Except  the  mere  denial  of  the  offence
      alleged, there was no evidence let in on behalf of  the  appellant  to
      counter the allegation levelled against him by  the  prosecutrix.   In
      such circumstances, the trial court on a detailed consideration of the
      evidence placed before it concluded that the case of  the  prosecutrix
      was cogent and convincing and also supported by the evidence of  other
      witnesses in so far as the commission of offence  of  forcible  sexual
      intercourse at knife point.

      14.        In this context it will  be  worthwhile  to  refer  to  the
      principles laid down by this Court as  to  the  manner  in  which  the
      evidence of a rape victim should be evaluated to ascertain the  truth.
      The said decision is reported in State  of  Punjab  Vs.  Gurmit  Singh
      1996(2) SCC 384.  Para 8 and 21 are relevant which reads as under:-
           “8..... The courts must, while evaluating evidence, remain alive
           to the fact that in a case of  rape,  no  self-respecting  woman
           would come forward  in  a  court  just  to  make  a  humiliating
           statement  against  her  honour  such  as  is  involved  in  the
           commission  of  rape  on  her.   In   cases   involving   sexual
           molestation, supposed  considerations  which  have  no  material
           effect  on  the  veracity  of  the  prosecution  case  or   even
           discrepancies in the statement of the  prosecutrix  should  not,
           unless the discrepancies are such which are of fatal nature,  be
           allowed to throw out an otherwise reliable prosecution case. The
           inherent bashfulness of the females and the tendency to  conceal
           outrage of sexual aggression are factors which the Courts should
           not overlook. The testimony of the victim in such cases is vital
           and  unless  there  are  compelling  reasons  which  necessitate
           looking for corroboration of her statement,  the  courts  should
           find no difficulty to act on the testimony of a victim of sexual
           assault alone to convict an accused where her testimony inspires
           confidence and is found to be reliable. Seeking corroboration of
           her statement before relying upon the same, as a rule,  in  such
           cases amounts  to  adding  insult  to  injury.  Why  should  the
           evidence of a girl of a woman who complains of  rape  or  sexual
           molestation, be viewed with doubt, disbelief or  suspicion?  The
           Court while appreciating the evidence of a prosecutrix may  look
           for some assurance of her  statement  to  satisfy  its  judicial
           conscience, since she is a witness  who  is  interested  in  the
           outcome  of  the  charge  levelled  by  her,  but  there  is  no
           requirement of law to insist upon corroboration of her statement
           to base conviction of an accused. The evidence of  a  victim  of
           sexual assault stands almost at par  with  the  evidence  of  an
           injured witness and to an extent is even more reliable. Just  as
           a witness who has sustained some injury in the occurrence, which
           is not found to be self inflicted, is considered to  be  a  good
           witness in the sense that he is least likely to shield the  real
           culprit, the evidence  of  a  victim  of  a  sexual  offence  is
           entitled   to   great   weight,   absence    of    corroboration
           notwithstanding. Corroborative evidence  is  not  an  imperative
           component  of  judicial  credence  in  every   case   of   rape.
           Corroboration as  a  condition  for  judicial  reliance  on  the
           testimony of the prosecutrix is not a requirement of law  but  a
           guidance of prudence under given circumstances. It must  not  be
           over-looked that a woman or a girl subjected to  sexual  assault
           is not an accomplice to the crime but is  a  victim  of  another
           persons’s lust and it is improper and undesirable  to  test  her
           evidence with a certain amount of suspicion, treating her as  if
           she were an accomplice.  Inferences have  to  be  drawn  from  a
           given set of facts and circumstances  with  realistic  diversity
           and not dead uniformity lest that type of rigidity in the  shape
           of rule of law is introduced through a new form  of  testimonial
           tyranny making justice a casualty.  Courts  cannot  cling  to  a
           fossil formula and insist upon corroboration even if, taken as a
           whole, the case spoken of by the victim of sex crime strikes the
           judicial mind as probable....”


           “21.  Of late, crime  against  women  in  general  and  rape  in
           particular is on the increase. It is an irony that while we  are
           celebrating women’s rights in all spheres, we show little or  no
           concern for her honour. It is a sad reflection on  the  attitude
           of indifference of the society towards the  violation  of  human
           dignity of the victims of sex crimes. We must  remember  that  a
           rapist not only  violates  the  victim’s  privacy  and  personal
           integrity, but inevitably causes serious psychological  as  well
           as physical harm in the process.  Rape is not merely a  physical
           assault - it is often destructive of the  whole  personality  of
           the victim. A murderer destroys the physical body of his victim,
           a rapist degrades the very soul  of  the  helpless  female.  The
           Courts, therefore, shoulder a great responsibility while  trying
           an accused on charges of rape. They must deal  with  such  cases
           with utmost sensitivity. The Courts should examine  the  broader
           probabilities  of  a  case  and  not   get   swayed   by   minor
           contradictions or insignificant discrepancies in  the  statement
           of the prosecutrix, which are not of a fatal  nature,  to  throw
           out an otherwise reliable prosecution case.  If evidence of  the
           prosecutrix inspires confidence, it must be relied upon  without
           seeking corroboration of her statement in material  particulars.
           If for some  reason  the  Court  finds  it  difficult  to  place
           implicit reliance on her testimony, it  may  look  for  evidence
           which  may  lend  assurance   to   her   testimony,   short   of
           corroboration  required  in  the  case  of  an  accomplice.  The
           testimony  of  the  prosecutrix  must  be  appreciated  in   the
           background of the entire case and the trial court must be  alive
           to its responsibility and be sensitive while dealing with  cases
           involving sexual molestations.”


     15.        Having heard learned counsel for  the  parties  and  having
     perused the judgment of the trial court as well as of the High  Court,
     we are convinced that the judgment of the trial court  does  not  call
     for interference.  From what has been let in by way of evidence by the
     court below, the prosecutrix  P.W.2  has  spoken  that  she  knew  the
     appellant, that she was forcibly taken to the sugarcane bush at  knife
     point and was subjected to sexual  intercourse  against  her  consent.
     She revealed the gruesome act committed by the  appellant  immediately
     after the occurrence to Ram Singh PW 5.  When she was examined by  the
     doctor, nothing could be traced about the presence of sperm  or  blood
     since admittedly before  going  to  the  Police  Station,  she  washed
     herself in the well which was nearby the place of occurrence to  which
     place she immediately went where she also  reported  the  incident  to
     Mr.Ram Singh Dada who was examined as P.W.5.

     16.        The doctor who examined the prosecutrix stated clearly that
     the hymen of the prosecutrix was torn and ruptured.

     17.        Except simply denying the offence alleged in the  statement
     under section 313 Cr.P.C., the appellant did not let in  any  evidence
     to contradict the version of the prosecutrix.  No  motive  was  either
     alleged or proved as against the prosecutrix or any of  the  witnesses
     to disbelieve the version of the prosecution witnesses or to hold that
     the Appellant  was  falsely  implicated.   Broken  bangles  were  also
     recovered from  the  place  of  occurrence  at  the  instance  of  the
     prosecutrix.  No previous grudge of the prosecutrix as against him  in
     order to falsely implicating the appellant was also suggested.

     18.        A careful reading  of  the  judgment  of  the  trial  court
     discloses that the reasons adduced by it were  cogent  and  convincing
     and there was no reason to disbelieve the same.  The conclusion of the
     High Court is also equally well reasoned and we do not find any  fault
     in the same in order to interfere with  the  same.  We  find  no  good
     ground to interfere with the well considered conclusion of  the  trial
     court as well as that of the High court.  In the light  of  our  above
     conclusion, we do not find any merit in this appeal and  the  same  is
     dismissed.

                                          ................................J.
                                                   (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)






                                          ................................J.
                                          (FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA)


      NEW DELHI;
      April 10, 2013.

