
Supreme Court of India
Raju @ Raj Kumar vs State Of Uttarakhand on 20 September, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                                        Non­Reportable

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1208  OF 2018
                               (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No.5055 of 2016)


                          Harish Chand                                      …..Appellant(s)

                                                   VERSUS

                          Smt. Urmila                                   …..Respondent(s)

                                   
                                             J U D G M E N T

                          Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.

                          1.   Leave granted.

                          2.  This appeal is directed against the final judgment

                          and   order   dated   24.02.2016   passed   by   the   High

                          Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur in S.B.

                          Criminal   Revision   Petition   No.196   of   2014   whereby

                          the   Single   Judge   of   the   High   Court   dismissed   the

Signature Not Verified    revision   petition   filed   by   the   appellant   herein   for
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.09.20

                          quashing   and   setting   aside   the   order   dated
16:51:17 IST
Reason:


                                                                                              1
17.01.2014 of the Judge, Family Court, Bharatpur in

Application No.352/13.

3.    Few   facts   need   to   be   mentioned   infra   for   the

disposal of this appeal, which involve a short point.

4.    The appellant­husband has filed this appeal by

way   of   special   leave   against   the   order   whereby   the

High Court dismissed his revision petition by passing

the following order:

            “I   have   heard   learned   counsel   for   the
      respective parties and carefully scanned the
      entire   material   made   available   to   me
      including the impugned order passed by the
      learned court below as also the fact that the
      petitioner is working as a headmaster/senior
      teacher   in   Government   school   and   he   is
      capable to maintain the respondent.”

5.     In our view, the Single Judge of the High Court

neither   set   out   the   facts   nor   considered   any

submissions   of   the   parties   and   nor   assigned   any

reasons   and   disposed   of   the   revision   petition   in   a

cryptic   manner.   Indeed,   it   is   clear   from   a   mere

reading   of   only   one   para   from   the   impugned   order




                                                                     2
quoted   supra   which   was   made   the   basis   for

dismissing the revision petition.

6.    In   the   absence   of   any   facts   mentioned,

submissions   of   both   the   parties   noted,   legal

provisions which govern the issue arising in the case

referred   and   the   reasons  assigned in the impugned

order   by   the   Single   Judge   in   the   context   of   the

submissions   urged,   we   are   unable   to   know   the

factual   background   of   the   dispute   involved   in   the

case, the reasoning of the Trial Court which led the

appellant herein to file a revision petition before the

High Court against the order of the Trial Court and

lastly, the reasoning of the High Court for dismissal

of the appellant’s revision petition.

7.    We   cannot   countenance   the   disposal   of   the

revision petition by the High Court in such a cryptic

manner and, therefore, decline to concur with such

order. 

8.    In   view   of   what   is   observed   supra,   we   do   not

wish to go into the issue on merits for the first time

                                                                       3
in this appeal and consider it proper to set aside the

impugned   order   and   remand   the   case   to   the   High

Court   for   deciding   the   revision   petition   afresh   on

merits strictly in accordance with law keeping in view

our observations made supra.

9.     The   appeal   thus   succeeds   and   is   accordingly

allowed.   Impugned   order   is   set   aside.   The   revision

petition out of which this appeal arises is remanded

to   the   High   Court   for   its   disposal   on   merits   in

accordance   with   law,   as   mentioned   above,   as

expeditiously   as   possible   preferably   within   six

months as an outer limit.

                                     .……...................................J.
                                    [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
                                

                                     .……...................................J.
                                    [S. ABDUL NAZEER]

New Delhi,
September 20, 2018.


                                                                                4

