
Supreme Court of India
Gulam Kutbuddin @ Lal Babu @ Gulam ... vs State Of Jharkhand & Anr on 3 March, 2008Bench: Ashok Bhan, Dalveer Bhandari
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  433 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Gulam Kutbuddin @ Lal Babu @ Gulam Qutubuddin & Ors

RESPONDENT:
State of Jharkhand & Anr

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03/03/2008

BENCH:
ASHOK BHAN & DALVEER BHANDARI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.433 OF 2008
[Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.)4812 of 2007]


	Leave granted.
	Respondent no.2 herein, viz., Afroozi Begam, who is the wife of appellant no.1, lodged a 
complaint against the appellants alleging therein that they  had subjected her to cruelty and 
criminal assault due to non-compliance of demand of dowry in the sum of Rs.2,00,000/-.  
The appellants allegedly had asked her to bring the said amount from her parents.
	The Trial Court dismissed the complaint on the ground that there was delay of more 
than nine months in lodging the complaint and that the allegations were vague and 
unspecific and the case was filed only to harass the appellants.
	Respondent no.2, being aggrieved, filed a Revision Petition before the Sessions Court.  
In the said petition, the appellants were not made parties.  The Addl. Sessions Judge, Fast 
Track Court, Jamshedpur, accepted the Revision Petition and set aside the  order of  the 
Trial Court and the Trial Court was 


Crl.A.No.433/08 @ SLP(Crl.)No.4812/07 .... (Contd.)
- 2 -
directed to proceed further in accordance with the provisions of law against the appellants 
by issuing processes against them and put them to trial.  
	Aggrieved against the said order of the Revisional Court, the appellants preferred an 
application under Section 482, Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing of the 
proceedings before the Trial Court.  The ground taken in the said application was that the 
Addl. Sessions Judge should have issued notice to the appellants and an opportunity of 
being heard should have been given to them.  The High Court, however, dismissed the said 
application by the impugned order dated 22nd June 2007.  
	Learned counsel for the appellants has relied upon a judgment of this Court in the case 
of P. Sundarrajan & Ors. v. R. Vidhya Sekar (2004) 13 SCC 472 to contend that it was 
mandatory for the Revisional Court to issue notice to the appellants before allowing the 
Revision Petition and setting aside the order of the Judicial Magistrate dismissing the 
complaint.  
	Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to controvert the same.
	Admittedly, the Revisional Court did not issue notice to the appellants before setting 
aside the order of the Judicial Magistrate dismissing the complaint.  It is also apparent 
from the record that the appellants were not made parties before the Revisional Court.  

Crl.A.No.433/08 @ SLP(Crl.)No.4812/07 .... (Contd.)
- 3 -
	We find force in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellants.  In the case of 
P. Sundarrajan (supra) in similar circumstances, this Court set aside the order of the High 
Court, which was the revisional court in that case, where the High Court, without issuing 
notice to the respondent therein, had directed the Magistrate to proceed with the 
complaint.  It was observed in para 5 as under : 

"In our opinion, this order of the High Court is ex facie unsustainable in law by 
not giving opportunity to the appellant herein to defend his case that the 
learned Judge violated all principles of natural justice as also the requirement of 
law of hearing a party before passing an adverse order."

In view of the above observation, this Court accepted the appeal, set aside the impugned 
judgment and remanded the matter to the High Court to issue proper notice to the accused 
therein and provide him an opportunity of hearing and pass appropriate orders.
	Following the dictum of this Court in the case of P. Sundarrajan (supra), we set aside 
the impugned order of the High Court as well as that of the Revisional Court and remand 
the case to the Revisional Court for a fresh decision in accordance with law after affording 
adequate opportunity to the appellants to defend themselves.  Parties, through their 
counsel, are directed  to  appear  before  the  Revisional Court on 07th April 


Crl.A.No.433/08 @ SLP(Crl.)No.4812/07 .... (Contd.)
- 4 -
2008.  The Revisional Court either on the said date or on a subsequent date(s) to be fixed 
by it pass appropriate orders in accordance with law.  In the meantime, the respondents 
may file appropriate application for impleading the concerned appellants as parties before 
the Revisional Court.
	The appeal is allowed accordingly.

