
Supreme Court of India
Budhadev Karmaskar vs State Of West Bengal on 26 July, 2012Bench: Altamas Kabir, Gyan Sudha Misra
                                                                             REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 135 OF 2010


         BUDHADEV KARMASKAR                         Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

         STATE OF WEST BENGAL                       Respondent(s)


                                O R D E R

           1.    CRLMP.NO.12415 of 2012, has been filed  on  behalf  of  the
           Union of India, for modification of  the  order  passed  by  this
           Court on  19th  July,  2011,  referring  certain  issues  to  the
           Committee which had been constituted by the said order itself.
           2.    The first modification sought by the Union of India is  for
           deletion of the Durbar Mahila Samanwaya Samiti, from  the  panel.
           The second modification sought is with regard to the  third  term
           of reference, which reads as follows:-

                        “(3)    Conditions conducive  for  sex  workers  who
                        wish  to  continue  working  as  sex  workers   with
                        dignity.”


           3.    Appearing in support of the application, the  learned  ASG,
           Mr. P.P. Malhotra, submitted that the Samiti in question had been
           actively   advocating   the    revocation    of    the    Immoral
           Traffic(Prevention) Act, 1956, and had also been  advocating  the
           recognition of sex trade being continued by  sex  workers.    The
           learned ASG submitted that the continuance of such Samiti in  the
           panel is giving a wrong impression to the public that  the  Union
           of India was also inclined to  think  on  similar  lines.     The
           learned ASG  submitted  that  this  wrong  impression  should  be
           removed  by excluding the Samiti from the panel.
           4.    As far as the second issue is concerned,  the  learned  ASG
           submitted that  wording  of  such  reference  could  be  suitably
           modified so as not to give an impression that the Union of  India
           was in favour of encouraging the sex workers, in contravention of
           the provisions of the aforesaid Act.
           5.    We have heard Mr. Pradip Ghosh, learned senior advocate and
           Chairman of the Committee, as also learned senior  advocate,  Mr.
           Jayant Bhushan, who is also a member of the Committee and its co-
           Chairman and Mr. Grover, learned senior advocate, on the issue.
           6.    It has been submitted by Mr. Ghosh that at the meetings  of
           the Committee, the members of the Samiti had contributed a  great
           deal towards the  understanding  of   the  problems  of  the  sex
           workers and it was not as if the said Samiti was encouraging  sex
           trade, but were  providing  valuable  inputs  into  the  problems
           being faced by   people  engaged in the trade.   Mr. Ghosh,   Mr.
           Grover, and Mr. Bhushan, in one voice urged that the presence  of
           the Samiti in the Committee was necessary even to function  as  a
           sounding board in respect of the problems that are faced by  this
           marginalised and unfortunate section of society.
           7.    We agree with the submissions made by Mr. Ghosh, Mr. Grover
           and Mr. Bhushan, learned senior counsel, and are not,  therefore,
           inclined to delete the Samiti from the Committee, as  prayed  for
           by the Union of India, and such prayer is rejected.
           8.    As to the second issue, it will not in  any  way  make  any
           difference to the terms of reference, if the wording of the third
           term of reference, is modified to the following effect:-

                          “Conditions conducive for sex workers    to  live
                          with dignity in accordance with the provisions of
                          Article 21 of the Constitution.”


           9.    The above modification, should not, however,  be  construed
           to mean that  by  this  order,  any  attempt  is  being  made  to
           encourage prostitution in any way.
           10.   CRLMP.NO.12415 of 2012, is, therefore, disposed of in  term
           of the aforesaid order.
           11.  Let this matter now be  listed  for   consideration  of  the
           Sixth and Seventh Interim Reports, filed  by  the  Committee,  on
           22nd  August, 2012, at 3.00 p.m.
           12.  Let this Bench be reconstituted on the said  date  and  time
           for the aforesaid purpose.

                                                       ...................J.
                                (ALTAMAS KABIR)
          NEW DELHI;
          JULY 26, 2012.




                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 135 OF 2010



BUDHADEV KARMASKAR                               .. Appellant

                                   Versus

STATE OF WEST BENGAL                                 ...Respondent


                                    ORDER


1.      While concurring with  the  views  of  my  learned  brother  Justice
Altamas Kabir, I prefer to add in regard  to  the  second  issue  that  this
Court should not be misunderstood to encourage the practice of  flesh  trade
or advocate the recognition of sex trade merely because it  has  raised  the
issue to emphasize the rehabilitation aspect of the sex workers,  for  which
this Court had taken  the initiative right  at  the  threshold.  I  consider
this essential in order to allay any apprehension which prompted  the  Union
of India to move this application for  modification,  by  highlighting  that
the sex workers although have a right to live with dignity  as  the  society
is aware that they are forced to continue with this trade under  compulsions
since they have no alternative source of  livelihood,  collective  endeavour
should be there on the part of the Court and all concerned who  have  joined
this cause as also the sex  workers  themselves  to  give  up  this  heinous
profession of flesh trade by providing the destitute and  physically  abused
women an alternative forum for employment and resettlement in  order  to  be
able to rehabilitate themselves. I, therefore, wish to reiterate by  way  of
abundant caution that this Court should not be  perceived  to  advocate  the
recognition of sex trade or promote the cause of prostitution  in  any  form
and manner even when it  had  stated  earlier  in  its  terms  of  reference
‘regarding conditions  conducive  for  sex  workers  who  wish  to  continue
working as sex workers with dignity’.
2.      Thus, when we  modify  the  earlier  term  of  reference  and  state
regarding conditions conducive for sex  workers  to  live  with  dignity  in
accordance with the provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution,  the  same
may not be interpreted or construed so as to create an  impression  or  draw
inference that this Court in any way  is  encouraging  the  sex  workers  to
continue with their profession of flesh trade  by  providing  facilities  to
them when it is merely making an effort to advocate the  cause  of  offering
an alternative source of employment to those sex workers who  are  keen  for
rehabilitation. When we say ‘conditions conducive for  sex workers  to  live
with dignity’, we unambiguously wish to convey that while  the  sex  workers
may be provided alternative source of employment  for  their  rehabilitation
to live life with dignity, it will  have  to  be  understood  in  the  right
perspective as we cannot direct the Union of India or the State  Authorities
to provide facilities to  those  sex  workers  who  wish  to  promote  their
profession of sex trade for earning their livelihood, except of  course  the
basic amenities for  a  dignified  life,  as  this  was  certainly  not  the
intention of this Court even when the term of reference was framed  earlier.

3.      We, therefore, wish to be understood that we  confine  ourselves  to
the efforts for rehabilitation of sex workers which should not be  construed
as facilitating, providing them assistance or creating conducive  conditions
to carry on flesh trade for expanding their business in  any  manner  as  it
cannot be denied that the profession of sex trade is a slur on  the  dignity
of women. Conditions conducive for sex  workers  to  live  with  dignity  in
accordance with  the  provisions  of  Article  21  of  the  Constitution  be
therefore understood in its correct perspective as indicated above.

                                                            …………………………………….J
                                       (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)

New Delhi,
July 26, 2012




-----------------------

7
