
Supreme Court of India
Accused X vs The State Of Maharashtra on 12 April, 2019Author: ..…………………………..……..J.
                                                                   REPORTABLE


                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                          REVIEW PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 301 OF 2008
                                              IN
                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 680 OF 2007



           ACCUSED ‘X’                                      …PETITIONER


                                            VERSUS



           STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                              ...RESPONDENT


                                      J U D G M E N T

     N. V. RAMANA, J.


1.         The instant proceedings pertain to the reopening of Review

           Petition (Crl.) No. 301 of 2008 to review the final Judgment and

           Order dated 16.05.2008 passed by this Court in Criminal Appeal

           No. 680 of 2007 dismissing the appeal filed by the Review

           Petitioner (hereinafter      “the Petitioner”) and confirming   his

           conviction under Sections 201, 363, 376 and 302 of the Indian
 Signature Not Verified

 Digitally signed by

           Penal Code (in short, “the IPC”). Vide the impugned judgment,
 VISHAL ANAND
 Date: 2019.04.15
 15:14:14 IST
 Reason:


           this Court upheld the sentence of 2 years’ rigorous imprisonment

                                              1
     each   under      Sections    201     and    363,   10    years’    rigorous

     imprisonment under Section 376 and the death sentence under

     Section 302, IPC imposed upon the Petitioner.


2.   This   petition    raises     complex       questions     concerning     the

     relationship   between       mental    illness   and     crime.    How   can

     culpability be assessed for sentencing those with mental illness?

     Is treatment better suited than punishment? These are some of

     the questions we need to reflect upon in this case at hand.


3.   In line with Section 23 (1) of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017,

     (Act 10 of 2017) and the right to privacy of the accused herein,

     while taking further action on this judgment, we direct the

     Registry to not disclose the actual name of the accused and other

     pertinent information which could lead to his identification as it

     concerns confidential information. In this context we shall

     address the accused herein as ‘accused x’.


4.   Brief facts giving rise to the present petition are as follows; the

     two deceased, viz. victim­1 (studying in the 4 th standard) and

     victim­2 (studying in the 1st standard) were cousins staying at

     Gulumb, Maharashtra, in a locality of homeless people (Beghar

     Vasti) at the house of Ramdas Jadhav (PW­13, victim­1’s father).
                                           2
     The Petitioner lived in the adjacent house with his family. On

     13.12.1999, at about 6 p.m., the Petitioner had gone to the

     grocery shop run by Sunil (PW­6), with his daughter, Reshma

     (PW­8), where he met the two deceased girls, and on the pretext

     of offering sweets, he led the girls to accompany him. Thereafter,

     he committed the rape and murder of both girls, and threw

     victim­2’s body in a well situated in the field of the father of

     Sakharam Bhiku Yadav (PW­11), and concealed the body of

     victim­1 in a “kalkache bet” (place where bamboo trees and

     shrubs grow together thickly).


5.   The Petitioner was apprehended by the villagers on the next day,

     i.e. 14.12.1999, before whom he made an extra judicial

     confession about the murder of victim­2. The same day, he also

     led the police to the recovery of the bodies of the deceased as well

     as the discovery of the spot of commission of rape, from where

     bloodstained earth and plants, half­burnt bidis and broken

     bangles were recovered. The blood­stained clothes worn by the

     Petitioner at the time of arrest were also seized. The clothes of the

     deceased were recovered at his instance on 25.12.1999. The FIR




                                       3
     came to be lodged by Jaysing Dinkar Jadhav, PW10, the brother

     of the grandfather of the deceased.


6.   The Trial Court in Sessions Case No. 142 of 2000 convicted the

     Petitioner for the offences stated supra on the basis of the ‘last

     seen’ evidence; motive of the accused; seizure of blood­stained

     clothes worn by the accused; the Chemical Analysis Report

     showing that “A” group blood was found on the shirt and pant of

     the Petitioner as well as in his nail clippings, which was the blood

     group of both the deceased; recovery of the bodies of the

     deceased at the instance of the accused; discovery of the spot of

     commission of rape of the two deceased wherefrom blood­stained

     earth and other incriminating articles were seized; extra­judicial

     confession of the Petitioner; recovery of frocks at his instance;

     and the false explanation given by the Petitioner. The Trial Court

     found that all these circumstances formed a complete chain

     pointing to the guilt of the Petitioner.


7.   The High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 652 of 2001 and

     Confirmation Case No.3 of 2001, confirmed the conviction and

     sentence as awarded by the Trial Court, including the sentence of

     death, relying upon all the aforementioned circumstances except

                                        4
     for the alleged extra­judicial confession. This Court, in appeal,

     being Criminal Appeal No. 680 of 2007, confirmed the same,

     holding that the case at hand falls into the category of the rarest

     of rare cases warranting punishment with death. Review Petition

     (Crl.) No. 301 of 2008 filed by the Petitioner against the above

     Judgment and Order of this Court was dismissed vide order

     dated 19.11.2008 by the same three­Judge Bench which had

     rendered the Judgment in appeal, who after considering the

     matter by way of circulation held that there was no merit in the

     petition.


8.   A criminal miscellaneous petition being Crl. M.P. No. 5584 of

     2015 was filed by the Petitioner seeking reopening of this review

     petition, placing reliance on the decision of this Court dated

     02.09.2014 in W.P. (Crl.) No. 77 of 2014 in Mohd. Arif @ Ashfaq

     v. The Registrar, Supreme Court of India, (2014) 9 SCC 737,

     which held that in light of Article 21 of the Indian Constitution,

     review petitions in death sentence cases were required to be

     heard orally by a three­Judge Bench, and specifically permitted

     the reopening of review petitions in all cases where review

     petitions had been dismissed by circulation.

                                      5
9.   In light of the above decision, this Court has heard the review

     petition filed by the Petitioner orally in the open Court.


10. Learned counsel for the Petitioner, Ms. Nitya Ramakrishnan, did

     not raise any argument concerning the merits of the case,

     however raised only the following two arguments:­ firstly, that the

     Trial Court had not given the Petitioner a separate hearing while

     awarding the sentence, in direct contravention of Section 235(2)

     of the Code of Criminal Procedure (in short, “CrPC”), which

     provides for the right of pre­sentencing hearing as affirmed by

     this Court in Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC

     684 and a plethora of other decisions; and secondly, that the

     award of the death sentence to the Petitioner is contrary to the

     ratio of the three­Judge Bench decision of this Court in

     Shatrughan Chauhan v. Union of India, (2014) 3 SCC 1,

     followed in a four­Judge Bench decision of this Court in Navneet

     Kaur v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2014) 7 SCC 264, which held that

     the execution of persons suffering from mental illness or insanity

     violates Article 21 of the Indian Constitution and that such

     mental illness or insanity would be a supervening circumstance

     meriting commutation of the death sentence to life imprisonment.

                                       6
11. Learned   counsel    for   the   Respondent,   i.e.   the    State   of

    Maharashtra, Mr. Nishant Ramakantrao Katneshwarkar, on the

    other hand, highlighted that the pre­sentencing hearing as

    envisaged under Section 235(2) of the Cr.P.C need not be

    conducted on a separate date, and the sentence awarded by the

    Trial Court does not stand vitiated merely because the sentence

    with respect to hearing was not conducted on a separate date. To

    that end, the counsel relied on the three­Judge Bench decision of

    this   Court   in   Vasanta      Sampat   Dupare      v.    State    of

    Maharashtra, (2017) 6 SCC 631. He also submitted that the

    Petitioner is not suffering from any mental illness so as to

    warrant commutation of the death sentence, and to that effect

    submitted certain medical reports.


12. On hearing this petition, this Court was of the opinion that there

    was no merit in the Petitioner’s submissions against the order of

    conviction, and it was therefore decided that this Court would

    hear only on the aspects of sentencing pertaining to two issues.


13. The first relates to the implications of non­compliance of Section

    235 (2) of CrPC during the sentencing process before the Trial

    Court. The second issue concerns the mental illness of ‘accused
                                      7
    x’, which was raised for the first time in this Review Petition, after

    the judgment of this Court in the earlier round.


14. On the first issue, the learned counsel on behalf of the Petitioner

    contended that considering the fact that the procedural right of

    Pre­Sentence Hearing, as envisaged under Section 235 (2) of

    CrPC, was never provided to the accused, this mandated a fresh

    hearing before the trial court on the sentencing aspect. In the

    instant case before us, the principle argument advanced by the

    counsel for the Petitioner was that, since the order of conviction

    and the order of sentence in the present case were passed on the

    same day, no opportunity was awarded to the Petitioner with

    regard to the sentence imposed upon him. Therefore, the counsel

    contended that the order of sentence passed in the present case

    is in violation of Section 235 (2) of the CrPC, which is an illegality

    vitiating the entire sentence. The counsel vehemently argued that

    a holistic reading of Section 235 (2) of the CrPC would indicate

    that the accused should be given ample opportunity to produce

    materials in his favour so as to place on record the mitigating

    circumstances which mandate the imposition of lesser penalty.




                                      8
15. It is pertinent at this point of time to note that countries following

    the common law tradition, prosecution historically did not play

    any part in the sentencing process and that it was mostly left for

    the judge to decide. In India, under the old Code, no opportunity

    was provided, post­conviction, for the accused to place relevant

    facts before the court. It was only after the introduction of the

    present Code in 1973 that such a hearing was provided for in

    accordance with modern penological practices. At this stage it

    may be necessary to quote Section 235 of CrPC, which provides

    for Pre­Sentence Hearing, among other things.


         235. Judgment of acquittal or conviction.

         …

         (2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless
         he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of
         section 360, hear the accused on the question of
         sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to
         law.


Section 235 (2) of CrPC implies that once the judgment of

    conviction is pronounced, the Court will hear the accused on the

    question of sentence and at that stage, it is open to the accused

    to produce such material on record as is available to show the

    mitigating circumstances in his favor. In other words, the
                                      9
    accused at this stage argues for imposition of lesser sentence

    based on such mitigating circumstances as brought to the notice

    of the Court by him.


16. Section 235 (2) of CrPC mandates Pre­Sentence Hearing for the

    accused and imbibes a cardinal principle that the sentence

    should be based on ‘reliable, comprehensive information relevant

    to what the Court seeks to do’. In the case at hand, the accused

    argues that his right to fair trial stands extinguished as he was

    not provided a separate hearing for sentencing. This issue can be

    resolved directly by relying on the interpretation of Section 235

    (2) of CrPC and this Court’s jurisprudence built around Pre­

    Sentence Hearing.


17. As also highlighted by the Petitioner, this requirement has also

    been affirmed by the five­Judge Bench of this Court in Bachan

    Singh v. State of Punjab (supra), wherein it was also held that

    at the stage of Pre­Sentence Hearing, the accused can bring on

    record material or evidence, which may not be strictly relevant to

    or connected with the particular crime under inquiry, but

    nevertheless, may have a bearing on the choice of sentence.



                                    10
18. The first case on this point is Santa Singh v. The State of

   Punjab, (1976) 4 SCC 190, which was decided by a Division

   Bench of this Court presided by Justice Bhagwati (as His

   Lordship then was) and Justice Fazal Ali. This case revolved on

   the fact that an accused in a double murder case was sentenced

   to death without providing an opportunity of ‘hearing’ under

   Section 235 (2) of CrPC, which was the only ground of appeal

   before the Supreme Court. This Court, by two concurrent

   opinions, remanded the matter back to the trial court for fresh

   consideration on sentencing after giving an opportunity of

   ‘hearing’ to the accused. Justice Bhagwati interpreted Section

   235 (2) of CrPC in the following manner­


         “This material may be placed before the court by
         means of affidavits, but if either party disputes the
         correctness or veracity of the material sought to be
         produced by the other, an opportunity would have to
         be given to the party concerned to lead evidence for
         the purpose of bringing such material on record. The
         hearing on the question of sentence, would be
         rendered devoid of all meaning and content and it
         would become an idle formality, if it were
         confined merely to hearing oral submissions
         without any opportunity being given to the
         parties and particularly to the accused, to produce
         material in regard to various factors bearing on the
         question of sentence, and if necessary, to lead
         evidence for the purpose of placing such material
         before the court.
                                  11
         …

         We are therefore of the view that the hearing
         contemplated by section 235 (2) is not confined
         merely to hearing oral submissions, but it is also
         intended to give an opportunity to the prosecution
         and the accused to place before the court facts and
         material relating to various factors bearing on the
         question of sentence and if they are contested by
         either side, then to produce evidence for the purpose
         of establishing the same. Of course, care would
         have to be taken by the court to see that this
         hearing on the question of sentence is not abused
         and turned into an instrument for unduly
         protracting the proceedings.”

                                         (emphasis supplied)




   Justice Fazal Ali, agreed with the aforesaid conclusion, and made

   observations along the same lines.


19. The aforesaid ruling came to be questioned in Dagdu and

   others v. State of Maharashtra, (1977) 3 SCC 68, wherein a

   similar question came before this Court. This Court, while

   repelling the submission of the counsel for the accused therein,

   who argued that the ratio in Santa Singh Case (supra)

   mandated compulsory remand of the case to the trial court, held

   as under­



                                  12
“But we are unable to read the judgment in Santa
Singh (supra) as laying down that the failure on the
part of the Court, which convicts an accused, to
'hear him on the question of sentence must
necessarily entail a remand to that Court in order
to afford to the accused an opportunity to. be
heard on the question of sentence. The Court, on
convicting an accused, must unquestionably hear him
on the question of sentence. But if, for any reason, it
omits to do so and the accused makes a grievance of it
in the higher court, it would be open to that Court to
remedy the breach by giving a hearing to the accused
on the question of sentence. That opportunity has to
be real and effective, which means that the accused
must be permitted to adduce before the Court all the
data which he desires to adduce on the question of
sentence. The accused may exercise that right either
by instructing his counsel to make oral submissions
to the Court or he may, on affidavit or otherwise, place
in writing before the Court whatever he desires to
place before it on the question of sentence. The Court
may, in appropriate cases, have to adjourn the
matter in order to give to the accused sufficient
time to produce the necessary data and to make
his contentions on the question of sentence. That,
perhaps, must inevitably happen where the conviction
is recorded for the first time by a higher court.

Bhagwati J. has observed in his judgment that care
ought to be taken to ensure that the opportunity of a
hearing on the question of sentence is not abused and
turned into an instrument for unduly protracting the
proceedings.”

                                  (emphasis supplied)




                           13
20. In Rajendra Prasad v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1979 SC

   916, the Supreme Court expressed its concern that the

   mandatory Pre­Sentence Hearing had become nothing more than

   a repetition of the facts of the case. The Bench hoped that “the

   Bar will assist the Bench in fully using the resources of the new

   provision to ensure socio­personal justice, instead of ritualising the

   submissions on sentencing by reference only to materials brought

   on record for proof or disproof of guilt”.


21. In the case of Muniappan v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1981) 3

   SCC 11, the Supreme Court noted that the trial court had

   sentenced the accused to death stating that when the accused

   was asked to speak on the question of sentence, he did not say

   anything. In such a case the Supreme Court noted that the

   requirement of Section 235(2) was not discharged by merely

   putting a formal question to the accused, and the court should

   undertake genuine efforts. The Court observed therein that, “it is

   the bounden duty of the judge to cast aside the formalities of the

   court scene and approach the question of sentence from a broad,

   sociological point of view”.


                                      14
22. The question of providing sufficient time for Pre­Sentence

   Hearing was dealt with by the Court in Allauddin Mian v. State

   of Bihar, (1989) 3 SCC 5. The Supreme Court observed that the

   trial court had not provided sufficient time to the accused for

   hearing on sentencing. Relevant factors, such as, the antecedents

   of the accused, their socio­economic conditions, and the impact

   of their crime on the community had not come on record, and in

   the absence of such information deciding on punishment was

   difficult. The Supreme Court therefore recommended that, “as a

   general rule the trial courts should after recording the conviction

   adjourn the matter to a future date and call upon both the

   prosecution as well as the defence to place the relevant material

   bearing on the question of sentence before it and thereafter

   pronounce the sentence to be imposed on the offender”. The

   aforesaid proposition was also reiterated in Malkiat Singh v.

   State of Punjab, (1991) 4 SCC 341.


23. On the other hand, in Sevaka Perumal v. State of Tamil Nadu,

   AIR 1991 SC 1463, this Court upheld the death sentence even

   though it was argued that no time had been given to raise

   grounds on sentencing by the trial court. This Court observed
                                   15
   that, during the appeal, the defence counsel had been unable to

   provide any additional grounds on sentence and therefore no

   prejudice had been caused to the accused.


24. In State of Maharashtra v. Sukhdev Singh, (1992) 3 SCC 700,

   the Supreme Court clarified that while Section 309 of the CrPC

   prescribed no power for adjournment of sentencing hearings,

   these should be provided where the accused sought to produce

   materials in capital cases. In Jai Kumar v. State of Madhya

   Pradesh, AIR 1999 SC 1860, this Court observed that the trial

   court had given an opportunity to the defence to produce

   materials, which they chose not to do, and had considered the

   mitigating circumstances raised by them. This Court opined that,

   in such circumstances, it was not a miscarriage of justice that

   the judge did not adjourn the hearing.


25. In Anshad v. State of Karnataka, (1994) 4 SCC 381, this Court

   disapprovingly noted that the trial judge had dealt with

   sentencing cryptically in one paragraph and this defeated the

   very object of Section 235(2) of CrPC, exposing a “lack of

   sensitiveness on his part while dealing with the question of

   sentence”. Commuting the sentences of the appellants, the
                                  16
    Supreme Court observed that both the lower courts did not

    appreciate the aggravating and mitigating circumstances and

    therefore their entire approach to sentencing was incorrect.


26. The aforesaid principle was further elucidated in the case of B.A.

    Umesh v. Registrar General, High Court of Karnataka, (2017)

    4 SCC 124, wherein it was held that a review petition cannot be

    allowed merely because no separate date was given for hearing on

    the sentence. This Court held that Section 235(2) of CrPC does

    not mandate separate date for the hearing of the sentence,

    rather, it is dependent on the facts and circumstances of the

    case, for instance, if parties insist to be heard on separate dates.


27. As per the order dated 03.02.2017 in Mukesh v. State (NCT of

    Delhi), (2017) 3 SCC 717, this Court, having found that there

    was no compliance of Section 235 (2) of CrPC by the court’s

    below, observed as under­


             “Having considered all the authorities, we find
             that there are two modes, one is to remand the
             matter or to direct the accused persons to
             produce necessary data and advance the
             contention on the question of sentence.
             Regard being had to the nature of the case, we
             think it appropriate to adopt the second mode.
             To elaborate, we would like to give opportunity
                                     17
            before conclusion of the hearing to the accused
            persons to file affidavits along with documents
            stating about the mitigating circumstances.
            Needless to say, for the said purpose, it is
            necessary that the learned Counsel, Mr. M.L.
            Sharma and his associate Ms. Suman and Mr.
            A.P. Singh and his associate Mr. V.P. Singh
            should be allowed to visit the jail and
            communicate with the accused persons and file
            the requisite affidavits and materials.”

                                           (emphasis supplied)




28. In the final order of Mukesh v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2017) 6

   SCC 1, this Court held that in the event the procedural

   requirements under Section 235 (2) of the CrPC are not met, the

   appellate court can either remit the case back to the trial court or

   adjourn the matter before the appellate forum for hearing on

   sentence after giving an opportunity to adduce evidence. On the

   other hand, the court also noted that any deficiency in non­

   compliance of Section 235 (2) of CrPC can be cured by providing

   the opportunity at the appellate stage itself so as to curtail the

   delay in the proceedings. In that case, this Court had allowed the

   accused to file an affidavit listing the mitigating circumstance,

   noticing that no pre­hearing on sentence was ever carried out.




                                    18
29. Two recent three­Judge Bench decisions of this Court on this

   aspect merit our consideration. Firstly, in the decision dated

   28.11.2018 in Chhannu Lal Verma v. State of Chhattisgarh

   (Criminal Appeal Nos. 1482­1483 of 2018), this Court observed

   that not having a separate hearing at the stage of trial was a

   procedural impropriety. Noting that a bifurcated hearing for

   conviction and sentencing was a necessary condition laid down in

   Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar, (2009) 6 SCC 498,

   the Court held that by conducting the hearing for sentencing on

   the same day, the Trial Court failed to provide necessary time to

   the appellant therein to furnish evidence relevant to sentencing

   and mitigation. We find that this cannot be taken to mean that

   this Court intended to lay down, as a proposition of law, that

   hearing the accused for sentencing on the same day as for

   conviction would vitiate the trial. On the contrary, in the said

   case, it was found on facts that the same was a procedural

   impropriety because the accused was not given sufficient time to

   furnish evidence relevant to sentencing and mitigation.


30. Secondly, in the decision dated 12.12.2018 in            Rajendra

   Prahladrao Wasnik v. State of Maharashtra, (Review Petition

                                   19
    (Crl.) Nos. 306­307 of 2013), this Court made a general

    observation that in cases where the death penalty may be

    awarded, the Trial Court should give an opportunity to the

    accused after conviction which is adequate for the production of

    relevant material on the question of the propriety of the death

    sentence. This is evidently at best directory in nature and cannot

    be taken to mean that a pre­sentence hearing on a separate date

    is mandatory.


31. It may also be noted that in the older three­Judge Bench decision

    of this Court in Malkiat Singh Case (supra), the Court observed

    that keeping in mind the two­Judge Bench decisions in

    Allauddin Mian Case (supra) and Anguswamy v. State of

    Tamil Nadu, (1989) 3 SCC 33, wherein it had been laid down

    that a sentence awarded on the same day as the finding of guilt is

    not in accordance with law, the normal course of action in case of

    violation of such procedure would be remand for further

    evidence. However, on a perusal of these two decisions we find

    that their import has not been correctly appreciated in Malkiat

    Singh Case (supra), since the observations in Allauddin Mian

    Case (supra), as relied upon in Anguswamy Case (supra),

                                    20
   regarding conduct of hearings on separate dates, were only

   directory. Be that as it may, it must be noted that the effect of

   Malkiat Singh Case (supra) has already been considered by this

   Court in Vasanta Sampat Dupare Case (supra), wherein it was

   already noted that the mere non­conduct of the pre­sentence

   hearing on a separate date would not per se vitiate the trial if the

   accused has been afforded sufficient time to place relevant

   material on record.


32. It may not be out of context to note that in case the minimum

   sentence is proposed to be imposed upon the accused, the

   question of providing an opportunity under Section 235(2) would

   not arise. (See Tarlok Singh v. State of Punjab, (1977) 3 SCC

   218; Ramdeo Chauhan v. State of Assam, (2001) 5 SCC 714).


33. There cannot be any doubt that at the stage of hearing on

   sentence, generally, the accused argues based on the mitigating

   circumstances in his favour for imposition of lesser sentence. On

   the other hand, the State/the complainant would argue based on

   the aggravating circumstances against the accused to support

   the contention relating to imposition of higher sentence. The

   object of Section 235 (2) of the Cr.P.C is to provide an
                                    21
    opportunity for accused to adduce mitigating circumstances. This

    does not mean, however, that the Trial Court can fulfil the

    requirements of Section 235(2) of the Cr.P.C. only by adjourning

    the matter for one or two days to hear the parties on sentence. If

    the accused is ready to submit his arguments on this aspect on

    the very day of pronouncement of the judgment of conviction, it is

    open for the Trial Court to hear the parties on sentence on the

    same day after passing the judgment of conviction. In a given

    case, based on facts and circumstances, the Trial Court may

    choose to hear the parties on the next day or after two days as

    well.


34. In light of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that as long

    as the spirit and purpose of Section 235(2) is met, inasmuch as

    the accused is afforded a real and effective opportunity to plead

    his case with respect to sentencing, whether simply by way of

    oral submissions or by also bringing pertinent material on

    record, there is no bar on the pre­sentencing hearing taking place

    on the same day as the pre­conviction hearing. Depending on the

    facts and circumstances, a separate date may be required for




                                     22
   hearing on sentence, but it is equally permissible to argue on the

   question of sentence on the same day if the parties wish to do so.


35. Now we need to consider the impact of non­compliance of

   procedure provided under Section 235 (2) of CrPC by the trial

   court. Even assuming that a procedural irregularity is committed

   by the trial court to a certain extent on the question of hearing on

   sentence, the violation can be remedied by the appellate Court by

   providing sufficient opportunity of being heard on sentence. It

   must be kept in mind that Section 465 of the CrPC mandates

   that no finding, sentence or order passed by the Court of

   competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or altered by the Court

   of appeal on account of any error, omission or irregularity in the

   order, judgment and other proceedings before or during trial

   unless such error, omission or irregularity results in a failure of

   justice. Such non­compliance can be remedied by the appellate

   Court by either remanding the matter in appropriate cases or by

   itself giving an effective opportunity to the accused.


36. The narrative provided by numerous cases on this aspect

   portrays a picture of the appellate Court trying to balance two

   important rights, viz., right to fair trial and right to speedy trial.

                                     23
    On one side, is the procedural right granted to the accused under

    Section 235 (2) of CrPC, and on the other side is the possibility of

    misuse to delay the trial. The experienced judges in India have

    enough expertise to distinguish, between the schemes for

    protracting trials from that of genuine causes in order to protect

    rights of the accused.


37. This brings us to the role of appellate courts under our Criminal

    Justice System. There is no dispute that under our chosen

    system, that the highest discretion is provided to trial courts.

    Sometimes appellate courts, in order to preserve the competing

    factors in play, provides discretion for the trial court to operate.

    However, appellate court must adopt a ‘cautionary approach’

    when providing such indulgence, which must be restricted and

    balanced against competing interests. 1 The narration of various

    court dicta, which are cited above, provide for a cautionary tale

    right from Santa Singh Case onwards, as the choice of solution

    for remedying non­compliance of Section 235 (2) of CrPC provides

    for selection of at least two different modes.




    1 Dame Sian Elias, Fairness in Criminal Justice (golden threads and pragmatic patches),
    Hamlyn Lectures (2018)
                                              24
38. As noted above, many cases have grappled with the question as

   to the choice between the two. The approach of this Court needs

   to be rationalized and understood in the light of cautionary

   approach discussed above. From the aforesaid discussion,

   following dicta emerge­


      i.     That the term ‘hearing’ occurring under Section 235 (2)
             requires the accused and prosecution at their option, to
             be given a meaningful opportunity.

      ii.    Meaningful hearing under Section 235 (2) of CrPC, in the
             usual course, is not conditional upon time or number of
             days granted for the same. It is to be measured
             qualitatively and not quantitatively.

      iii.   The trial court need to comply with the mandate of
             Section 235 (2) of CrPC with best efforts.

      iv.    Non­compliance can be rectified at the appellate stage as
             well, by providing meaningful opportunity.

      v.     If such an opportunity is not provided by the trial court,
             the appellate court needs to balance various
             considerations and either afford an opportunity before
             itself or remand back to trial court, in appropriate case,
             for fresh consideration.

      vi.    However, the accused need to satisfy the appellate courts,
             inter alia by pleading on the grounds as to existence of
             mitigating circumstances, for its further consideration.

      vii.   Being aware of certain harsh realities such as long
             protracted delays or jail appeals through legal aid etc.,
             wherein the appellate court, in appropriate cases, may
             take recourse of independent enquiries on relevant facts
             ordered by the court itself.


                                     25
      viii. If no such grounds are brought by the accused before the
            appellate courts, then it is not obligated to take recourse
            under Section 235 (2) of CrPC.

39. Having discussed the law on pre­sentence hearing, it would be

    appropriate at this juncture to revisit the decisions of the Courts,

    leading to this review in order to ascertain whether the Petitioner

    was given an effective opportunity to place material on record

    relevant to the quantum of sentence, in this instant case.


40. The Trial Court heard the Petitioner on the aspect of imposition

    of sentence separately, which is amply clear from paragraphs 79­

    87 of the judgment of the Trial Court. Hence, based on the

    material on record we are satisfied that the Trial Court has fully

    complied with the requirement of Section 235(2) of the CrPC,

    While coming to its conclusion, the Court held that the

    aggravating circumstances of the crime, i.e. the magnitude and

    manner of commission of the crime in the form of the

    kidnapping, rape and murder of two minor girls, outweighed the

    mitigating circumstances of the accused, i.e. the dependency of

    his aged mother on him, and his young age. The Court also gave

    weightage to the prior convictions of the accused for the same

    kind of offence, i.e. for the offence of rape of a nine­year­old girl

    child under Sections 376 and 506 of the IPC and Section 57 of
                                     26
   the Bombay Children Act, as well as for the kidnapping and rape

   of a seven­year­old girl child under Sections 363 and 366 of the

   IPC. It may be noted here itself that in light of his two prior

   convictions, the Trial Court also gave him an opportunity to be

   heard on the question of Section 75 of the IPC, which pertains to

   enhance punishment for certain offences under Chapter XII or

   XVII of the IPC after previous conviction, but the factum of these

   convictions was also not contested by the Petitioner.


41. Before the High Court as well, further material was brought on

   record by the Petitioner regarding his discharge in one case

   related to offences of the same nature, which the Court found to

   not be in the nature of a mitigating circumstance. The High Court

   was of the opinion that the dependency of aged parents could

   also not be considered as a mitigating circumstance to begin

   with, and that the accused was not young enough for his age to

   be considered as a mitigating circumstance. The High Court

   noted   the   absence   of   any   extreme   mental   or   emotional

   disturbance leading to the commission of the offence, and

   observed that given the past offending history of the accused,

   there was no hope of his reform or rehabilitation. The Court also


                                      27
    noted the barbaric nature of the offence, inasmuch as the

    Petitioner had cold­bloodedly raped and murdered two innocent

    and defenceless girls by abusing the faith that they had reposed

    in him as their neighbour, and concluded that he would pose a

    threat to society even if released for the smallest period of time,

    and might commit similar acts in the future. On this basis, the

    High Court affirmed the death penalty awarded to the accused.


42. The Supreme Court, in appeal, being Criminal Appeal No. 680 of

    2007, also determined the case to fall into the category of the

    rarest of rare cases.


43. The record in the instant matter therefore clearly shows that the

    accused was accorded a real and effective opportunity at the trial

    stage itself. It may further be stated that the opportunity granted

    to the Petitioner by the High Court to adduce further material on

    this aspect was above and beyond the requirement of Section

    235(2). The Courts had taken all the attendant circumstances

    into account before reaching the conclusion of awarding the

    death penalty. It is also not the case that the accused made a

    request for hearing on sentencing on a separate date and the

    same was refused. In such circumstances, we reject the

                                    28
   contention that the procedure envisaged in Section 235(2) of the

   CrPC was not complied with in the present case.




44. Now we need to consider the second issue concerning post­

   conviction mental illness as a mitigating factor for converting a

   death sentence to life imprisonment.


45. It is pertinent for us to understand the phenomenon of post­

   conviction mental illness. As the phrase itself suggests, it is only

   after being proven guilty, that the convict has developed such

   illness. It is well acknowledged fact throughout the world that,

   prisons are difficult places to        be in. The World Health

   Organisation and the International Red Cross, identify multiple

   circumstances such as overcrowding, various forms of violence,

   enforced solitude, lack of privacy, inadequate health care

   facilities, concerns about family etc, can take a toll on the mental

   health of the prisoners. Due to the prevailing lack of awareness

   about such issues,    the prisoners have no recourse and their

   mental health keeps on degrading day by day. The prevailing

   argument in favour of such prisoners is that; whether the
                                    29
    imposition of death penalty upon such prisoners is justified, who

    have clearly impaired their abilities to even understand the

    nature and purpose of such punishment and the reasons for

    such imposition? The aforesaid issues will be dealt at length at

    the later stage.


46. The accused has now pleaded an entirely new ground of post­

    conviction mental illness for the first time herein, which obliges

    us to go into the aspect of sentencing afresh. It is also brought to

    our notice that the appellant has been a death row convict for

    almost 17 years, mandating us to resolve the issue of sentencing

    herein. Before we consider the appropriate punishment for the

    accused herein, a reference needs to be made to the background

    principles concerning sentencing policy considering that the

    present Petitioner is pleading a mitigating factor which has arisen

    post­conviction.


47. Sentencing is appropriate allocation of criminal sanctions, which

    is mostly given by the judicial branch. 2 This process occurring at

    the end of a trial still has a large impact on the efficacy of a

    Criminal Justice System. It is established that sentencing is a

    2 Nicola Padfield, Rod Morgan and Mike Maguire, ‘Out of Court, out of sight? Criminal
    sanctions and no­judicial decision making’, The Oxford Handbook of Criminology (5th Ed.).
                                               30
   socio­legal process, wherein a judge finds an appropriate

   punishment for the accused considering factual circumstances

   and equities. In light of the fact that the legislature provided for

   discretion to the judges to give punishment, it becomes important

   to exercise the same in a principled manner. We need to

   appreciate that a strict fixed punishment approach in sentencing

   cannot be acceptable, as the judge needs to have sufficient

   discretion as well.


48. Before analyzing this case, we need to address the issue of the

   impact of reasoning in the sentencing process. The reasoning of

   the trial court acts as a link between the general level of sentence

   for the offence committed and to the facts and circumstances.

   The trial court is obligated to give reasons for the imposition of

   sentence, as firstly, it is a fundamental principle of natural

   justice that the adjudicators must provide reasons for reaching

   the decision and secondly, the reasons assume more importance

   as the liberty of the accused is subject to the aforesaid reasoning.

   Further, the appellate court is better enabled to assess the

   correctness of the quantum of punishment challenged, if the trial

   court has justified the same with reasons. The aforesaid principle


                                    31
   is fortified not only by the statute under Section 235 (2) of CrPC

   but also by judicial interpretation. Any increase or decrease in

   the quantum of punishment than the usual levels need to be

   reasoned by the trial court. However, any reasoning dependent

   on moral and personal opinion/notion of a Judge about an

   offence needs to be avoided at all costs.


49. Sentencing in India, is a midway between judicial intuition and

   strict application of rule of law. As much as we value the rule of

   law, the process of sentencing needs to preserve principled

   discretion for a judge. In India, sentencing is mostly led by

   ‘guideline judgments’ in the death penalty context, while many

   other countries like United Kingdom and United States of

   America, provide a basic framework in sentencing guidelines.


50. Although at the outset, it is clarified that this Court may not

   laydown a ‘definitive sentencing policy’, which is rather a

   legislative function, however, the Courts in India have addressed

   this problem in a principled manner having regards to judicial

   standards and principles. These judicially set­principles not only

   serve as instructive guidelines, but also preserve the required

   discretion of the trial judges while sentencing. Such an effort has

                                    32
   already been initiated by the Supreme Court, in Sunil Dutt

   Sharma Case, (2014) 4 SCC 375, when the sentencing

   guidelines evolved in the context of death penalty were applied to

   a lesser sentence as well. However, achieving sentencing

   uniformity may not only require judicial efforts, but even the

   legislature may be required to step in.


51. Moreover, our attention is also drawn to the Malimath Committee

   Report on Reforms in the Criminal Justice System, which

   recommended creation of a statutory body for prescribing

   sentencing guidelines. Before concluding the aforementioned

   observations highlighting the dangers of sentencing discretion,

   we are reminded of the words of Justice Krishna Iyer, who held

   that “Guided missiles with lethal potential, in unguided hands,

   even judicial, is a grave risk where the peril is mortal though

   tempered by the appellate process.” [refer Rajendra Prasad v.

   State of Uttar Pradesh (1979) 3 SCC 646]


52. In any case, considering that a large part of the exercise of

   sentencing discretion is principled, a Judge in India needs to

   keep in mind broad purposes of punishment, which are

                                    33
    deterrence,   incapacitation,    rehabilitation,   retribution   and

    reparation (wherever applicable), unless particularly specified by

    the legislature as to the choice. The purposes identified above,

    marks a shift in law from crime­oriented sentencing to a holistic

    approach wherein the crime, criminal and victim have to be

    taken into consideration collectively.


53. Having observed some of the general aspects of sentencing, it is

    necessary to consider the aspect of post­conviction mental illness

    as mitigating factor in the analysis of ‘rarest of the rare’ doctrine

    which has come into force post Bachan Singh Case (supra).


54. As a starting point we need to refer to Piare Dusadh v. King

    Emperor, AIR 1944 FC 1, has already recognized post­conviction

    mental illness as a mitigating factor in the following manner­


              Case No. 47­The appellant in this case was
              convicted by a Special Judge of the offence of
              murder and was sentenced to death on 30th
              September 1942. His appeal to the Allahabad
              High Court was dismissed and the sentence of
              death was confirmed. The appellant is a young
              man of 25 who has been twice widowed. His
              victim was his aunt, 30 years of age, whose
              husband (Kanchan) had about six years
              previously murdered his own brother, appellant's
              father. Kanchan was sentenced to death for the

                                     34
murder, but lost his reason while awaiting the
execution of the death sentence, and is now
detained as a lunatic. The evidence in this case
leaves no room for doubt that the appellant was
rightly convicted of murder. There is some
confusion as to the exact motive for the
undoubtedly brutal assault of which the
appellant made his aunt the victim. The
prosecution alleged that the appellant being a
widower was chagrined by the refusal of his aunt
to become his mistress. In his statement before,
the Special Judge he said that another uncle
(P.W. 7) who according to the appellant was
behind the prosecution was on terms of improper
intimacy with the deceased and resented even
small acts of kindness on the part of the
deceased towards the appellant. In the appeal
preferred by him through the jail authorities to
the High Court, the appellant stated that his
aunt was a woman of loose character and was
pursuing him with unwelcome attentions. The
previous history of this family indicates that the
appellant probably suffers from an unbalanced
mind. The nature and ferocity of the assault
upon his aunt appear to confirm this.




In committing the offence the appellant must
have been actuated by jealousy or by
indignation either of which would tend
further to disturb the balance of his mind. He
has besides been awaiting the execution of his
death sentence for over a year. We think that
in this case a sentence of transportation for
life would be more appropriate than the
sentence of death.


                     35
               We accordingly reduce the sentence of death
               to one of transportation for life and subject to
               this modification dismiss the appeal.

                                                   (emphasis supplied)

    However, this case does not provide any guidelines or the

    threshold for evaluating what kind of mental illness needs to be

    taken into consideration by the Courts.


55. We note that, usually, mitigating factors are associated with the

    criminal and aggravating factors are relatable to commission of

    the crime. These mitigating factors include considerations such

    as the accused’s age, socio­economic condition etc. We note that

    the ground claimed by ‘accused x’ is arising after a long­time gap

    after crime and conviction. Therefore, the justification to include

    the same as a mitigating factor does not tie in with the equities of

    the case, rather the normative justification is founded in the

    Constitution as well as the jurisprudence of the ‘rarest of the

    rare’ doctrine. It is now settled that the death penalty can only be

    imposed in the rarest of the rare case which requires a

    consideration of the totality of circumstances. In this light, we

    have to assess the inclusion of post­conviction mental illness as a

    determining factor to disqualify as a ‘rarest of the rare’ case.

                                      36
56. Sentencing generally involves curtailment of liberty and freedom

    for the accused. Under Article 21 of the Constitution, right to life

    and liberty cannot be impaired unless taken by jus laws. In this

    case we are concerned with the death penalty, which inevitably

    affects right to life, and is subjected to a various substantive and

    procedural protections under our criminal justice system. An

    irreducible core of right to life is ‘dignity’. [refer Navtej Singh

    Johar v. Union of India, AIR 2018 SC 4321]. Right to human

    dignity comes in different shades and colours. [refer Common

    Cause v. Union of India, AIR 2018 SC 1665]. For our purposes,

    the dignity of human being inheres a capacity for understanding,

    rational choice, and free will inherent in human nature, etc. The

    right to dignity of an accused does not dry out with the judges’

    ink, rather, it subsists well beyond the prison gates and operates

    until his last breath. In the context of mentally ill prisoners it is

    pertinent to mention that Section 20 (1) of the Mental Health

    Care Act, 2017, Act No. 10 of 2017, explicitly provides that ‘every

    person with mental illness shall have a right to live with dignity’.


57. All human beings possess the capacities inherent in their nature

    even though, because of infancy, disability, or senility, they may
                                      37
    not yet, not now, or no longer have the ability to exercise them.

    When such disability occurs, a person may not be in a position to

    understand the implications of his actions and the consequence

    it entails. In this situation, the execution of such a person would

    lower the majesty of law.


58. Article 20 (1) of the Indian Constitution imbibes the idea

    communication/knowledge for the accused about the crime and

    its punishment. It is this communicative element, which is

    ingrained in the sentence (death penalty), that gives meaning to

    the punishments in a criminal proceeding. The notion of death

    penalty and the sufferance it brings along, causes incapacitation

    and is idealized to invoke a sense of deterrence. If the accused is

    not able to understand the impact and purpose of his execution,

    because of his disability, then the raison d’être for the execution

    itself collapses.


59. It may not be out of context to refer Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S.

    304 (2002), wherein the United States Supreme Court, while

    dealing with the question ‘whether the execution of mentally

    retarded persons "cruel and unusual punishment" prohibited by

    the Eighth Amendment?’ The Court noted that hanging mentally
                                    38
   disabled or retarded neither increases the deterrence effect of

   death penalty nor does the non­execution of the mentally

   disabled will measurably impede the goal of deterrence.


60. Moreover, Article 20 of the Constitution guarantees individuals

   the right not to be subjected to excessive criminal penalty. The

   right flows from the basic tenet of proportionality. By protecting

   even those convicted of heinous crimes, this right reaffirm the

   duty to respect the dignity of all persons. Therefore, our

   Constitution embodies broad and idealistic concepts of dignity,

   civilized standards, humanity, and decency against which penal

   measures have to be evaluated. In recognizing these civilized

   standards, we may refer to the aspirations of India in being a

   signatory        to    the     Convention           on    Rights      of    Persons        with

   Disabilities, which endorse ‘prohibition of cruel, inhuman or

   degrading punishments’ with respect to disabled persons.

   Additionally, when the death penalty existed in England, there

   was a common law right barring execution of lunatic prisoners. 3




   3 Hale's Pleas of the Crown Vol. I ­ p. 33; Coke's Institutes, Vol. III, pg. 6; Black­stone's
   Commentaries on the Laws of England Vol. IV, pages 18 and 19; , "An Introduction to
   Criminal Law", by Rupert Cross, (1959), p. 67.
                                                  39
   Additionally, there is a strong international consensus against

   the execution of individuals with mental illness.4


61. We may note that various prison rules in India also recognizes

   that generally the Government has the duty to pass appropriate

   orders on execution, if a person is found to be lunatic. Andhra

   Pradesh Prison Rules, 1979, Rule 796; Gujarat Prisons (Lunatics)

   Rules, 1983; Delhi Prison Rules, 2018, Rule 824; Tamil Nadu

   Prison Rules, 1983, Rule 923; Maharashtra Prison Manual, 1979,

   Chapter XLII (Government Notification, Home department, No.

   RJM­1058 (XLVI)/12,495­XVI, dated 18.01.1971); Model Prison

   Manual by Ministry of Home Affairs (2016), Rule 12.36 are some

   of the examples of legal instruments in India which have already

   recognized post­conviction mental illness as a relevant factor for

   Government to consider under its clemency jurisdiction.


62. Having understood the normative basis for recognition of post­

   conviction mental illness as a mitigating factor in a death penalty

   case, we must mention that Shatrughan Chauhan Case (supra)

   had identified the same and holds as under:



   4 Commission on Human Rights Resolution 2000/65 The question of the death penalty, UN
   Commission on Human Rights (Apr. 27, 2000); G.A. Res. 69/186, ¶ 5(d) (Feb. 4, 2015);
                                              40
             “86. The above materials, particularly, the
             directions of the United Nations international
             conventions, of which India is a party, clearly
             show that insanity/mental illness/schizophrenia
             is a crucial supervening circumstance, which
             should be considered by this Court in deciding
             whether in the facts and circumstances of the
             case death sentence could be commuted to life
             imprisonment. To put it clear, “insanity” is a
             relevant supervening factor for consideration by
             this Court.”



63. Now we need to consider the test for recognizing an accused

   eligible for such mitigating factor. It must be recognized that

   insanity recognized under IPC and the mental illness we are

   considering in the present case arise at a different stage and

   time. Under IPC, Section 84 recognizes the plea of legal insanity

   as a defence against criminal prosecution. [refer Surendra

   Mishra v. State of Jharkhand, (2011) 3 SCC (Cri.) 232]. This

   defence is restricted in its application and is made relatable to

   the moment when the crime is committed. Therefore, Section 84

   of IPC relates to the mens rea at the time of commission of the

   crime, whereas the plea of post­conviction mental illness is based

   on appreciation of punishment and right to dignity. [refer Amrit

   Bhushan Gupta v. Union of India, AIR 1977 SC 608] The


                                   41
    different   normative    standards        underpinning      the   above

    consequently mean different threshold standards as well.


64. On the other hand, considering the fact that the case is at the fag

    end of the process and the mitigating factors so discussed above

    were not emergent at the time of commission of the crime,

    therefore this ground needs to be utilized only in extreme cases of

    mental illness considering the element of marginal retribution

    which survives. In any case, considering that India has taken an

    obligation at an international forum to not punish mental

    patients with cruel and unusual punishments, it would be

    necessary for this Court to provide for a test wherein only

    extreme cases of convicts being mentally ill are not executed.

    Moreover, this Court cautions against utilization of this dicta as a

    ruse to escape the gallows by pleading such defense even if such

    aliment is not of grave severity.


65. Before we analyse this case at hand, a brief survey of

    classification of mental illness and its impact on death penalty

    needs to be considered. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of

    Mental Disorders     (DSM),   is    one   of   the   most   well­known

    classification and diagnostic guides for mental disorders in

                                        42
    America. Its fifth edition (DSM­5), published in 2013, defines

    mental disorder as follows: ­


              A    mental      disorder     is    a     syndrome
              characterized      by    clinically      significant
              disturbance in an individual’s cognition,
              emotion regulation, or behaviour that reflects
              a dysfunction in the psychological, biological,
              or    developmental      processes       underlying
              mental functioning. Mental disorders are
              usually associated with significant distress in
              social, occupational, or other important
              activities. An expectable or culturally approved
              response to a common stressor or loss, such as
              the death of a loved one, is not a mental disorder.
              Socially deviant behavior (e.g., political, religious,
              or sexual) and conflicts that are primarily
              between the individual and society are not
              mental disorders unless the deviance or conflict
              results from a dysfunction in the individual, as
              described above.


66. ‘Severe Mental Illness’ under the ‘International Classification of

    Diseases (ICD)’, which is accepted under Section 3 of the Mental

    Health Care Act, 2017, generally include­


           1. schizophrenic and delusional disorders

           2. mood (affective) disorders, including depressive,
              manic and bipolar forms

           3. neuroses, including phobic, panic and obsessive–
              compulsive disorders
                                     43
           4. behavioural disorders, including eating, sleep
              and stress disorders

           5. personality disorders of different kinds.




67. American Bar Association, by its Resolution 122A passed on

    August 2006, notes as under­


              (a) Grounds for Precluding Execution. A sentence
              of death should not be carried out if the prisoner
              has a mental disorder or disability that
              significantly impairs his or her capacity (i) to
              make a rational decision to forgo or terminate
              post­conviction     proceedings      available   to
              challenge the validity of the conviction or
              sentence; (ii) to understand or communicate
              pertinent information, or otherwise assist
              counsel, in relation to specific claims bearing on
              the validity of the conviction or sentence that
              cannot be fairly resolved without the prisoner's
              participation; or (iii) to understand the nature
              and purpose of the punishment, or to appreciate
              the reason for its imposition in the prisoner's
              own case.

68. In line with the above discussion, we note that there appear to be

    no set disorders/disabilities for evaluating the ‘severe mental

    illness’, however a ‘test of severity’ can be a guiding factor for

    recognizing those mental illness which qualify for an exemption.

    Therefore, the test envisaged herein predicates that the offender
                                    44
   needs to have a severe mental illness or disability, which simply

   means that a medical professional would objectively consider the

   illness to be most serious so that he cannot understand or

   comprehend the nature and purpose behind the imposition of

   such    punishment.      These    disorders   generally    include

   schizophrenia, other serious psychotic disorders, and dissociative

   disorders­with schizophrenia.


69. Following directions need to be followed in the future cases in

   light of the above discussion­


           a. That the post­conviction severe mental illness will be a
              mitigating factor that the appellate Court, in
              appropriate cases, needs to consider while sentencing
              an accused to death penalty.

           b. The assessment of such disability should be conducted
              by a multi­disciplinary team of qualified professionals
              (experienced medical practitioners, criminologists etc),
              including professional with expertise in accused’s
              particular mental illness.

           c. The burden is on the accused to prove by a
              preponderance of clear evidence that he is suffering
              with severe mental illness. The accused has to
              demonstrate active, residual or prodromal symptoms,
              that the severe mental disability was manifesting.

           d. The State may offer evidence to rebut such claim.

           e. Court in appropriate cases could setup a panel to
              submit an expert report.


                                    45
              f. ‘Test of severity’ envisaged herein predicates that the
                 offender needs to have a severe mental illness or
                 disability, which simply means that objectively the
                 illness needs to be most serious that the accused
                 cannot understand or comprehend the nature and
                 purpose behind the imposition of such punishment.

70. Having said so, it needs to be considered that the accused has

    submitted a report of the Class­I Psychiatrist, Yerawada Central

    Prison, indicating that he was suffering from some sort of mental

    illness   without   providing   any    objective   factors   for   such

    assessment. We may reproduce the aforesaid report dated

    25.09.2014, in the following manner­


                Clinical   impression:­    no     delusions,   no
                hallucinations, sleep and appetite are normal.

                Remark:­Taking      regular    medication and
                maintaining improvement. He is under OPD
                under Psychiatric treatment since 21.12.1994
                and since then taking regular treatment.
                Currently he is on anti­psychotic drugs…

                The doctor further opined that ‘he is maintaining
                good improvement on medication, good diet. He
                is  having    psychological   disturbance    and
                symptoms like irritability emerges when the
                dosage is decreased.


71. Moreover, the expert opinion offered by a Psychiatrist registered

    with the Maharashtra Medical Council working as a coordinator

    of the Centre for Mental Health Law and Policy, Indian Law
                                      46
    Society, Pune, does not provide any further clarity. We may

    extract the conclusion reached by the aforesaid report as well­


              While no definite opinion can be given
              relating to the mental health condition of
              Accused    ‘X’   and    the    treatment    being
              administered to him, considering that he appears
              to be under treatment for a severe mental illness
              such as schizophrenia or some type of psychosis,
              there appears to be a need to review Accused
              x’s medical records and to clinically examine
              him to assess his current psychiatric status.

                                           (emphasis supplied).

72. Even though we are not satisfied with such statements made by

    the doctors as the assessment seems to be incomplete. However,

    it is to be noted that the present accused has been reeling under

    bouts of some form of mental irritability since 1994, as apparent

    from the records placed before us. Moreover, he has suffered long

    incarceration as well as a death row convict. In the totality of

    circumstances, we do not consider it be appropriate to constitute

    a panel for re­assessment of his mental condition, in the facts

    and circumstances of this case.


73. At the same time, we cannot lose sight of the fact that a sentence

    of life imprisonment simpliciter would be grossly inadequate in

    the instant case. Given the barbaric and brutal manner of
                                      47
    commission of the crime, the gravity of the offence itself, the

    abuse of the victims’ trust by the Petitioner, and his tendency to

    commit such offences as is evident from his past conduct, it is

    extremely clear that the Petitioner poses such a grave threat to

    society that he cannot be allowed to roam free at any point

    whatsoever. In this view of the matter, we deem it fit to direct

    that the Petitioner shall remain in prison for the remainder of his

    life. It need not be stated that this Court has in a plethora of

    decisions held such an approach to be perfectly within its power

    to adopt, and that it acts as a useful via media between the

    imposition of the death penalty and life imprisonment simpliciter

    (which usually works out to 14 years in prison upon remission).

    (See for instance Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of

    Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767; Union of India v. V. Sriharan,

    (2016) 7 SCC 1; Tattu Lodhi v. State of Madhya Pradesh,

    (2016) 9 SCC 675).


74. In light of the above discussion, the petition is allowed to the

    extent that the sentence of death awarded to the Petitioner is

    commuted to imprisonment for the remainder of his life sans any

    right to remission.

                                    48
75. Further, it is this state of ‘accused x’ that obliges the State to act

    as parens patriae. In this state ‘accused x’ cannot be ignored and

    left to rot away, rather, he requires care and treatment.

    Generally, it needs to be understood that prisoners tend to have

    increased affinity to mental illness.5 Moreover, due to legal

    constraints on the recognition of broad­spectrum mental illness

    within the Criminal Justice System, prisons inevitably become

    home for a greater number of mentally­ill prisoners of various

    degrees. There is no overlooking of the fact that the realities

    within the prison walls may well compound and complicate these

    problems.6


76. In order to address the same, the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017

    was brought into force. The aspiration of the Act was to provide

    mental health care facility for those who are in need including

    prisoners. The State Governments are obliged under Section 103

    of the Act to setup a mental health establishment in the medical

    wing of at least one prison in each State and Union Territory, and

    prisoners with mental illness may ordinarily be referred to and

    cared for in the said mental health establishment.
    5 Although statistics on the same are not available for all of Indian prisons, but we were
    able to compare sample studies within some Indian prisons and literature on psychiatric
    morbidity concurs as well.
    6 Liebling, Maruna and McAra et al., The Oxford Handbook of Criminology (6th Ed. (2017)).
                                               49
77. Therefore, we direct the State Government to consider the case of

    ‘accused x’ under the appropriate provisions of the Mental

    Healthcare Act, 2017 and if found entitled, provide for his rights

    under that enactment.


78. In light of the above discussion, this review petition stands partly

    allowed in the aforesaid terms and pending applications, if any,

    shall also stand disposed of.


                                          ..…………………………..……..J.
                                                   [N.V. Ramana]


                                          ..…………………………..……..J.
                                           [Mohan M. Shantanagoudar]

                                                ..…..……………………..
                                                              ……..J.
                                                   [Indira Banerjee]

    NEW DELHI;
    APRIL 12, 2019




                                     50

