
Supreme Court of India
Shyam Lal Verma vs C.B.I on 21 January, 2013Bench: P. Sathasivam, Jagdish Singh Khehar
                                                                  REPORTABLE


                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.171 OF 2013
            (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 4378 OF 2012)

SHYAM LAL VERMA                                 ...APPELLANT

        VERSUS

CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION                 ....RESPONDENT


                          O R D E R

                 Leave granted.

                 The appellant is a retired employee of  Post  Office.   The
     incident occurred in 1993-94. The allegation against  him  is  that  he
     misappropriated to the extent of Rs.1,35,240/- (Rupees one lakh  thirty
     five  thousand  and  two  hundred  forty).  The  employees  of  various
     departments deposited their amount, but the appellant did not remit the
     amount and failed to make entry in the ledger.  He  was  charged  under
     Section 477-A IPC read with Section 3(1)(c) and 13(2) of the Prevention
     of Corruption Act 1988.

                 After fullfleged trial,  the  Trial  Court  convicted   him
     under the  above  mentioned  Sections.  However,  instead  of  awarding
     sentence, the Trial Court released the appellant under the Probation of
     Offenders Act,1958   on  executing  a  personal  bond  in  the  sum  of
     Rs.50,000/- and furnishing two sureties each of the like amount  for  a
     period of one year. He was also directed to  maintain  peace  and  good
     behaviour during this period.

                                                                ...2/-

                                        -2-
                 Aggrieved by the above decision of the Trial Court, the CBI
     filed an appeal before the High Court. Admittedly, the accused did  not
     file any appeal challenging the  order of conviction. By  the  impugned
     order, the High Court allowed the appeal of the CBI and  sentenced  him
     for a period of one year under Sections 477-A  IPC  and  under  Section
     13(1)(c) read with Section 13(2) for  a further  period  of  one  year.
     Both the sentences were directed to run concurrently.

                 Questioning the order of the High Court sentencing him,  as
     stated above, the accused  preferred  the  present  appeal  by  way  of
     special leave.

                 Heard learned senior counsel appearing  on  behalf  of  the
     appellant and learned counsel appearing on behalf  of  the  respondent-
     CBI.

                 The  only  point  for  consideration  in  this  appeal  is,
     whether the Probation of Offenders Act is applicable to offences  under
     the Prevention of Corruption Act? The Trial Court applied Probation  of
     Offenders Act and sentenced him accordingly. This was reversed  by  the
     High Court and ultimately imposed substantive sentence of one year.

                 It is not in dispute that the issue raised in this   appeal
     has been considered by this Court in 2004 (4) SCC 590 –  State  Through
     SP, New Delhi Versus Ratan lal Arora wherein in similar  circumstances,
     this Court held that since Section 7 as well  as   Section  13  of  the
     Prevention  of Corruption Act




                                                        ...3/-

                                   -3-
     provide for a minimum sentence of six months and one year  respectively
     in addition to the maximum sentences as well as imposition of fine,  in
     such circumstances claim for granting relief  under  the  Probation  of
     Offenders Act is not permissible. In other  words,  in  cases  where  a
     specific provision prescribed a minimum sentence, the provisions of the
     Probation Act cannot be invoked.  Similar view has  been  expressed  in
     2006  (11)  SCC  473  –  State  Represented  by  Inspector  of  Police,
     Pudukottai, T.N. Vs. A. Parthiban.

                 In view of the settled legal position,  we  find  no  valid
     ground to  interfere  with  the  impugned  order  of  the  High  Court.
     Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.

                 In view of the dismissal of the appeal, the appellant shall
     surrender and  has to undergo remaining period of  sentence.  His  bail
     bonds executed pursuant to  our  order  dated  05.07.2012  shall  stand
     cancelled.




                                                ....................J
                                [P. SATHASIVAM]


NEW DELHI                                       ....................J.
JANUARY 21, 2013                                [JAGDISH SINGH KHEHAR]




