
Supreme Court of India
Anil Sachar & Anr vs M/S Shree Nath Spinners P.Ltd.& ... on 17 August, 2011Bench: Mukundakam Sharma, Anil R. Dave
                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA                   REPORTABLE

                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.  1413-1414 OF 2011 




Anil Sachar &Anr.                                          .....Appellants



                                          Versus

M/s. Shree Nath Spinners P.Ltd.  
& Ors. Etc.                                                .....Respondents





                                 O R D E R 

        We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the 

parties on the question of sentence.     Having gone through the 

records, we find that Mr. Munish Jain, against whom the notice 

was issued on the question of sentence has died.   Accordingly, 

so far he is concerned, the matter stands abated. 




        There is yet one more accused in the case, apart from the 

company,   who   was   also   impleaded   as   a   party   in   the   present 

proceedings.     The   said   Director   of   the   company   is   Mr.   Varun 

Jain.  


        We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the 

parties on the question of sentence.  Considering the provisions 

of   Section   138   of   the   Negotiable   Instruments   Act,   we   consider 

that imposition of fine of an amount of Rs. 10,00,000/- (Rupees 


ten   lacs   only)   would   meet   the   ends   of   justice   in   the   present 

case.   Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, we, 

therefore,   impose   a   fine   of   Rs.   10,00,000/-   (Rupees   ten   lacs 

only)   on   the   respondent   payable   to   the   appellants/complainants 

by way of compensation. 


        At   this   stage,   the   counsel   appearing   for   the   respondent 

has handed over drafts amounting to Rs. 10,00,000/-, payable to 

the   appellants/complainants,   to   the   counsel   appearing   for   the 

appellants/complainants,   who   receives   the   said   amount   which   is 

imposed as fine and payable to the appellants.  Fine having been 

paid and received brings the litigation to an end.  




        In   that   view   of   the   matter,   nothing   further   survives   in 

these appeals, which stand disposed of.





                                                    ......................J
                                                    (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)





                                                    ......................J
                                                    (ANIL R. DAVE)

NEW DELHI
AUGUST 17, 2011



