
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Dharmendra Rathore on 29 January, 2019Author: ......................J.
Bench: K Joseph, A Bhushan
                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 171 of 2019
                           (arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.10681/2015)


          THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.                 ...APPELLANT(S)
                                              VERSUS
          DHARMENDRA RATHORE                                 ...RESPONDENT(S)


                                               WITH


                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.     172 of 2019
                           (arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.10671/2015)


          THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ORS.                 ...APPELLANT(S)
                                              VERSUS
          RAMU @ BRAJMOHAN JADON                             ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                          J U D G M E N T
          ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.


                         Leave granted.
Signature Not Verified

          2.
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
                         These two appeals raising similar question of law
Date: 2019.01.29
16:42:23 IST
Reason:


          has been heard together and are being decided by this


                                                 1
common judgment.           State of Madhya Pradesh has filed

the appeal questioning the judgment of Division Bench

of the High Court dated 30.10.2013 passed in Writ

Appeal No. 244 of 2013 and judgment of Division Bench

in   Writ      Appeal    No.     71    of   2014   dated   20.06.2014

following the earlier judgment dated 30.10.2013.



3.     For deciding the appeals, it shall be sufficient

to refer to the facts in Civil Appeal – The State of

Madhya Pradesh & Ors. Vs. Dharmendra Rathore.                       The

Additional District Magistrate, Gwalior has passed an

order dated 26.02.2013 externing the respondent for a

period of one year from the district concerned.                      An

appeal was filed by the respondent against the order

of   the      Additional     District       Magistrate     before   the

Commissioner,          Gwalior        Division,    which     too    was

dismissed on 17.06.2013.              A writ Petition No. 4818 of

2013    was    filed    by     the    respondent    challenging     the

order of the Additional District Magistrate as well

as of the Commissioner, Gwalior Division.                    The main

ground taken by the respondent before the High Court



                                      2
was that the Additional District Magistrate had no

jurisdiction           to     pass    the    order     under    the    Madhya

Pradesh Rajya Suraksha Adhiniyam, 1990 (hereinafter

referred to as “Adhiniyam, 1990”).                       The order can be

passed      only by          District Magistrate.              Reliance     was

also placed on an order passed by another learned

Single Judge dated 30.05.2013 in Writ Petition No.

8555/2012 – Arvind Sharma Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh

&    Ors.    The        High    Court        relying     on    judgment      of

Arvind      Sharma      Vs.     State    of     Madhya    Pradesh      &   Ors.

allowed      the       writ    petition       holding    that    Additional

District Magistrate was incompetent to pass the order

under the Adhiniyam, 1990.                      Writ Appeal was filed

against the judgment of the High Court by the State

of Madhya Pradesh being Writ Appeal No. 71 of 2014.

By   judgment          and    order     dated    20.06.2014,      the      writ

appeal has been dismissed by Division Bench relying

on its judgment in Writ Appeal No. 244 of 2013 dated

30.10.2013         –    State    of     Madhya     Pradesh      Vs.    Arvind

Sharma,      in    which       judgment,        the    High    Court       after

considering the provisions of Sections 3, 13 and 29



                                         3
of   the      Adhiniyam,       1990     and    relying     on     the

Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Ajaib

Singh Vs. Gurbachan Singh, AIR 1965 SC 1619 held that

the order could not have been passed by any authority

lower than the rank of District Magistrate.                      State

aggrieved by the order has come up in this appeal.



4.   Learned counsel for the appellant in support of

the appeal contends that High Court committed error

in relying on the Constitution Bench Judgment of this

Court in Ajaib Singh Vs. Gurbachan Singh (supra).                   He

submits that in the case of Ajaib Singh (supra), this

Court   had    occasion     to    consider    the    provisions    of

Defence of India Act,1962 and Defence of India Rules,

which contained a different statutory scheme.                     The

Statutory     Scheme      in     the    Adhiniyam,     1990      being

different, the said judgment was not applicable.                   It

is submitted that Additional District Magistrate was

fully   competent      to        pass   the   order      under    the

Adhiniyam, 1990.


                                   4
5.   Learned counsel for the respondent supporting the

order of the High Court contends that when Sections

3, 4, 5 and 6 empowers the District Magistrate to

pass the order, an authority lower in rank could not

have been passed the order.         It is further submitted

that the State Government, in exercise of power under

Section 13, can also not delegate its power to any

authority lower in rank to the District Magistrate.

It is further submitted that there were other grounds

to   challenge   the   order       of   Additional   District

Magistrate in the writ petition but High Court having

considered only one ground, other grounds were not

considered.


6.   We have considered the submissions of the learned

counsel for the parties and have perused the records.



7.   It is necessary to notice the statutory scheme

under the Adhiniyam, 1990.         Sections 3 and 4 of the

Adhiniyam, 1990 are as follows:-

     3. Power to make restriction order. - (1)
     If a District Magistrate is satisfied with
     respect to any persons that he is acting or


                               5
is likely to act in a manner prejudicial to
the    security   of   the   State   or   the
maintenance of public order and that, in
order to prevent him from so acting it is
necessary in the interest of the general
public to make an order under this Section,
the   District   Magistrate,   may  make   an
order,-
    (a) requiring him to notify movements
    or to report himself or both to
    notify   his  movements   and  report
    himself in such manner at such times
    and to such authority or persons as
    may be specified in the order;
   (b)    imposing   upon    him   such
   restrictions as may be specified in
   the   order,   in  respect   of  his
   association or communications with
   such persons as may be mentioned in
   the order;
   (c) prohibiting or restricting the
   possession or use by him of any such
   article   or   articles  as   may  be
   specified in the order.
(2) A restriction order made under sub-
section (1) shall remain in operation for
such period as may be specified therein and
shall in no case exceed a period of one
year from the date of the order.
4. Dispersal of gangs and bodies of
persons. - Whenever it appears to the
District Magistrate that the movement or
encampment of any gang or body of persons
in the district is causing or is calculated
to cause danger or alarm or reasonable
suspicion   that   unlawful   designs   are
entertained by such gang or body, or by
members thereof the District Magistrate,

                     6
     may by an order addressed to the persons
     appearing to be the leaders or chiefmen of
     such gang or body and published by beat of
     rumor otherwise, as the District Magistrate
     thinks fit, direct the members of such gang
     or body,-
         (a) to conduct themselves in such
         manner as may be necessary in order
         to prevent violence and alarm; or
         (b) to disperse and each of them to
         remove himself outside the district
         or any part thereof or such area, and
         any district or districts, or any
         part thereof contiguous thereto with
         such time as the District Magistrate
         may specify, and not to enter the
         said district or part thereof or such
         area and such contiguous districts,
         or part thereof, as the case may be
         or not to return to the place from
         which each of them was directed to
         remove himself.

8.   Sections   5   and   6   are   other   provisions,   which

confer some power to District Magistrate to remove a

person about to commit offence and remove a person

convicted of certain offences.          Sections 7 provides

that period of operation of orders under Sections 4,

5 or 6 shall in no case exceed a period of one year.

Section 13 provides for power of externment of the

State Government, which is to the following effect:-


                                7
13.   Power     of   externment    of   State
Government. - (1) The State Government or
the officer specially empowered by the
State Government in that behalf, may, in
like circumstances, and in like manner,
exercise   the   powers   exercisable  in   a
district by the District Magistrate under
Section 3, 4, 5 or 6 with this modification
that it shall be lawful for the State
Government    or   the    officer   specially
empowered to direct the members of such
gang or body, or persons or immigrants, or
persons convicted, as the case may be, to
remove themselves from and not to enter or
return or any district or districts or
parts thereof whether contiguous thereto or
not.

(2) The provisions of Sections 7, 8,10, 11
and 12 and of Section 9 where the order is
passed by the officer specially empowered
by the State Government under sub-section
(1) shall mutatis mutandis apply to the
exercise of any powers under this section
as they apply to the exercise of any powers
under Section 3, 4, 5 or 6.

(3) Where the order is passed by the State
Government under sub-section (1), the State
Government may, either on its own motion or
on an application of the person aggrieved,
review any order passed by itself and pass
such order in reference thereto as it
thinks fit :

   Provided that no order shall be varied
or reversed unless notice has been given to
the person concerned to appear and be heard
in support of such order.


                     8
9.   Section 18 deals with delegation of powers and

duties    of    District   Magistrate,   which   is     to    the

following effect:-

        18. Delegation of power and duties of
        District   Magistrates. -   Notwithstanding
        anything contained in the Code of Criminal
        Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the State
        Government may by order direct that any
        power on duty conferred or imposed on a
        District Magistrate under this Act shall be
        exercised or performed by such additional
        District   Magistrate   or   Sub-Divisional
        Magistrate and for such areas as may be
        specified in the order

10. In the present case, the State Government had

issued a notification under Section 13 delating the

power of the District Magistrate to the Additional

District Magistrate divisional head quarter, Indore,

Jabalpur, Rewa, Ujjain, Bhopal, Gwalior, Hoshangabad,

Sagar     and   Chambal    (Murena).     Notification        dated

05.03.2003 is to the following effect:-

                  “Madhya Pradesh Gazette
                      Extra-ordinary
                  Published by Authority
          Bhopal Wednesday dated 5th March, 2003
                Home Department (C section)
              Ministry, Vallabh Bhawan Bhopal
                Bhopal dated 5th March 2003

        No. F35-116-2001-P-one- In exercise             of
        powers conferred by sub section (11)            of

                                9
        section 13 of Madhya Pradesh State Security
        Act, 1990 (No. 4 of 1991) and superseding
        the notification no. F17-1-51-B(1)-2, dated
        7th May 1991 and F35-116-2001-T-one dated
        10th July, 2001 of this very department,
        the State Government hereby empowers the
        Additional     District    Magistrate     of
        divisional head quarter, Indore, Jabalpur,
        Rewa, Ujjain, Bhopal, Gwalior, Hoshangabad,
        Sagar and Chambal (Murena) for the purposes
        of the aforesaid sub section.
                                           By order
                & in the name of the Governor of MP
                 Rakesh Sahni, Principal Secretary”

11. The entire basis of impugned judgment of the High

Court    is   the      Constitution          Bench    judgment       of    this

Court in Ajaib Singh (supra).                     In Ajaib Singh's case

(supra),      this     Court     had    occasion       to    consider       the

provisions       of    Defence    of        India    Act,    1962    and    the

Rules framed thereunder, where in that case, one Lall

Singh,     who        was   working         as      Additional      District

Magistrate, was invested with the power of District

Magistrate       under      Section         10(2)     of     the    code     of

Criminal      Procedure,       1898,        had     passed   an     order    of

detention of the appellant under the Defence of India

Act as District Magistrate.                   The challenge was that

he was incompetent to pass an order being not the

District Magistrate.           It is necessary to consider the

                                       10
Scheme   of   Section   3(i)    of   the   Act   and   noticed

relevant provision in Paragraph No.6, which is to the

following effect:-

     “6. We do not think it necessary for
     purposes of this case to decide the first
     point   raised  by   the   learned  Advocate
     General, for we have come to the conclusion
     that no officer other than the District
     Magistrate of a District can pass an order
     of detention under R. 30 of the Rules in
     view of the provisions of the Act and of
     the Rules to which we shall now refer.
     Section 3(1) of the Act gives power to the
     Central Government by notification in the
     Official Gazette to make such rules as
     appear to it necessary or expedient for
     securing the defense of India and civil
     defense, the public safety, the maintenance
     of public order or the efficient conduct of
     military operations, or for maintaining
     supplies and services essential to the life
     of community. Section 3(2) then provides
     for the making of rules for various
     purposes    without    prejudice   to    the
     generality of the powers conferred by
     section 3(1), and the 15th clause thereof
     provides   for   detention.    The  relevant
     portion of that clause necessary for our
     purposes reads thus :-

         "(15). Notwithstanding anything in
         any other law for the time being in
         force -
         (i) the apprehension and detention in
         custody of any person whom the
         authority empowered by the rules to
         apprehend or detain (the authority
         empowered to detain not being lower


                               11
        in rank than that of a District
        Magistrate), suspects, on grounds
        appearing to that authority to be
        reasonable,   of  being   of  hostile
        origin or having acted, acting, being
        about to act or being likely to act
        in a manner prejudicial to the
        defense of India and civil defense,
        the security of the State, the public
        safety or interest, the maintenance
        of public order, India's relations
        with foreign States, the maintenance
        of peaceful conditions in any part or
        area of India or the efficient
        conduct of military operations, or
        with respect to whom that authority
        is satisfied that his apprehension
        and detention are necessary for the
        purpose of preventing him from acting
        in any such prejudicial manner."

        It would be seen that section 3(2)
        (15)(i) which is the source of power
        to detain according to the Rules to
        be framed thereunder itself lays down
        that   the  authority   empowered  to
        detain shall not be lower in rank
        than that of a District Magistrate.”


12. It is to be noted that under the Statutory Scheme

under the Defence of India Act, detention order can

be passed by the authority empowered by the rules to

apprehend   or   detain   with   restriction   that   the

authority empowered to detain not being lower in rank

than that of a District Magistrate. In view of the



                           12
above   Statutory     Scheme,     this    Court     held    that

Additional District Magistrate being not the District

Magistrate   was    incompetent    to    pass     the   impugned

order. In Paragraph No.7, following has been held:-

     “7. Then we came to section 40(2) of the
     Act, which gives power to the State
     Government to delegate its powers to any
     officer or authority subordinate to it.
     This power of delegation, however, must be
     read harmoniously with section 3(2)(15) and
     therefore under section 40(2) the State
     Government cannot delegate its power to
     detain to any officer below the rank of a
     District Magistrate. Rule 30 of the Rules
     then provides for detention and under that
     rule that power is conferred on the Central
     Government or the State Government to
     detain any person. That power of the State
     Government can however be delegated under
     section 40(2) to any officer subordinate to
     it. But as we have already indicated the
     power   of    delegation   must   be   read
     harmoniously with section 3(2)(15) and
     therefore   the   State  Government  cannot
     delegate the power to detain to any officer
     who is lower in rank than the District
     Magistrate. The position is further clearly
     brought out in r. 30-A which provides for
     review of a detention order made by an
     officer. It is made clear there also that
     the officer shall in no case be lower in
     rank than a District Magistrate. The effect
     of these provisions thus is that the power
     of detention can either be exercised by the
     State Government or by its delegate who
     however can in no case be lower in rank
     than a District Magistrate. The Act and the
     Rules therefore show unmistakably that the


                            13
       power of detention can only be exercised by
       the State Government or an officer or
       authority to whom it might be delegated but
       who shall in no case be lower in rank than
       a District Magistrate.”


13. This Court has further contrasted the provisions

of the order of that of Preventive Detention Act,

when     where   District      Magistrate       is   specially

empowered.   Paragraph   No.    8   of   the   judgment   is   as

follows:-

       “8. We may in this connection contrast the
       language of section 3(2) of the Preventive
       Detention Act, No. 4 of 1950, which lays
       down that any of the following officers,
       namely :-

          (a) district magistrates,

          (b) additional district magistrates
          specially empowered in this behalf by
          the State Government,

          (c)......

          (d)......

       may   exercise  the   powers  conferred   by
       section 3(1)(a)(ii) and (iii). If the
       intention under the Act and the Rules was
       that the Additional District Magistrate may
       also   exercise  the   power  of   detention
       conferred thereunder we would have found a
       provision similar to that contained in the
       Preventive Detention Act.”



                               14
14. Applying the ratio of the above judgment in the

facts of the present case, it is clear that in the

Statutory Scheme of the Adhiniyam, 1990, there is no

provision,       which    prohibit      passing    an     order      by   an

officer lower than the rank of District Magistrate

rather under Section 13, there is no limitation on

the State Government while specially empowering an

officer     of    the     State   to     exercise       the    power      of

District Magistrate under Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 and

further under Section 18, the powers and duties of

District Magistrate can be directed to be exercised

or performed by Additional District Magistrate or Sub

-Divisional       Magistrate      for    such     areas       as   may    be

specified in the order.                 Thus, the Scheme of the

Adhiniyam, 1990 clearly contemplate exercise of the

power of District Magistrate under Sections 3, 4, 5

and 6 by an Additional District Magistrate or Sub

-Divisional       Magistrate.           The     Notification         dated

05.03.2003       was     not   under     challenge      in     the     writ

petition.


                                   15
15. We are, thus, of the view that Constitution Bench

Judgment of this Court in Ajaib Singh (supra) was not

applicable in the facts of the present case and High

Court   committed     the    error    in    relying    on   the   said

judgment      for     holding    that       Additional      District

Magistrate     had     no    jurisdiction.            The   impugned

judgment is, thus, unsustainable on the above ground.

We further notice that the period of externment being

one   year,   which    has   already       expired,    there   is   no

useful purpose in considering the other grounds of

challenge     as     contended   by        the   counsel    for     the

respondent.


16. In result, the appeals are allowed.                The impugned

judgments of the High Court are set aside.



                                      ......................J.
                                          ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )



                                      ......................J.
                                           ( K.M. JOSEPH )

New Delhi,
January 29, 2019.


                                 16

