
Supreme Court of India
Kantilal vs The State Of Gujarat on 4 October, 2019Author: L. Nageswara Rao
Bench: L. Nageswara Rao, Hemant Gupta
                                           Non-Reportable

            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          Criminal Appeal No. 1519 of 2019
    (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 1959 of 2019)

Kantilal                             .... Appellant(s)
                          Versus

The State of Gujarat                 ….Respondent (s)

                      JUDGMENT

L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.


  1. On 02.10.2013,    Maheshwari committed suicide by

     jumping from Jamalpur Bridge into Sabarmati River.

     FIR was registered on a complaint filed by her father

     (PW-1) that Maheshwari was being harassed by her

     husband – Suhag Kantibhai Parmar and his family

     members for not complying their demand       of dowry.

     He further alleged that Suhag Kantibhai Parmar had

     an illicit relationship with another lady.   Appellant-

     Kantilal Laxman Parmar, father-in-law of the deceased,

     was also accused of physically assaulting Maheshwari.

     Allegations of physical and mental cruelty were made


1 | Page
     against Pratik @ Pintoo Kantibhai Parmar - brother-in-

     law, Bhavnaben Kantibhai Parmar -sister-in-law and

     Manoramaben Kantibhai Parmar - mother-in-law of

     Maheshwari.       According to the FIR, the informant

     came to know about the suicide committed by his

     daughter. He reached the hospital and found her body

     lying on a stretcher.        FIR was registered under

     Sections 498A, 306, 323 and 149 of the Indian Penal

     Code, 1860 (for short, “the IPC”) and Sections 3 and 7

     of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.


  2. On completion of the investigation, charges were

     framed against all the accused. After conducting trial,

     the City Sessions Court, Ahmedabad convicted all the

     accused under Sections 498A and 114 IPC. Accused

     No.2-Suhag Kantibhai Parmar was further convicted

     under Section 306 IPC read with Sections 3 and 7 of

     the Dowry Prohibition Act.          Accused No.1-      the

     Appellant   and    Accused   No.3   -   Pratik   @   Pintoo

     Kantibhai Parmar were also convicted under Section

     323 IPC. Accused No.2- Suhag Kantibhai Parmar was

     sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for five

2 | Page
     years and a fine of Rs.2000/- for the offence

     punishable under Section 306 IPC.     He was further

     sentenced to five years for the offences punishable

     under Sections 3 and 7 of the Dowry Prohibition Act

     and three years for the offence punishable under

     Section 498A IPC.    The Appellant and Accused No.3

     Pratik @ Pintoo Kantibhai Parmar were sentenced to

     undergo three years imprisonment for the offences

     punishable under Sections 498A and 114 IPC and six

     months for the offence punishable under Section 323

     IPC. Accused No.4- Bhavnaben Kantibhai Parmar and

     Accused No.5- Manoramaben Kantibhai Parmar were

     sentenced to undergo one year rigorous imprisonment

     for the offence punishable under Section 498A.


  3. On appreciation of the evidence, the trial court was

     convinced    that   deceased-Maheshwari    committed

     suicide due to the harassment that she suffered at the

     hands of the accused for not satisfying the demand of

     dowry. The evidence of PW- 1 and PW-4, who are the

     father and mother of the deceased, was found to be

     reliable.   The trial court was convinced that the

3 | Page
     charges against the accused were proved on the basis

     of the evidence available on record.    In the Appeal

     filed by the accused, the High Court acquitted

     Accused Nos.3, 4 and 5, but upheld the conviction of

     the Appellant for committing offences under Sections

     498A, 114 and 323 IPC. The conviction and sentence

     of Accused No.2-Suhag Kantibhai Parmar-husband of

     the deceased, was also confirmed by the High Court.

     We are informed that Accused No.2- Suhag Kantibhai

     Parmar   has undergone the sentence.     We are only

     concerned with the Appeal filed by Accused No.1. The

     High Court upheld the conviction and sentence of

     Accused No.1- Kantilal Laxmanbhai Parmar on the

     basis of the evidence of PW-1, that he was informed

     by the deceased that she was beaten up twice by the

     Appellant.    Ms. Jaikriti S. Jadeja, learned counsel

     appearing on behalf of the Appellant submitted that

     the evidence of PW-1 could not have been relied upon

     by the trial court and the High Court     to hold the

     Appellant guilty of the charges.   PW-1 deposed that

     the deceased-Maheshwari as well as his wife (PW-4)


4 | Page
     informed him that the Appellant had beaten the

     deceased-Maheshwari twice.     Whereas, PW-4 was

     silent about the Appellant causing any physical

     violence on her daughter.


  4. Ms. Aastha Mehta, learned counsel appearing on

     behalf of the State submitted that the suicide

     committed by the deceased was due to harassment

     by the Accused and his son Suhag Kantibhai Parmar.

     The medical evidence disclosed that the deceased

     was pregnant at the time of her death. The extreme

     step had been taken by the deceased due to

     unbearable torture at the hands of the Accused. She

     submitted that the evidence of PW1 is sufficient to

     uphold the conviction of the Appellant who was also

     responsible for driving the deceased to commit

     suicide.


  5. As stated earlier, Accused No.2 who is the husband of

     the deceased accepted the conviction and served out

     the sentence imposed upon him and the conviction

     and sentence of Accused Nos. 3 and 5 were set aside.


5 | Page
     Apart from the allegation that the entire family

     harassed the deceased, the overt act attributed to the

     Appellant is that he had physically assaulted the

     deceased on two occasions.        This allegation finds

     place in the FIR.   PW-1 deposed in court about the

     Appellant beating the deceased on two occasions.

     PW1 stated that he was informed by PW4 about the

     incident of Appellant beating his deceased daughter.

     However, PW 4 did not speak of any such incident of

     the Appellant beating the deceased on two occasions.

     Reliance cannot be placed on the sole testimony of

     PW1, on the basis of which the Appellant was

     convicted under Sections 498A, 114 and 323 as there

     is no corroboration by PW4 who is alleged to have

     given the information to him. Other than the above

     allegation, the Appellant stands on the same footing

     as of Accused Nos. 3, 4 and 5 who have been

     acquitted by the High Court.   As the accusation of the

     physical assault by the appellant on the deceased is

     not proved, he is entitled to be acquitted.




6 | Page
  6. In view of the aforesaid, the Appeal is allowed and the

     Appellant is acquitted of the charges under Sections

     498A, 114 and 323 of the IPC.          The Appellant is

     directed to be released forthwith if he is not required

     in any other case.


                              ..…................................J.
                                   [L. NAGESWARA RAO]



                               ..…….............................J.
                                  [HEMANT GUPTA]


New Delhi,
October 04, 2019.




7 | Page

