
Supreme Court of India
Surinder Kumar Khanna vs Intelligence Officer ... on 31 July, 2018Author: U U Lalit
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 949 OF 2018
                              (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.9816 of 2017)



                         Surinder Kumar Khanna                                    ……Appellant


                                                            Versus


                         Intelligence Officer Directorate
                         of Revenue Intelligence                                 ..…. Respondent


                                                      JUDGMENT

                         Uday Umesh Lalit, J.


                         1.    Special Leave to Appeal granted.


                         2.    This appeal challenges the correctness of Judgment and Order dated

                         21.12.2016 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.07.31
13:20:43 IST
                         in Criminal Appeal No.798 of 2014 by which the High Court affirmed the
Reason:


                         conviction of the appellant for the offences punishable under Section 21(c)
 2
read with Section 29 of The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances

Act, 1985 (‘NDPC Act’, for short).


3.    According to the Prosecution:-

      a.    On a specific information that narcotic drugs were going to be

      transported from Jammu side to Chandigarh via Hoshiarpur in a white

      colour Indica car bearing registration no.PB-02AJ-7288, the officers

      of Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (for short ‘DRI’) laid picket at

      toll barrier at Hoshiarpur-Garhshankar road. At 10:35 hours, they

      intercepted an Indica car of white colour which was coming from

      Hoshiarpur side bearing registration No.PB-02AJ-7288. The car was

      being driven by one Raj Kumar @ Raju whereas one Surinder Pal

      Singh was sitting next to him. To ensure safe search of the car and

      personal search of occupants, the car was taken to the office of

      Superintendent, Central Excise Range, Model Town, Hoshiarpur. The

      officers of DRI served notice under Section 50 of the NDPS Act upon

      said Raj Kumar @ Raju and Surinder Pal Singh.

      b.    As desired by said suspects, their personal searches and that of

      the car were conducted in the presence of independent witnesses and

      Shri SJS Chugh, Senior Intelligence Officer. Personal searches of the

      suspects did not result in recovery of any incriminating material.
                                                                    3
However, when the car was searched, four packets wrapped with

yellowish adhesive tapes were found concealed in the door of dickey

of the car. The gross weight of those four packets came to 4.300 kg.

c.    Each   of   those   packets   was    containing   white   colour

granules/powder which gave a very pungent smell. The pinch of each

packet was tested, which showed the presence of heroin.            The

recovered heroin weighing 3.990 kgs was valued at Rs.19,95,000/-.

Those four packets were taken into possession. Two representative

samples of 5 gms each were taken out from each of the packets as per

rules. Indica car was also seized by the officers of DRI. Statements

of both the suspects were recorded.        From their statements, it

transpired that four packets of heroin had been taken from one Mr.

Goldy r/o Vijaypur, Jammu and those packets were to be delivered to

a person of African origin near PGI Chandigarh.

d.    Initially a complaint under Sections 21, 22, 23, 28, 29 and 60 of

the NDPS Act was lodged against said Raj Kumar @ Raju and

Surinder Pal Singh. During investigation, the involvement of the

present appellant in the drug racket was said to have been made out.

After the appellant was arrested, a supplementary complaint was

presented against him and the matter was taken up with the main
                                                                         4
      complaint. After hearing arguments, charges were framed against said

      Raj Kumar @ Raju and Surinder Pal Singh and the appellant for the

      offences under Sections 21, 29 and 60 of the NDPS Act.


4.    The prosecution, in support of its case examined four witnesses. After

hearing submissions, the trial court convicted and sentenced all three

accused. The appellant was convicted under Section 21(c) read with Section

29 of the NDPS Act and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment

for 12 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1 lakh, in default whereof to undergo

further rigorous imprisonment for three years. Similar orders for conviction

and sentence were recorded against other two accused namely Raj Kumar @

Raju and Surinder Pal Singh. All three convicted accused preferred appeals;

namely Criminal Appeal No.D-955-DB-2013 was filed by Raj Kumar @

Raju and Surinder Pal Singh while Criminal Appeal No.D-798-DB-2014

was preferred by the appellant. Both these appeals were heard together by

the High Court.


5.    As regards the appellant, it was observed by the High Court that he

was specifically named by co-accused Raj Kumar @ Raju and Surinder Pal

Singh in their statements. Apart from such statements nothing was produced

on record to indicate the involvement of the appellant. The High Court
                                                                           5
however found that the case against the appellant was made out. It was

observed:

             “Offence of abetment under Section 29 of NDPS Act
      stood established against accused Surinder Kumar Khanna,
      showing that he was involved in drug trafficking. He was
      specifically named by accused Raj Kumar @ Raju and Surinder
      Pal Singh in their statements. Such statements of accused Raj
      Kumar @ Raju and Surinder Pal Singh recorded under Section
      67 of the NDPS Act are admissible in evidence and are not hit
      by Section 25 of the Evidence Act because the officers of DRI,
      who had apprehended Raj Kumar @ Raju and Surinder Pal
      Singh, traveling in an Indica car and effecting recovery from
      them do not come within the definition of police officers.”.
      The High Court thus affirmed the order of conviction as recorded

against the appellant but reduced the sentence to rigorous imprisonment for a

period of 10 years and to pay fine of Rs.1 lakh, in default whereof to

undergo further rigorous imprisonment for 1½ years. Similar orders of

sentence were passed in respect of other co-accused namely Raj Kumar @

Raju and Surinder Pal Singh.


6.    In this appeal challenging the correctness of the conviction and

sentence rendered as against the appellant, it was submitted by Mr. Jayant

Bhushan, learned Senior Advocate that apart from the so called statements of

co-accused Raj Kumar @ Raju and Surinder Pal Singh there was nothing

against the appellant and that he was neither arrested at the site nor was the
                                                                                  6
contraband material in any way associated with him. Mr. Maninder Singh,

learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondent however

supported the judgment of conviction and sentence rendered against the

appellant. He placed on record call data reports showing that around the

time when the co-accused was arrested, the appellant was in touch with a

person named Chaudhary from Dubai. The learned Additional Solicitor

General however fairly accepted that apart from the statements of the co-

accused there was nothing to link the appellant with said convicted accused.

The call data reports also did not indicate that around the time when co-

accused were apprehended, the appellant was in touch with either of them.


7.       For the present purposes, we will proceed on the footing that the

statements of co-accused were recorded under and in terms of Section 67 of

the NDPS Act. As regards such statements, a bench of two Judges of this

Court after referring to and relying upon the earlier Judgments, observed in

Kanhaiyalal v. Union of India1, as under:

         “45. Considering the provisions of Section 67 of the NDPS Act and
         the views expressed by this Court in Raj Kumar Karwal case2 with
         which we agree, that an officer vested with the powers of an officer
         in charge of a police station under Section 53 of the above Act is not
         a “police officer” within the meaning of Section 25 of the Evidence
         Act, it is clear that a statement made under Section 67 of the NDPS
         Act is not the same as a statement made under Section 161 of the
1
    (2008) 4 SCC 668
2
    (1990) 2 SCC 409
                                                                                 7
      Code, unless made under threat or coercion. It is this vital difference,
      which allows a statement made under Section 67 of the NDPS Act to
      be used as a confession against the person making it and excludes it
      from the operation of Sections 24 to 27 of the Evidence Act.”


8.    Later, another bench of two Judges of this Court in Tofan Singh v.

State of Tamil Nadu3 was of the view that the matter required

reconsideration and therefore, directed that the matter be placed before a

larger bench. It was observed in Tofan Singh (supra) as under:

      “40. In our view the aforesaid discussion necessitates a re-look into
      the ratio of Kanhaiyalal case. It is more so when this Court has
      already doubted the dicta in Kanhaiyalal in Nirmal Singh Pehlwan4
      wherein after noticing both Kanhaiyalal as well as Noor Aga5, this
      Court observed thus: (Nirmal Singh Pehlwan case, SCC p. 302,
      para 15)

             “15. We also see that the Division Bench in
             Kanhaiyalal case had not examined the principles and
             the concepts underlying Section 25 of the Evidence
             Act, 1872 vis-à-vis Section 108 of the Customs Act
             and the powers of a Customs Officer who could
             investigate and bring for trial an accused in a narcotic
             matter. The said case relied exclusively on the
             judgment in Raj Kumar case. The latest judgment in
             point of time is Noor Aga case which has dealt very
             elaborately with this matter. We thus feel it would be
             proper for us to follow the ratio of the judgment in
             Noor Aga case particularly as the provisions of
             Section 50 of the Act which are mandatory have also
             not been complied with.”




3
  (2013) 16 SCC 31
4
  (2011) 12 SCC 298
5
  (2008) 16 SCC 417
                                                                                    8
         41. For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the matter
         needs to be referred to a larger Bench for reconsideration of the issue
         as to whether the officer investigating the matter under the NDPS
         Act would qualify as police officer or not.

         42. In this context, the other related issue viz. whether the statement
         recorded by the investigating officer under Section 67 of the Act can
         be treated as confessional statement or not, even if the officer is not
         treated as police officer also needs to be referred to the larger Bench,
         inasmuch as it is intermixed with a facet of the 1st issue as to
         whether such a statement is to be treated as statement under Section
         161 of the Code or it partakes the character of statement under
         Section 164 of the Code.”


9.       Thus the issue whether statement recorded under Section 67 of the

NDPS Act can be construed as a confessional statement even if the officer

who recorded such statement was not to be treated as a police officer, has

now been referred to a larger Bench.


10.      Even if we are to proceed on the premise that such statement under

Section 67 of the NDPS Act may amount to confession, in our view, certain

additional features must be established before such a confessional statement

could be relied upon against a co-accused. It is noteworthy that unlike

Section 15 of Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act, 1987 6 which

specifically makes confession of a co-accused admissible against other

accused in certain eventualities; there is no such similar or identical

provision in the NDPS Act making such confession admissible against a co-
6
    Similarly: Section 18 of Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999
                                                                                  9
accused. The matter therefore has to be seen in the light of the law laid

down by this Court as regards general application of a confession of a co-

accused as against other accused.


11.      In Kashmira Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh7, this Court relied

upon the decision of the Privy Council in Bhuboni Sahu v. The King8 and

laid down as under:

                “Gurubachan's confession has played an important part in
         implicating the appellant, and the question at once arises, how
         far and in what way the confession of an accused person can be
         used against a co-accused? It is evident that it is not evidence in
         the ordinary sense of the term because, as the Privy Council say
         in Bhuboni Sahu v. The King "It does not indeed come within
         the definition of" 'evidence' contained in section 3 of the
         Evidence Act., It is not required to be given on oath, nor in the
         presence of the accused, and it cannot be tested by cross-
         examination." Their Lordships also point out that it is
         "obviously evidence of a very weak type......... It is a much
         weaker type of evidence than the evidence of an approver,
         which is not subject to any of those infirmities."

                 They stated in addition that such a confession cannot be made
         tile foundation of a conviction and can only be used in "support of
         other evidence." In view of these remarks it would be pointless to
         cover the same ground, but we feel it is necessary to expound this
         further as misapprehension still exists. The question is, in what way
         can it be used in support of other evidence? Can it be used to fill in
         missing gaps? Can it be used to corroborate an accomplice or, as in
         the present case, a witness who, though not an accomplice, is placed
         in the same category regarding credibility because the judge refuses
         to believe him except in so far as he is corroborated ?

7
    (1952) SCR 526
8
    (1949) 76 Indian Appeal 147 at 155
                                                                                10
       In our opinion, the matter was put succinctly by Sir 'Lawrence
       Jenkins in Emperor v. Lalit Mohan Chuckerbutty9 where he said
       that such a confession can only be used to "lend assurance to other
       evidence against a co-accused "or, to put it in another way, as Reilly
       J. did in In re Periyaswami Moopan10

              "the provision goes no further than this--where there is
              evidence against the co-accused sufficient, if believed,
              to support his conviction, then the kind of confession
              de- scribed in section 30 may be thrown into the scale
              as an additional reason for believing that evidence."

               Translating these observations into concrete terms they come
       to this. The proper way to approach a case of this kind is, first, to
       marshal the evidence against the accused excluding the confession
       altogether from consideration and see whether, if it is believed, a
       conviction could safely be based on it. If it is capable of belief
       independently of the confession, then of course it is not necessary to
       call the confession in aid. But cases may arise where the judge is not
       prepared to act on the other evidence as it stands even though, if
       believed, it would be sufficient to sustain a conviction. In such an
       event the judge may call in aid the confession and use it to lend
       assurance to the other evidence and thus fortify himself in believing
       what without the aid of the confession he would not be prepared to
       accept.”


12.    The law laid down in Kashmira Singh (supra) was approved by a

Constitution Bench of this Court in Hari Charan Kurmi and Jogia Hajam

v. State of Bihar11 wherein it was observed:

              “As we have already indicated, this question has been
       considered on several occasions by judicial decisions and it has been
       consistently held that a confession cannot be treated as evidence
       which is substantive evidence against a co-accused person. In
       dealing with a criminal case where the prosecution relies upon the
       confession of one accused person against another accused person,

9
  [1911] I.L.R. 38 CAl. 559 at 588
10
   [1931] I.L.R. 54 Mad. 75 at 77.
11
   (1964) 6 SCR 623 at 631-633
                                                                           11
the proper approach to adopt is to consider the other evidence
against such an accused person, and if the said evidence appears to
be satisfactory and the court is inclined to hold that the said evidence
may sustain the charge framed against the said accused person, the
court turns to the confession with a view to assure itself that the
conclusion which it is inclined to draw from the other evidence is
right. As was observed by Sir Lawrence Jenkins in Emperor v. Lalit
Mohan Chuckerburty a confession can only be used to “lend
assurance to other evidence against a co-accused”. In re
Periyaswami Moopan Reilly. J., observed that the provision of
Section 30 goes not further than this: “where there is evidence
against the co-accused sufficient, if believed, to support his
conviction, then the kind of confession described in Section 30 may
be thrown into the scale as an additional reason for believing that
evidence”. In Bhuboni Sahu v. King the Privy Council has
expressed the same view. Sir John Beaumont who spoke for the
Board, observed that “a confession of a co-accused is obviously
evidence of a very weak type. It does not indeed come within the
definition of “evidence” contained in Section 3 of the Evidence Act.
It is not required to be given on oath, nor in the presence of the
accused, and it cannot be tested by cross-examination. It is a much
weaker type of evidence than the evidence of an approver, which is
not subject to any of those infirmities. Section 30, however, provides
that the court may take the confession into consideration and
thereby, no doubt, makes it evidence on which the court may act; but
the section does not say that the confession is to amount to proof.
Clearly there must be other evidence. The confession is only one
element in the consideration of all the facts proved the case; it can be
put into the scale and weighed with the other evidence”. It would be
noticed that as a result of the provisions contained in Section 30, the
confession has no doubt to be regarded as amounting to evidence in
a general way, because whatever is considered by the court is
evidence; circumstances which are considered by the court as well as
probabilities do amount to evidence in that generic sense. Thus,
though confession may be regarded as evidence in that generic sense
because of the provisions of Section 30, the fact remains that it is not
evidence as defined by Section 3 of the Act. The result, therefore, is
that in dealing with a case against an accused person, the court
cannot start with the confession of a co-accused person; it must
begin with other evidence adduced by the prosecution and after it
has formed its opinion with regard to the quality and effect of the
said evidence, then it is permissible to turn to the confession in order
to receive assurance to the conclusion of guilt which the judicial
                                                                                 12
          mind is about to reach on the said other evidence. That, briefly
          stated, is the effect of the provisions contained in Section 30. The
          same view has been expressed by this Court in Kashmira Singh v.
          State of Madhya Pradesh where the decision of the Privy Council in
          Bhuboni Sahu case has been cited with approval.”


13.       The law so laid down has always been followed by this Court except

in cases where there is a specific provision in law making such confession of

a co-accused admissible against another accused.12


14.       In the present case it is accepted that apart from the aforesaid

statements of co-accused there is no material suggesting involvement of the

appellant in the crime in question. We are thus left with only one piece of

material that is the confessional statements of the co-accused as stated

above.        On the touchstone of law laid down by this Court such a

confessional statement of a co-accused cannot by itself be taken as a

substantive piece of evidence against another co-accused and can at best be

used or utilized in order to lend assurance to the Court. In the absence of

any substantive evidence it would be inappropriate to base the conviction of

the appellant purely on the statements of co-accused. The appellant is

therefore entitled to be acquitted of the charges leveled against him. We,

therefore, accept this appeal, set aside the orders of conviction and sentence

12
     For example: State vs. Nalini, (1999) 5 SCC 253, paras 424 and 704
                                                                         13
and acquit the appellant. The appellant shall be released forthwith unless his

custody is required in connection with any other offence.




                                                    …...……..…………….J.
                                                    (Abhay Manohar Sapre)




                                                    ..…..………….……….J.
                                                    (Uday Umesh Lalit)

New Delhi,
July 31, 2018

