
Supreme Court of India
Krishan vs State Of Haryana on 13 December, 2012Author: S Kumar
Bench: Swatanter Kumar, Madan B. Lokur
                                                                             REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 766 OF 2008




Krishan                                             ... Appellant

                                   Versus

State of Haryana                               ... Respondent




                               J U D G M E N T

Swatanter Kumar, J.

1.    This appeal is directed against the judgment of conviction and  order
of sentence dated 17th July, 2007 passed by the High Court  of  Punjab  and
Haryana at Chandigarh whereby the  High  Court  reversed  the  judgment  of
acquittal passed by the Trial Court against the accused Krishan.   However,
it maintained the acquittal  of  another  accused  Shardi,  mother  of  the
accused Krishan.

2.    In brief, the facts are that Ex. PH/1, FIR  No.  134  was  registered
against accused Shardi and Krishan under Sections 307, 498A, 109 read  with
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short “IPC”) on 30th  March,
1998.    This FIR was  registered  in  furtherance  of  the  rukka,  Ex.PH,
received by the Police Station Sadar Narwana, from  Civil  Hospital,  Jind.
After receiving the rukka ASI Umed Singh, PW9 along  with  police  officers
reached the Civil Hospital, Narwana.   That  police  officer  obtained  the
evidence certificate in respect of Smt. Rani, wife of  Krishan.    She  was
admitted to the hospital with burn injuries.   The doctor declared Rani fit
to make the statement and also provided  her  medico-legal  report  to  the
Investigating  Officer.   Since   Rani’s   condition   was   serious,   the
Investigating Officer summoned Sh. Baljit Singh, then SDJM Narwana for  the
purpose of recording the statement of Rani.

3.    On the request of the police, the said SDJM came to the hospital  and
proceeded to record the statement of Rani.    The statement of the deceased
was recorded on 30th March, 1998 at about 11.40 a.m.    As  per  the  dying
declaration, Ext. PR/2 she was married to Krishan approximately 18-19 years
ago.   Krishan was addicted to liquor and used to harass  her.    When  she
served food to Krishan, he would throw away the thali on the ground.

4.    From this wedlock, two sons were  born  aged  9  years  and  7  years
respectively.   According  to  Rani,  accused  Krishan  used  to  give  her
beatings whenever he was under the influence of liquor.   Krishan also used
to make demands for a car, and used to ask Rani to bring money to  purchase
the car from her father. She also stated that  her  father-in-law  used  to
help her, but mother-in-law never helped.    Shardi, mother of the  accused
used to instigate him.

5.        On the fateful day, Rani herself took kerosene oil from the store
at about 7 a.m. in the morning to burn  the  stove.    At  that  time,  her
husband  poured the kerosene oil on her body and set her on fire.   On  the
night previous to the occurrence, Krishan had come with  his  friend  Bedu,
son of Teka and asked her to prepare tea which she prepared and  served  to
both of them.   According to Rani, when she was set on fire by the accused,
her father-in-law and sister-in-law extinguished the fire and  seeing  them
even her husband helped in putting off the fire.    The  father-in-law  and
sister-in-law had come  to  the  place  of  occurrence  after  hearing  her
screams, but none of  them  were  present  when  the  accused  Krishan  had
sprinkled kerosene on her body.

6.    Vide Ext. PJ, PW9 had sought the opinion of  the  doctor,  which  was
recorded vide Ext. PJ/1 wherein it was stated that “patient is fit to  make
her statement”.   The Investigating Officer  then  requested  the  SDJM  to
record the statement of the deceased which then was recorded vide Ext. PR/2
and thumb impression of Rani was taken.   This was signed by the SDJM.

7.    Based upon the dying declaration  made  by  the  deceased,   FIR  was
registered  under  Sections  498A,  307,  109  and   34   IPC.     However,
subsequently on 2nd April, 1998 Rani died and the offence was converted  to
Section 302 IPC and FIR accordingly amended.    The  Investigating  Officer
prepared the site plan, recorded statement of PWs and prepared the  Inquest
Report, Ext.PN, with regard to the dead body of Rani.   The  doctor,  PW14,
who performed the post-mortem upon the body of the  deceased  and   noticed
the condition of the body and injuries upon the body of the deceased stated
in his statement as follows:-

           “On dated 3.4.98 vide PMR No. 325/98 I conducted the autopsy  of
           the dead body of Rani wife of Krishan Balmiki by Caste, resident
           of Sudkan Kalan, District Jind.   Dead body was brought by  H.C.
           Om Parkash 451 and Identified by Rajinder and Wazir.    I  found
           the following on Post-mortem examination.

           Dead body was 160 cm. Long.   It was naked.  Rigour  mortis  was
           present in all the limbs.   There  was  a  golden  colour  nazle
           coca.  There were superficial to deep bones over the whole  body
           except lower parts of both thigh, both legs, and foot.   Line of
           demarcation was  present.    Singeing  was  present.    Redning,
           blackning and peeling of  skin  was  present.    Vesication  was
           present.  Bones were superficial to deep and approximately 75%.

           The cause of death was due to burns and its complications  which
           were anti-mortem in nature and  sufficient  to  cause  death  in
           ordinary course of nature.

           The following were handed over to the police.

           1. Dead body after Post Mortem Examination.
           2. Copy of PMR
           3. 11 Police papers duly signed.

           The probable time that elapse between the injury and  death  was
           between 3-4 day (as per  record  and  between  death)  and  post
           mortem was within 4-36 hours.   Ext. PT is the  carbon  copy  of
           the PMR which bears my signature.   On police request Ex.  PO  I
           conducted the P.M. Examination on the dead body of Rani wife  of
           Krishan which is also accompanied by the inquest report  Ex.  PN
           which are in total 11 pages and I initial the same.

           xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx by defence counsel.

           The burns were on the whole body  except  as  mentioned  in  the
           statement.    The  burns  are   classified   of   three   types.
           Epidermal, Dermo-epidermal and Deep.  Burns were of  superficial
           and deep burns.  It is correct that due to burns there is severe
           pains, and the medication is prescribed.   It  is  incorrect  to
           suggest that I am deposing falsely.”


8.    The accused were directed to face trial before the Court of Sessions.
  The learned Trial Court vide its detailed judgment dated  15th  November,
1999 confirmed the opinion that the prosecution had not been able to  prove
its case against the accused beyond shadow of reasonable doubt  and,  thus,
while giving the benefit of doubt, acquitted both the accused.   The  Trial
Court found that in the facts of the present case, it was not safe to  rely
upon the dying declaration of the deceased and acquitted both the  accused.
 It will be useful to refer to the relevant findings of the trial court.

           “14.All the  material  witnesses  examined  by  the  prosecution
           namely, PW1 Ramdhari, PW3 Mamo, mother of deceased, PW4  Nirmala
           sister of accused Krishan have  not  supported  the  prosecution
           version in any manner and they  were  declared  hostile  on  the
           request of the learned PP and were  cross-examined  by  him  but
           nothing favourable to the prosecution came  out  of  them.   The
           only piece of evidence against  accused  Krishan  is  the  dying
           declaration recorded by Shri Baljeet Singh then SDJM, Narwana in
           which Rani has implicated her husband Krishan  for  the  present
           occurrence.   PW11 Dr. B.R. Kayat who admitted Rani  has  stated
           in the cross examination that Krishan accused was also  admitted
           in the hospital at the  same  time  on  the  same  and  he  also
           suffered burn injuries and  Krishan  remained  admitted  in  the
           hospital for 21 days.   From this  it  is  proved  that  Krishan
           tried to extinguish the fire and that is why  he  also  received
           burn injuries along with Rani.   DW2 Ram Rati who is real sister
           of Rani has stated that Krishan was not present in the house  at
           the time of occurrence but he came to the spot from outside  and
           he also helped the other family  members  in  extinguishing  the
           fire.   So, from the evidence it is proved that Krishan  accused
           took part in extinguishing the fire and Rani was got admitted in
           the hospital alongwith Krishan.  The  parents  of  the  deceased
           have clearly stated that accused Krishan  was  not  addicted  to
           liquor and he never harassed Rani for bringing  less  dowry  and
           that accused Krishan never demanded any dowry articles  although
           the marriage took place more than 18/19 years  ago.    Similarly
           sister of the deceased who was married with the brother  of  the
           accused Krishan and who appeared as DW2 has also stated that  it
           was a natural death because Rani caught fire while preparing tea
           and Rani told the witness that Krishan  was  not  at  fault  and
           accused Krishan took  part  in  extinguishing  the  fire.    The
           material witnesses were declared hostile on the question of  the
           learned PP and were cross-examined by him but nothing favourable
           to the prosecution came out them.    There  is  no  evidence  on
           record that accused Krishan or her mother Sardhi might have ever
           treated Rani with cruelty for  bringing  fewer  dowries  or  for
           bringing more  dowries.     It  is  also  not  proved  from  the
           evidence of  the  prosecution  that  accused  Krishan  might  be
           addicted to  liquor.    So  now  we  are  left  with  the  dying
           declaration.......

           15.........In the  present  case  dying  declaration  cannot  be
           believed because even parents of the deceased have not supported
           her versioning any manner.   Similarly, even the sister  of  the
           deceased who was present at  the  time  of  occurrence  has  not
           implicated the two accused in  any  manner.    Further  she  has
           stated  that  it  was  accidental  fire  and   Krishan   accused
           extinguished the fire.”



9.    The above reasoning of the Trial Court did not find favour  with  the
High Court and the High Court while relying upon the dying declaration, the
statement of SDJM PW10 and the statement of Dr. B.R. Kayat  PW11,  recorded
the following reasoning:-

           “23. In this case, dying declaration  does  not  leave  anything
           vague.   It is free from blemish.   The act  of  the  Magistrate
           cannot be suspected when he records the dying declaration  as  a
           part of the judicial function,  which  carries  great  sanctity.
           Opinion of the doctor was obtained and deceased remained fit  to
           make  statement  during  the  course  of  recording  the   dying
           declaration.   There is no evidence that there was any body else
           to influence her.

           24.   Learned counsel for  the  accused-respondents,  supporting
           the judgment of the  trial  Court,  has  pointed  out  that  the
           benefit of doubt should be given to the husband because  he  was
           the person who tried to extinguish the  fire  and  as  a  result
           thereof, he received burn injuries on his hands.

           25.   This Court does not concur  with  the  contention  of  the
           learned  counsel  for  the  accused-respondents.     When   burn
           injuries are found on the hands etc. of the accused in  case  of
           bride burning etc. it shall be a  relevant  circumstance  to  be
           taken into consideration along with other circumstances pointing
           to the innocence of the husband or whoever  is  accused  of  the
           crime of causing death  by  burning.    It  was  stated  by  the
           deceased in her statement (Exhibit PR/2) that her  father-in-law
           and Nanad extinguished the fire.   Her husband also extinguished
           the  fire.    Since  father  and  sister  of  Krishan   accused-
           respondent tried to extinguish the fire, Krishan husband had  no
           option but to join them in extinguishing the fire.    Had  there
           been any falsity in the statement (Exhibit PR/2)  of  Rani,  she
           would have been the last person to say  that  her  husband  also
           (sic) extinguished the fire.   It is one of the  factors,  which
           strengthens the consideration that  the  dying  declaration  was
           spontaneous and truthful. Dr. R.K. Wadhwa (PW14)  conducted  the
           Post Mortem on the dead body of Rani on April 3, 1998 and opined
           that the death occurred due to burn injuries  and  the  injuries
           were ante mortem and sufficient to cause death in  the  ordinary
           course of nature.    The circumstance would  further  strengthen
           the duly proved and  unequivocal  dying  declaration.    Learned
           trial judge, in this case, fell in serious error by putting  the
           circumstance of presence of burn injuries on the  hands  of  the
           accused at a higher but unmerited pedestal and putting the dying
           declaration in the background.   The  importance  and  emphasis,
           which ought to have been put  on  the  dying  declaration,  were
           wrongly put on the said circumstance of  burn  injuries  on  the
           hands of the accused in negation of the settled  proposition  of
           law governing dying declaration.   The entire  approach  of  the
           trial judge was lopsided and rather contumacious.”


10.   The High Court convicted the accused Krishan  while  maintaining  the
acquittal of Shardi, mother of accused Krishan.

11.   In light of the diametrically opposite views  recorded  by  the  Trial
Court  and  the  High  Court,  the  primary   question   that   arises   for
consideration in the present case is as to  whether  the  court  can  safely
rely upon the  dying  declaration  and  make  the  same  as  the  basis  for
conviction of the accused Krishan, though other witnesses like PW1, PW3  and
PW4 have not fully supported the case of  the  prosecution.    In  order  to
examine this aspect, it is necessary for us to  bifurcate  this  proposition
into the following two heads:-

   a. Firstly, whether as a principle of law, a dying declaration  can  form
      the sole basis for conviction of an accused or not?

   b. Secondly, whether the facts of the  present  case  fully  satisfy  the
      settled principles and it would be safe to convict the accused Krishan
      solely on the basis of the dying declaration of the deceased?

DISCUSSION :

12.   The learned counsel  appearing  for  the  appellant  relied  upon  the
judgment of this Court in the case of Khushal Rao  v.  State of Bombay  [AIR
1958 SC 22] to contend that it is not safe to convict an accused  merely  on
evidence furnished by a dying  declaration,  without  further  corroboration
because such a statement is not made on oath and because  the  maker  of  it
might be mentally and physically in a state  of  confusion  and,  therefore,
the value to be attached to such a dying declaration cannot be  such  so  as
to form the sole basis of conviction of an accused.

13.   On the contrary the counsel appearing for the State  relied  upon  the
judgment of this Court in the case of State of Uttar Pradesh  v.  Ram  Sagar
Yadav and Ors. [(1985) 1 SCC 552] and argued  that  primary  effort  of  the
Court has to be to find out whether the dying declaration is true and if  it
is  so,  no  question  of  corroboration  arises.   It  is   only   if   the
circumstances surrounding the dying declaration are not clear or  convincing
that the court may, for its assurance, look for corroboration of  the  dying
declaration.

14.   We are not able to see any contradiction in  these  two  judgments  of
this Court.  The three-Judge Bench judgment  in  the  case  of  Khushal  Rao
(supra) had stated the principle in paragraphs 16 and  17,  which  reads  as
under:

             “16. On a review of the relevant provisions  of  the  Evidence
             Act and of the decided cases in the different High  Courts  in
             India and in this Court, we have come to  the  conclusion,  in
             agreement with the opinion of the Full  Bench  of  the  Madras
             High Court, aforesaid, (1) that it cannot be laid down  as  an
             absolute rule of law that a dying declaration cannot form  the
             sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated;  (2)  that
             each case must be determined on its own facts keeping in  view
             the circumstances in which the dying declaration was made; (3)
             that it cannot be laid down as a general  proposition  that  a
             dying declaration is a weaker  kind  of  evidence  than  other
             pieces of evidence; (4) that a dying declaration stands on the
             same footing as another piece of evidence and has to be judged
             in the light of surrounding circumstances and  with  reference
             to the principles governing the weighing of evidence; (5) that
             a dying declaration which has been  recorded  by  a  competent
             Magistrate in the proper manner, that is to say, in  the  form
             of questions and answers, and, as far as practicable,  in  the
             words of the maker of the declaration, stands on a much higher
             footing than a  dying  declaration  which  depends  upon  oral
             testimony which may suffer from all the infirmities  of  human
             memory and human character, and (6) that in order to test  the
             reliability of a dying declaration, the court has to  keep  in
             view, the circumstances like the opportunity of the dying  man
             for observation, for example,  whether  there  was  sufficient
             light if  the  crime  was  committed  at  night;  whether  the
             capacity of the man to remember the facts stated, had not been
             impaired  at  the  time  he  was  making  the  statement,   by
             circumstances beyond his control; that the statement has  been
             consistent throughout  if  he  had  several  opportunities  of
             making a dying declaration apart from the official  record  of
             it; and that the statement  had  been  made  at  the  earliest
             opportunity and was not the result of tutoring  by  interested
             parties.

             17. Hence, in order to pass the test of reliability,  a  dying
             declaration has to be subjected  to  a  very  close  scrutiny,
             keeping in view the fact that the statement has been  made  in
             the absence of the accused who had no opportunity  of  testing
             the veracity of the statement by cross-examination. But  once,
             the  court  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that   the   dying
             declaration was the truthful version as to  the  circumstances
             of the death and the assailants of the  victim,  there  is  no
             question of further corroboration.

                 If, on the other hand, the court, after examining the dying
             declaration in all its aspects, and testing its veracity,  has
             come to the conclusion that it is not reliable by itself,  and
             that it suffers from an infirmity, then, without corroboration
             it cannot form the basis of a conviction. Thus, the  necessity
             for corroboration arises not from any inherent weakness  of  a
             dying declaration as a piece of evidence, as held in  some  of
             the reported cases, but from the fact that  the  court,  in  a
             given case, has come to the conclusion  that  that  particular
             dying declaration was not free from the  infirmities  referred
             to above or from such other infirmities as may be disclosed in
             evidence in that case.”



15.   A bare reading of the above paragraphs shows  that  the  Court  opined
that it cannot be laid down  as  an  absolute  rule  of  law  that  a  dying
declaration  cannot  form  the  sole  basis  of  conviction  unless  it   is
corroborated.  The Bench further clarified that where the dying  declaration
is true and correct, the attendant circumstances show it to be reliable  and
it has been recorded in accordance with law, the  deceased  made  the  dying
declaration of her own accord and upon due certification by the doctor  with
regard to the state of mind and body, then it may not be necessary  for  the
court to look for corroboration.   In  such  cases,  the  dying  declaration
alone can form the basis for the conviction of the accused.  But  where  the
dying declaration itself is attended by suspicious  circumstances,  has  not
been recorded in accordance with law and settled procedures  and  practices,
then, it may be necessary for the court to look  for  corroboration  of  the
same.

16.   In the case of Ram Sagar Yadav (supra), this Court  had  followed  the
same principle and, in  turn,  specifically  referred  to  the  judgment  of
Khushal Rao (supra).  Not only this, even in the  case  of  Munnu  Raja  and
Anr.  v. State of Madhya Pradesh (1976) 3 SCC 104, this  Court  referred  to
the judgment in  Khushal  Rao’s  case  (supra).    In  paragraph  6  of  the
judgment,  the  Court  stated  the  same  principle  that  where  the  dying
declaration suffers from an infirmity, the  Courts  will  have  to  adopt  a
different course to adjudicate the matter in accordance with law.    In  the
case of Ramilaben Hasmukhbhai  Khristi  v.  State of Gujarat  (2002)  7  SCC
56, this Court held as under:

           “28. Under the law, dying declaration can form the sole basis of
           conviction, if it is free from any kind of doubt and it has been
           recorded in the manner as provided under the law. It may not  be
           necessary to look for corroboration of the dying declaration. As
           envisaged, a dying declaration is generally to be recorded by an
           Executive Magistrate with the certificate of  a  medical  doctor
           about the mental fitness of the declarant to make the statement.
           It may be in the form of question and answer and the answers  be
           written in the words of the person making the  declaration.  But
           the court cannot be too technical and in substance if  it  feels
           convinced about the trustworthiness of the statement  which  may
           inspire confidence such a dying declaration can  be  acted  upon
           without any corroboration.”



17.   In this regard, reference can also be made to  a  recent  judgment  of
this Court in the case of Bhajju @ Karan Singh  v.  State of Madhya  Pradesh
(2012) 4 SCC 327.

18.   From the above judgments,  it  clearly  emerges  that  it  is  not  an
absolute principle of law that a dying  declaration  cannot  form  the  sole
basis of conviction of an accused  when  such  dying  declaration  is  true,
reliable and has been recorded in accordance with the  established  practice
and principles.

19.   Having answered the first question, now  we  have  to  deal  with  the
facts of the present case.  As already noticed, the  dying  declaration  had
been recorded in accordance with the established  practice  and  procedures.
To its correctness and authenticity, there  can  hardly  be  any  challenge.
After receiving the rukka at the police  station,  PW9  had  rushed  to  the
hospital and vide Ex.PJ/2 submitted application for recording the  statement
of the deceased. The doctor vide Ex. PJ/1 issued a  certificate  of  fitness
to record the statement of Rani.  They  dying  declaration  is  Ex.PR/2  and
photocopy thereof was marked as Ex.PK.  This was recorded  by  the  SDJM  in
his handwriting after questioning the deceased.  Ex.PR/2 was signed  by  the
SDJM as well as the thumb impression of  Rani  was  taken,  which  was  duly
identified by the Investigating Officer.  The  proceedings  to  that  effect
were  duly  recorded  as  giving  complete  details  as  to  how  the  dying
declaration came to be recorded and the proceedings were  submitted  to  the
SDJM and the Area Magistrate.  The truthfulness  of  the  dying  declaration
can further be evaluated from the fact that the same was  recorded  on  30th
March, 1998 while Rani died on  2nd  April,  1998,  i.e.  she  survived  for
another two-three days after the  statement  was  made  from  which  it  can
reasonably be inferred that she was in a fit condition to make statement  at
the relevant time, as stated by PW9 and PW11.   In  the  dying  declaration,
the deceased did not unnecessarily involve the other family members  of  the
accused Krishan.  On the contrary, she specifically stated that her  father-
in-law and sister-in-law were always helping her and, in  fact,  even  tried
to douse the fire.  She did  not  even  make  any  allegations  against  her
mother-in-law, except that she did not help Rani.  She only  attributed  the
acts of cruelty and beating to her husband and that too, when he  was  under
the influence of liquor.

20.   Dr.B.R. Kayat, when examined as PW11,  specifically  stated  that  the
patient was conscious but the B.P. could not be recorded because  of  burns.
She had 75% burns.  The doctor issued the  endorsement,  Ex.PJ/1,  declaring
that the deceased was fit to  make  statement  and  he  also  permitted  the
Magistrate to record the statement of the  deceased  and  she  remained  fit
during the recording of her statement.  According to this  witness,  he  had
granted endorsement (Ex. PJ/1) at 11.15 a.m. and then he granted  the  other
certificate, Ex.PR/3 at about 11.42 a.m. certifying that  she  remained  fit
during recording of her statement.   He  also  stated  that  the  Magistrate
remained present in the hospital for about 30 minutes.

21.   The learned counsel appearing for the appellant  heavily  relied  upon
the answer of the doctor in his cross-examination, where he stated that  “it
is correct that both  hands  of  Rani  were  burnt,  including  fingers  and
thumb.”  The deceased is stated to have suffered 75% burns.  This answer  of
the witness in face of his statement in examination-in-chief does not  bring
any advantage, inasmuch as no specific question was put to the  doctor  that
the extent of burns was such that her thumb impression could not  have  been
taken.  No such question was put to this witness.   Not  even  a  suggestion
was made to the doctor and the Investigating Officer to the effect  that  it
was not possible to take the thumb impression of the deceased in  the  state
of health that she was  in.   Dr.  R.K.  Wadhwa,  PW14,  who  performed  the
autopsy  on  the  dead  body  of  Rani  clearly  noticed  that  there   were
superficial to deep burns all over the body except her lower parts  of  both
thighs, both legs and feet.  In other words, it is  not  only  possible  but
quite feasible that her thumb impression  could  rightly  be  taken  by  the
SDJM.

22.   The next submission was that since PW1, PW3 and PW4, the relatives  of
the deceased had themselves turned hostile,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
prosecution has been able to prove its case  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt.
On the contrary, this will also take  this  case  outside  the  category  of
cases where an accused can be convicted solely  on  the  basis  of  a  dying
declaration.

23.    No  doubt,  these  three  witnesses  were  declared  hostile  by  the
prosecutor with the leave of the court.  However, this Court can still  rely
on and refer to the statements of these three witnesses to the  extent  that
they support the case of the prosecution.   PW1,  father  of  the  deceased,
stated that he had four daughters and one son.  His daughters, Rani and  Ram
Rati were married to Krishan and Sat Narain about 19 years back.  He  denied
that Krishan used to treat his daughter with cruelty.  But two vital  pieces
of information that  clearly  surfaced  from  his  examination-in-chief  are
inferred by the following statement “about two years ago,  Krishan  came  to
me and demanded  money  for  purchase  of  vehicle,  but  I  refused.  .....
Statement  of  my  daughter  was  recorded  before  my  arrival.”   It  was,
thereafter, that  the  witness  was  declared  hostile  and  cross-examined.
Similarly, PW3, mother of the deceased stated that her  daughter  was  never
harassed by the accused for bringing less dowry and  was  declared  hostile.
PW4 is the sister of Krishan and she stated that Krishan  was  not  at  home
and the deceased caught fire while she was preparing  the  tea.   Maybe,  it
was not possible for the Court to convict the accused on the  basis  of  the
statements of PW1, PW3 and PW4 respectively.  These  witnesses  support  the
case of the prosecution to a limited.  Rani and Ram Rati  were  two  sisters
who were married to two real brothers, i.e. Krishan and  Sat  Narain.   This
fact has duly been noticed by the Trial Court  in  its  judgment.   However,
its impact on the case of the prosecution and the reason for not  supporting
of the prosecution case by these witnesses was  completely  ignored  by  the
Trial Court.  PW1 supports the dying declaration to the  extent  that  money
was demanded for purchase of a car and he had refused to  meet  the  demand.
To that extent, this fully corroborates the dying declaration  made  by  the
deceased.  Keeping in view the social set up in rural areas, the  fact  that
another daughter Ram Rati, sister of the deceased Rani, had been married  in
the same family, gives a definite indication as  to  the  reason  why  these
witnesses turned hostile.  The hostility of these  witnesses  would,  in  no
way, render the dying declaration doubtful, much less inadmissible or of  no
evidentiary  value.   The  hostility  of  the  witnesses   is   a   relevant
consideration, but is not the sole determinative  factor  for  deciding  the
guilt or otherwise of an accused.  PW9, PW11, PW14, SDJM, the  other  police
witnesses and to some extent  PW1  have  also  supported  the  case  of  the
prosecution and partially the dying declaration.

24.   The judgment of this Court  in  the  case  of  Bhajju  @  Karan  Singh
(supra) can usefully be referred again as it has some similarity  on  facts.
There also two witnesses had turned hostile  and  a  dying  declaration  was
involved.  Considering the cumulative effect of hostile  witnesses  and  the
reliability of a dying declaration, the Court held as under:

           “33.  As  already  noticed,  none  of  the  witnesses   or   the
           authorities involved in the recording of the  dying  declaration
           had turned hostile. On the contrary, they have  fully  supported
           the case of the prosecution and have, beyond  reasonable  doubt,
           proved that the dying declaration is reliable, truthful and  was
           voluntarily made by the deceased. We may also notice  that  this
           very judgment, Munnu Raja (1976) 3 SCC 104 relied  upon  by  the
           accused itself clearly says that the dying  declaration  can  be
           acted upon without corroboration and can be made  the  basis  of
           conviction.

           34. Para 6 of the said judgment  reads  as  under:  (Munnu  Raja
           case, SCC pp. 106-07)


              “6. … It is well settled that though a dying declaration must
              be approached with caution for the reason that the  maker  of
              the statement cannot be subject to  cross-examination,  there
              is neither a rule of law nor a rule  of  prudence  which  has
              hardened into a rule of law that a dying  declaration  cannot
              be acted upon unless it is corroborated (see Khushal  Rao  v.
              State of Bombay AIR 1948 SC 22). The High Court, it is  true,
              has  held  that  the  evidence  of   the   two   eyewitnesses
              corroborated the dying declarations but it did  not  come  to
              the conclusion that the dying declarations suffered from  any
              infirmity by reason of which it was necessary to look out for
              corroboration.”


           35. Now, we shall discuss the effect  of  hostile  witnesses  as
           well as the worth of the defence put forward on  behalf  of  the
           appellant-accused. Normally, when a witness deposes contrary  to
           the stand of the prosecution  and  his  own  statement  recorded
           under Section 161 Cr.PC, the prosecutor, with the permission  of
           the court, can pray to the  court  for  declaring  that  witness
           hostile  and  for  granting  leave  to  cross-examine  the  said
           witness. If such a permission is granted by the court  then  the
           witness is subjected to cross-examination by the  prosecutor  as
           well as an opportunity is provided  to  the  defence  to  cross-
           examine such witnesses, if he so desires. In other words,  there
           is a  limited  examination-in-chief,  cross-examination  by  the
           prosecutor and cross-examination by the counsel for the accused.
           It is admissible to use the examination-in-chief as well as  the
           cross-examination of the said witness insofar as it supports the
           case of the prosecution.

           36. It is settled law that the evidence of hostile witnesses can
           also be relied upon by the prosecution to the extent to which it
           supports the prosecution version of the incident.  The  evidence
           of such witnesses cannot be treated as washed off  the  records,
           it remains admissible in trial and there is no legal bar to base
           the  conviction  of  the  accused  upon   such   testimony,   if
           corroborated by other reliable  evidence.  Section  154  of  the
           Evidence Act enables the court, in its discretion, to permit the
           person, who calls a witness, to put any question  to  him  which
           might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party.

           37. The view that the evidence  of  the  witness  who  has  been
           called and cross-examined by the party with  the  leave  of  the
           court, cannot be believed or disbelieved in part and has  to  be
           excluded altogether, is not the correct exposition of  law.  The
           courts may rely upon so much of the testimony which supports the
           case of the prosecution and is corroborated by  other  evidence.
           It is also now a settled canon of  criminal  jurisprudence  that
           the part which has been allowed to be cross-examined can also be
           relied upon by  the  prosecution.  These  principles  have  been
           encompassed in the judgments of  this  Court  in  the  following
           cases:

                    a. Koli Lakhmanbhai Chanabhai   v.   State  of  Gujarat
                       (1999) 8 SCC 624.

                    b. Prithi  v.  State of Haryana (2010) 8 SCC 536.

                    c. Sidhartha  Vashisht  @  Manu Sharma  v.  State  (NCT
                       of Delhi) (2010) 6 SCC 1.

                    d. Ramkrushna  v.  State of Maharashtra (2007)  13  SCC
                       525.”





25.   Even in the case of Mrinal Das v.  State of Tripura (2011) 9 SCC  479,
this Court held as under:

           “68.  In  our  case,  the  eyewitnesses  including  the  hostile
           witnesses, firmly  established  the  prosecution  version.  Five
           eyewitnesses, namely, PW 1, PW 4, PW 6, PW 7 and  PW  8  clearly
           identified two convicts, appellants Tapan Das (A-5)  and  Gautam
           Das (A-11). PWs 1, 4, 7 and 8 identified accused Pradip Das  (A-
           9). PWs 1 and 7 identified accused Somesh Das (A-7). PWs 1 and 4
           identified Mrinal Das (A-4). PWs 4 and 8 identified Anil Das (A-
           1).  It  is  clear  that  6  accused   persons   including   two
           convicts/appellants  had  been  identified  by  more  than   one
           eyewitnesses. It is also clear that 6 accused  could  have  been
           identified by the eyewitnesses though all of them could not have
           been identified by the same assailants.  However,  it  is  clear
           that two or more than two eyewitnesses  could  identify  one  or
           more than one assailants. The general principle of  appreciating
           evidence of eyewitnesses in such a case is that  where  a  large
           number of offenders are involved, it is necessary for the  court
           to seek corroboration, at least, from two or more witnesses as a
           measure of caution. Likewise, it is  the  quality  and  not  the
           quantity of evidence to be the rule for  conviction  even  where
           the number of eyewitnesses is less than two.

           69. It is well  settled  that  in  a  criminal  trial,  credible
           evidence of even  hostile  witnesses  can  form  the  basis  for
           conviction. In other words, in the  matter  of  appreciation  of
           evidence of witnesses, it is not the  number  of  witnesses  but
           quality of their evidence.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)




26.   In view of the settled position of law, we are of the considered  view
that the hostility of PW1,  PW3  and  PW4  cannot  demolish  the  value  and
reliability of the dying declaration of the deceased, Ext. PR/2.  The  dying
declaration has been proved in accordance with law, is  a  truthful  version
of the events that occurred and the  circumstances  leading  to  her  death.
The same is reliable and in fact, to some extent, finds  corroboration  from
the statements of other witnesses.

27.   For these reasons, we see no merit in the present appeal and the  same
is dismissed.

                                          ....….…………......................J.
                                                           (Swatanter Kumar)









                                          ....….…………......................J.
                                                            (Madan B. Lokur)
New Delhi,
December 13, 2012.

