
Supreme Court of India
M.Dhandapani vs R.Muthu Naliappan & Ors on 21 October, 2008Author: . Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, C.K. Thakker, Lokeshwar Singh Panta
                                                                                  REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                             CRIMINAL APPEAL Nos. 453-454 OF 2003


M.DHANDAPANI                                                          ...     Appellant(s)

            Versus

R.MUTHU NALIAPPAN & ORS.                                                ...   Respondent(s)


                                       JUDGMENT

Dr.ARIJIT PASAYAT,J.


              Heard.

              Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a learned Single Judge of the

    Madras High Court dismissing the appeal under Section 378(4) of the Code of

    Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short the 'Code'). The appeal was filed questioning the

    order dated 20.12.2001 made in CC No. 85/2000 on the file of Learned Munsif cum

    Judicial Magistrate, Kodumudi, Erode DIstrict. The allegations were to the effect

    that on 18.2.1997 at about 9.45 P.M. accused persons took exception to the fact that

    the complainant had kept his shop open after the time fixed for closing the shop.

    The complainant was questioned by respondent No. 1 as to        why he had kept the

    shop open. The complainant replied that the shop was kept open for the cleaning the

    utensils. This does not appear to have satisfied respondent No. 1 who directed the

    other two accused persons who were constables to put the accused in the jeep and

    assaulted him.


                                              -2-
     The trial court with reference to the evidence of witnesses came to hold that the

     accusations were without substance and there was no material to show the alleged

     commission of offence. Since the order was passed in a complaint case, appeal was

     preferred by grant of leave. The High Court referred to the various conclusions of the

     trial court and hold that the accusations have not been established. Learned counsel

     for the appellant submitted that the High Court's conclusions are contrary to the

     evidence on record. The High Court has concluded about the contradictions based on

     the evidence of PW1 and PW2. It is pointed out that the conclusions are at variance

     with the evidence on records.

               We have perused the records and after hearing learned

     counsel for the appellant we are satisfied that no interference is called for. The High

     Court has indicated several reasons as to why the complainant version lacks credibility

     or cogency.

               That being the position, we find no merit in these appeals. The appeals are

     accordingly dismissed.


                                           ...................J.
                                         (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)



                                         ....................J.
                                         (C.K.THAKKER



                                               ....................J.
                                     (LOKESHWAR SINGH PANTA)

New Delhi,
October 21, 2008.

