
Supreme Court of India
Mishrilal & Ors vs State Of M.P. & Ors on 11 May, 2005Author: K Balakrishnan
Bench: K.G. Balakrishnan, B.N. Srikrishna
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  939 of 2004

PETITIONER:
Mishrilal & Ors.

RESPONDENT:
State of M.P. & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 11/05/2005

BENCH:
K.G. BALAKRISHNAN & B.N. SRIKRISHNA

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

K.G. BALAKRISHNAN, J.

	The four appellants along with two others were found guilty of 
the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC.  
They were also found guilty of the offence under Section 148 IPC.  The 
appellants preferred an appeal before the High Court and the same 
was dismissed.    Hence, they challenge their conviction  and  sentence 
in this appeal.

	The incident giving rise to the present appeal happened on 
22.7.1990 at about 6.00 p.m.  PW-1 Kammod, PW-2 Mokam Singh 
and deceased Balmukund were grazing the cattle in their fields.  The 
appellants along with their accomplices came there and attacked 
Balmukund  and PW-2 Mokam Singh.   Appellants Mishrilal and Lallu @ 
Lalaram were armed with axe and A-3 Kamoda @ Kamod Singh was 
armed with 'lathi'  while A-4 Narayan Singh was armed with a 
'Luhangi.'  The prosecution case is that all of them caused injuries to 
deceased Balmukund.  PW 1 Kammod later went to the Police Station 
at Bajranggarh and gave information about the incident.

	On the side of the prosecution, 8 witnesses were examined.  
PWs 1 to 4 are eye witnesses.  The evidence of PW 4 Mathura Lal was 
not accepted by the Sessions Judge as his name was not mentioned in 
the F.I. Statement.  The Sessions Court relied on the evidence of PW 1 
to PW 3.  The High Court also accepted the evidence of PW 1 to PW 3.

	We heard the learned Counsel for the appellants and learned 
Counsel on behalf of the respondents.  The learned Counsel for the 
appellants seriously contended before us that the incident happened 
after the sunset and these witnesses could not have identified the 
assailants.  It was pointed out that these witnesses were standing at a 
distance and due to paucity of light, they had no opportunity to 
identify the assailants.  We are not inclined to accept this contention, 
for the reason that  the incident  is alleged to have happened at about 
6'o Clock in the evening and the prosecution case is that  deceased 
Balmukund as well as PW 1 and PW 2 were grazing the cattle in their 
field at that time  and  there would not have been much darkness.  
Moreover, in the cross-examination of PW 1, there is not even a 
suggestion that there was no light and they were unable to see the 
incident,  though, of course, there was a suggestion  to the effect that 
the witnesses PW 1 and PW 2 must have been standing at a distance.

	The learned Counsel for the appellants seriously attacked the 
evidence of PW 2 Mokam Singh.  This witness was examined by the 
Sessions Judge on 6.2.1991 and  cross-examined on the same day by 
the defence counsel.  Thereafter,  it seems,  that on behalf of the 
accused persons an application was filed and PW 2 Mokam Singh was 
recalled.  PW-2 was again examined and cross-examined on 
31.7.1991.  It may be noted that some of the persons who were 
allegedly involved in this incident were minors and their case was tried 
by the Juvenile Court.  PW 2 Mokam Singh was also  examined as a 
witness in the  case before the Juvenile court.  In the Juvenile Court, 
he gave evidence to the effect that he was not aware of the persons 
who had attacked him and on hearing the voice of the assailants, he 
assumed that they were some Banjaras.   Upon recalling,  PW-2 
Mokam Singh  was confronted  with the evidence he had given later 
before the Juvenile Court on the  basis of which the accused persons 
were acquitted of the charge under Section 307 IPC for having made 
an attempt on the life of this witness. 

	In our opinion, the procedure adopted by the Sessions Judge 
was not strictly in accordance with law.  Once the  witness was 
examined in-chief and cross-examined  fully, such witness should not 
have been recalled and re-examined to deny the evidence he had 
already given before the court,   even though that witness had given 
an inconsistent statement before any other court or forum 
subsequently.  A witness could be confronted only with  a previous 
statement made by him.  At  the time of examination of PW 2 Mokam 
Singh on 6.2.1991, there was no such previous statement and the 
defence counsel did not confront  him with any  statement alleged to 
have been made previously.   This witness must have given some 
other version before the Juvenile Court for extraneous reasons and he 
should not have been given a further opportunity at a later stage to 
completely efface the evidence already given by him under oath.   The 
courts have to  follow the procedures strictly and cannot allow a 
witness to escape  the legal  action for giving false evidence before the 
court on mere explanation that he had given it under the pressure of 
the police or some other reason.  Whenever the witness speaks 
falsehood in the court,  and  it is proved satisfactorily,  the court 
should take a serious action against such  witnesses.

	PW 2 Mokam Singh, when examined on 6-2-1991,  gave 
evidence to the effect that he and deceased Balmukund were attacked 
by the appellants herein.  PW-3 is the daughter of the deceased 
Balmukund.  She had also given evidence to the effect that these four 
appellants came  to the place of  incident and caused injuries to her 
father Balmukund and PW 2 Mokam Singh.  She also deposed that the 
accused persons were carrying axe, farsa, lathis and some other 
weapons.

	The medical evidence in this case shows that deceased 
Balmukund had sustained as many as 8 injuries. Except one injury, all 
others were lacerated injuries.  The learned Counsel for the appellants 
submitted that there is no evidence to show that appellants Mishrilal 
and  Lallu @ Lalaram caused injuries with an axe  and  that there is no 
corresponding incised injury on the head of the deceased and hence 
the medical evidence is in conflict with the evidence of the eye-
witnesses. 	That plea also is not correct as the post-mortem certificate 
shows that there was an injury on the head  of the deceased which 
must have been caused by the appellant Mishrilal.  Injury nos. 1 and 3 
are on the left fronto-temporo parietal region and mid parietal region.  
The blunt edge of the axe must have been used to cause these 
injuries.

	The evidence of the three witnesses, namely PW-1 to PW-3, 
coupled with the medical evidence satisfactorily proved that the 
appellants had committed  the offence as alleged by the prosecution.  
There is, therefore, no reason to interfere with the conviction and  
sentence  entered against the appellants.  The appeal is without any 
merits and is dismissed accordingly.

							....J.
							(K.G. BALAKRISHNAN)



							.J.
							(B.N. SRIKRISHNA)

New Delhi
May 11.   2005.
 








			IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
			CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
			CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 939 OF 2004

Mishrilal & Ors.							..Appellants
		Versus
State of M.P. & Ors.							..Respondents

					J U D G M E N T
K.G. Balakrishnan, J.

	The four appellants along with two others were found guilty for the offence 
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC.  They were also found 
guilty of the offence under Section 148 IPC.  The appellants had preferred an 
appeal before the High Court and the same was dismissed. Hence, they 
challenge their conviction sentence.

	The incident happened on 22.7.1990 at about 6.00 p.m.  PW 1 Kammod, 
PW 2 Mokam Singh and deceased Balmukund were grazing the cattle in their 
fields.  The appellants alongwith others came there and attacked Balmukund and 
PW 2 Mokam Singh.  The appellants Mishrilal and Lallu @ Lalaram were armed 
with axe and A-3 Kamoda @ Kamod Singh was armed with lathi and A-4 
Narayan Singh was armed with Luhangi.  The prosecution case is that all of them 
caused injuries to deceased Balmukund.  PW 1 Kammod later went to the Police 
Station at Bajranggarh and gave information about the incident.

	On the side of the prosecution, 8 witnesses were examined.  PWs 1 to 4 
are eye witnesses.  The evidence of PW 4 Mathura Lal was not accepted by the 
Sessions Judge as his name was not mentioned in the FI Statement.  The 
Sessions Court relied on the evidence of PW 1 to PW 3.  The High Court also 
accepted the evidence of PW 1 to PW 3.

	We heard the learned Counsel for the appellants and learned Counsel on 
behalf of the respondents.  The learned Counsel for the appellants seriously 
contended before us that the incident happened after the sunset and these 
witnesses could not have identified the assailants.  It was pointed out that these 
witnesses were standing at a distance and due to paucity of light, they had no 
opportunity to identify them.  We are not inclined to accept this contention for the 
reason that the incident happened at about 6'o Clock in the evening.  Moreover, 
the prosecution case is that the deceased Balmukund as well as PW 1 and PW 2 
were grazing the cattle in their field and at that time there would not have been 
much darkness.  Moreover, in the cross-examination of PW 1, there is not even a 
suggestion that there was no light and they were unable to see the incident.  Of 
course, the suggestion was to the effect that the witnesses PW 1 and PW 2 must 
have been standing at a distance.

	The learned Counsel for the appellants seriously attacked the evidence of 
PW 2 Mokam Singh.  This witness was examined by the Sessions Judge on 
6.2.1991 and he was cross-examined on the same day by the defence Counsel 
and thereafter it seems that on behalf of the accused persons, an application was 
filed to recall these witnesses and PW 2 Mokam Singh was recalled and 
examined on 31.7.1991 for further cross-examination.  It may be noted that some 
of the persons who were allegedly involved in this incident were minors and their 
case was tried by the Juvenile Court.  PW 2 Mokam Singh was examined as a 
witness in the Juvenile court.  In the Juvenile Court, he gave evidence to the 
effect that he was not aware of the persons who had attacked him and on 
hearing the voice of the assailants, he assumed that they were some Banjaras.  
After recalling PW 2 Mokam Singh the evidence he had given later before the 
Juvenile Court was confronted to the witnesses and based on that, the accused 
persons were acquitted of the charge under Section 307 IPC for having made an 
attempt on the life of this witness. 

	The procedure adopted by the Sessions Judge was not strictly in 
accordance with law.  When once the witness was examined in-chief and cross-
examined in full, and even if the witness had given any statement thereafter 
before any other court or forum, such witnesses shall not be recalled and 
examined to deny the evidence he had already given before the Court.  A 
witness could be confronted only with previous statement made by him.  At the 
time of examination of PW 2 Mokam Singh, there was no such previous 
statement and the defence Counsel did not confront any statement made by him 
previously.  The witness must have given some other version before the Juvenile 
Court for extraneous reasons and he should not have been given a further 
opportunity at a later stage to completely efface the evidence already given by 
him under oath.  The courts have to view these things seriously, and the 
witnesses often escape from any action for giving false evidence before the 
Court on mere explanation that they had been giving it under the pressure of the 
police or some other reason.  Whenever the witness speaks falsehood in court 
and if it is proved satisfactorily, the court should take a serious action against 
such persons.

	PW 2 Mokam Singh when examined on 6-2-1991 and gave evidence to 
the effect that he and deceased Balmukund were attacked by the appellants 
herein.  PW 3 is the daughter of the deceased Balmukund.  She had also given 
evidence to the effect that these four appellants came there and caused injury to 
her father Balmukund and PW 2 Mokam Singh.  She also deposed that the 
accused persons were carrying axe, farsa, lathis and some other weapons.

	The medical evidence in this case shows that deceased Balmukund had 
sustained as many as 8 injuries. Except one injury, all others were lacerated 
injuries.  The learned Counsel for the appellants submitted that there is no 
evidence to show that the appellant Mishrilal and appellant Lallu @ Lalaram 
caused injury with an axe on the head and there is no corresponding incised 
injury on the head and hence the medical evidence is in conflict with the 
evidence of the eye-witnesses. That plea also is not correct as the post mortem 
certificate shows that there was injury on his head which must have been caused 
by the appellant Mishrilal.  Injury no. 1 and 3 are on the left fronto-temporo-
parietal region and mid parietal region.  The blunt edge of the axe must have 
been used to cause these injuries.

	The evidence of these three witnesses coupled with the medical evidence 
satisfactorily proved that the appellants had committed an offence as alleged by 
the prosecution.  There is no reason to interfere with the conviction sentence and 
the appeal is without any merits and is accordingly dismissed.

