
Supreme Court of India
Balumal Jamnadas Batra vs State Of Maharashtra on 29 August, 1975Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 2083, 1976 SCR  (1) 539
Author: M H Beg
Bench: Beg, M. Hameedullah
           PETITIONER:
BALUMAL JAMNADAS BATRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

DATE OF JUDGMENT29/08/1975

BENCH:
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
BENCH:
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
BHAGWATI, P.N.
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1975 AIR 2083		  1976 SCR  (1) 539
 1975 SCC  (4) 645
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1980 SC 593	 (20)
 R	    1980 SC 793	 (8)


ACT:
     Customs Act,  1962, Section 123 sub-section (1) and (2)
-Seizure of  smuggled goods prior to notification under sub-
section (2)  -Presumption under sub-section (1), if could be
applied subsequent to notification to the goods seized.



HEADNOTE:
     Section 123(1) of the Customs Act, 1962, provided that,
where any  goods to  which this	 section applies  are seized
under this  Act in  the	 reasonable  relief  that  they	 are
smuggled goods,	 the burden  of proving	 that they  are	 not
smuggled goods	shall be on the person from whose possession
the goods were seized.
     On 21-4-1967 Police officers of the Anti Corruption and
Prohibition Bureau..  Greater Bombay,  acting on information
received, had  searched room  no. 10  at 56,  Sheriff  Deoji
Street Bombay. This room was divided by petitions into three
parts. In the central portion the police found the appellant
and three  other persons. This portion was again sub-divided
with a	locked connecting  door fixed  in the passage to the
sub-divided part.  This was  opened by one of the two Godrej
lock keys  produced by	the appellant  from a side pocket of
his trousers.  Eleven wooden  boxes covered  with jute cloth
and secured  by iron   strips  were found  there. On opening
them. six  of them  were found to contain cigarette lighters
of "Imco  Triplex Junior"  brand "Made in Austria.". Each of
the six	 boxes were  tightly packed with 1 200 lighters. The
remaining five	boxes contained	 fifty sealed tins of flints
for cigarette  lighters which  bore the	 Following  writing:
"Tego Lighter  Flints of  Superior Quality  Made in Germany"
inscribed on  them. A panchnama was prepared before Panchas.
A rent	receipt in  the name  of the appellant in respect of
room No.  10, in this house, of which a portion was occupied
by  the	 appellant,  and  a  bill  for	the  consumption  of
electricity  were  also	 seized	 from  the  custody  of	 the
appellant together  with  the  Godrej  locks  and  the	keys
produced  by  the  appellant.  On  30th	 October.  1968	 the
Assistant  Collector   of'  Central   Excise,	Marine	 and
Prevention Division. Bombay, filed a complaint alleging that
the  appellant	 had  committed	 offences  punishable  under
Section 135(a) and (b) of the Customs Act. The appellant had
denied being  in possession  of the offending goods although
he had	admitted the production of keys from his possession.
The trying Presidency Magistrate convicted him under section
135(b)(ii) of the Customs Act. 1962 and sentenced him to six
months rigorous	 imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 2,000/-, and
in default,  to three  months further rigorous imprisonment.
The High  Court dismissed  his appeal.	This appeal has been
preferred on  the basis of the special leave granted by this
Court.
     It was  contended	for  the  appellant  that:  (1)	 the
presumption contained in s.123(1) of the Act would not place
the onus  of proving  innocent possession  of the  goods  in
question upon  the appellant; and, (ii) the goods in respect
of which  the appellant was prosecuted were not seized under
the Act.
     Rejecting the  contentions and  dismissing the  appeal.
the court
^
     HELD: (1)	Though lighters	 and  flints  were  notified
provided in Section 123(2), in the official Gazette of 26-8-
1967 the  provisions of Section 123(1) which only lay down a
procedural rule, could be applied when the case came up for.
trial before the Presidency Magistrate. He divided it on 15-
7-1969. The complaint itself' was filed on 30-10-1968. It is
immaterial that the appellant was round in possession of the
goods on 21-4-1967. [542-B-C]
     (ii) The very appearance of the goods and the manner in
which they  were  packed  indicated  that  they	 were  newly
manufactured and  brought into	this country  very  recently
from another  country. The  inscriptions on them and writing
on the	boxes were  Parts of the state in which the goods in
unopened boxes	were found from which inferences about their
origin and recent import
540
could  arise.	The  appellant's   conduct,  including	 his
untruthful  denial   of	 their	 h   possession,   indicated
consciousness of  their smuggled  character  or	 means	rea.
There was  some evidence to enable the courts to come to the
conclusion that	 the goods  must  have	been  known  to	 the
appellant to  be smuggled  even if  he was  not party  to  a
fraudulent evasion of duty. [543 B-D]
     Gian Chand & ors. v. The State of Punjab, [1962] Suppl.
l S.C.R.  364 Collector	 of Customs,  Madras &	ors.  v.  D.
Bhoormull A.I.R.  1974 S  C. 859  M/s, Kanungo	& Co. v. The
Collector of  Customs, Calcutta	 & ORS.	 A.I. R.  1972	S.C.
2136, Issaradas Daulat Ram & ors v. The Union of India & ors
[1962] Suppl.  1 S.C.R.	 358, Gopal  Sheorey v. The State of
Bombay [1959]  S.C.R. 919  and The  State of  Punjab v. Gian
Chand & ors. Criminal Appeal No. 195 of 1962-decided by this
court on 2-4-1968, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 74
of 1971.
     Appeal by	Special Leave  from the	 Judgment and  order
dated the  25th January	 1972 of  the Bombay  High Court  in
Criminal Appeal 1025 of 1959.
     N.	 H.  Hingoorani	 and  Mrs.  K.	Hingoorani  for	 the
Appellant.
     S. B. Wad and Al. N. Shroff for the Respondent.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by V
     BEG, J.-The  appellant before  us by  special leave  to
appeal was  convicted  under  Section  135(b)  (ii)  of	 the
Customs Act,  1962 (hereinafter	 referred to  as 'the Act'),
and sentenced to six months rigorous imprisonment and a fine
of Rs.	2,000/-, and,  in default,  to three  months further
rigorous  imprisonment.	 Goods	in  respect  of	 which	this
offence	 was   found  to   have	 been  committed  were	also
confiscated.
     On 21-4-1967,  Police Officers  of the  Anti Corruption
and  Prohibition   Bureau,   Greater   Bombay,	 acting	  on
information received,  had  searched  room  No.	 10  at	 56,
Sheriff Deoji  Street, Bombay.	This room   was	 divided  by
partitions into	 three parts.  In the  central	portion	 the
police found  the appellant  and three	other persons.	This
portion was  again sub-divided with a locked connecting door
fixed in  the passage  to the  sub-divided  part.  This	 was
opened by  one of  the two  Godrej lock keys produced by the
appellant from	a side pocket of his trousers. Eleven wooden
boxes covered  with jute  cloth and  secured by	 iron strips
were found there. On opening them, six of them were found to
contain cigarette  lighters of	"Imco Triplex Junior'? brand
"Made in Austria". Each of the six boxes were tightly packed
with 1200 lighters. The remaining five boxes contained fifty
sealed tins  of flints for cigarette lighters which bore the
following writing:  "Tego Lighter Flints of Superior Quality
Made  in  Germany".  On	 the  wooden  boxes  containing	 the
lighters were  found written  "Dubai" and "Made in Austria".
The five  boxes containing  flints had the words "Dubai" and
"Made in  West Germany"	 inscribed on  them. A panchnama was
prepared before	 Panchas. A  rent receipt in the name of the
appellant in respect of room No. 10, in this house, of which
a portion  was occupied by the appellant, and a bill for the
consumption of electricity were also seized from the custody
of the appellant together
541
with the Godrej lock and the keys produced by the appellant.
Subsequently, the  seized articles  were made  over  to	 the
inspector  of	Central	 Excise	  and  Customs,	 Marine	 and
Prevention Division, Bombay, on 24-4-1967, under Section 110
of the Customs Act.
     The value	of 7200 cigarette lighters was stated as Rs.
14,400/- and  of 250 tins of flints as Rs. 15,000/- on which
Customs duty  of Rs.  15,840/- and Rs. 10,500/- respectively
was alleged  to be  payable. In	 the complaint filed on 30th
October, 1968, by the Assistant Collector of Central Excise,
Marine and  Prevention Division,  Bombay, it is alleged that
the cigarette  lighters and  flints were imported into India
without an import licence and in contravention of provisions
of Government  of India,  Ministry of  Commerce &  Industry,
Import Control	order No.17/55	dated 7-12-1955 (as amended)
issued under  Section 3(2)  of the Import & Export (Control)
Act, 1947,  which was  to be  deemed to	 be an	order passed
under Section  11 of  the Act.	It was	submitted  that	 the
accused, having	 been concerned	 in a  fraudulent evasion of
payment of  Rs. 26,340/-  as customs duty to the Government,
had committed  offences punishable  under Section 135(a) and
(b)  of	 the  Act.  The	 goods	were  also  as	a  necessary
consequence, said to be liable to confiscation under Section
111 (d) of the
Act.
     The appellant  had denied	being in  possession of	 the
offending goods	 although he  had admitted the production of
keys from  his possession He alleged that the portion of the
room from  which the  goods were  recovered  was  sublet  to
Dwarumal and  Kishen who  had  kept  the  goods	 there.	 The
appellant's explanation	 had been  disbelieved by the trying
Magistrate as  well as	by the High Court. The production of
the key	 which, according  to the  prosecution evidence, the
appellant had  at first	 refused to produce, proved that the
portion in  which the  boxes were  kept was  in	 appellant's
exclusive possession  with all	that was contained in it. It
is possible  that he  may have sub let other portions of the
partitioned room to other persons, but there is no reason to
doubt that  the appellant  was not only in possession of the
bodies but  knew something about the incriminating nature of
their contents.	 Otherwise, why	 should he,  at first,	have
refused to  produce  the  key  he  had	?  Furthermore,	 the
appellant had  not given  any evidence to show that his sub-
tenants had  placed the	 boxes there,  or that there was any
reason why  he should allow them to use the portion reserved
by him	for himself.  His case rested on his bare assertions
in a  written statement.  Of course, no one had come forward
to  state   or	   allege  that	 the  goods  found,  in	 the
circumstances  stated	above?	had  been  imported  without
payment of  duty. The  only question  raised before  us	 was
whether the presumption contained in Section 123 of the Act,
corresponding to  Section 128(A)  of the  Sea  Customs	Act,
1878. Or  any other provision of law would place the onus of
proving	 innocent   possession	of   these  goods  upon	 the
appellant. Section 123 of the Art reads as follows:
	  "123. Burden of proof in certain cases.
	  (1)  Where any goods to which this section applies
	       are seized  under this  Act in the reasonable
	       belief that
542
	       they  are   smuggled  goods,  the  burden  of
	       proving that  they  are	not  smuggled  goods
	       shall be	 on the person from whose possession
	       the goods were seized.
	  (2)  This section  shall apply  to gold, diamonds,
	       manufacturers of	 gold or  diamonds, watches,
	       and  any	 other	class  of  goods  which	 the
	       Central Government may by notification in the
	       official Gazette specify".
     lt is  true that  lighters and  flints were notified as
provided in  Section 123(2) in the official Gazette of 26-8-
1967. Nevertheless,  as the  provisions of Section 123(1) of
the Act	 only lay  down a  procedural rule,  they  could  be
applied	 when	the  case  came	 up  for  trial	 before	 the
Presidency Magistrate  who actually decided it on 15-7-1969.
Indeed, the  complaint itself was filed on 30-10-1968. It is
immaterial that the appellant was found in possession of the
goods on  21-4-1967 There  is, however, another objection to
the applicability  of Section  123(1) of the Act. It is that
it would  apply only  to goods	seized under  the Act. lt is
contended that	the goods  in respect of which the appellant
was prosecuted	were not  seized under the Act. Reliance was
placed for  this contention  upon Gian	Chand &	 ors. v. the
State of Punjab (1)
     Even if the goods with which we are concerned here were
not seized  under the Act, as provided by Section 111 of the
Act, it	 is contended  on behalf  of the  State that Section
106,  read  with  Section  114	of  the	 Evidence  Act,	 was
sufficient to  enable the  prosecution to  ask the  Court to
presume that  the appellant  knew that	the goods  must have
been smuggled  or imported  in contravention of the law. The
appellant had  not produced  evidence to show that the goods
were legally  brought into  India. Reliance  was  placed  on
behalf of the prosecution on: Collector of Customs, Madras &
ors. v. D. Bhoormal (2); M/s. Kanungo & Co. v. The Collector
of Customs, Calcutta & Ors(3), Issardas Daulat Ram & ors. v.
the Union  of India  & Ors.(4),	 Anant Gopal  Sheorey v. The
State of Bombay(5).
     Learned Counsel  for the  appellant had  in  his  turn,
relied upon  The State of Punjab v. Gian Chand & ors.(6). He
contended that	it was	necessary  for	the  prosecution  to
prove:	(1)  that,  the	 goods	in  question  were  actually
smuggled or  brought into  the country	without	 payment  of
customs duty  at a time when payment of such duty had become
obligatory; and,  (2) that,  the appellant  was dealing with
them knowing  them to  be smuggled  goods. It  was contended
that mere  possession by the accused of such goods could not
enable the  prosecution to apply Section 106 of the Evidence
Act when  the appellant	 could not know where the goods came
from. It  was urged  that there	 was no evidence which could
enable the  appellant to  know where  the goods came from or
when the  goods were  imported or that duty, if leviable was
not P d on them. The admissibility and sufficiency of
     (1) [1962] (Suppl.) 1 S.C.R. 364.	     (2) A.I.R. 1974
						   S.C. 859.
     (3) A.I.R. 1972 S.C.R. 2136.      (4) [1962] Suppl. (1)
						 S.C.R. 358.
     (5) [1959] S.C.R. 919.
(6) Criminal Appeal No. 195 of 1962 decided by this Court on
2-4-1968.
543
the inscriptions  on the  goods and  the writing on boxes in
which they were found, for proving the place from where they
came, or  when they  were  imported,  were  questioned.	 The
contention was,	 that even  if the appellant is deemed to be
in possession with full knowledge of what the goods actually
were, the  Court could	not go further and assume them to be
smuggled or  imported into  the country from another country
of their  assumed origin  after a time when the restrictions
on  their   import  had	 been  imposed.	 Unfortunately,	 the
appellant did  not admit the possession of the goods at all.
If he  could have succeeded in explaining satisfactorily how
he was	an innocent  receiver of  such goods without knowing
that they  were illegally  imported or	smuggled he may have
had a  chance of  getting the  benefit	of  doubt  The	very
appearance of  the goods  and the  manner in which they were
packed indicated  that	they  were  newly  manufactured	 and
brought	 into	this  country  very  recently  from  another
country. The  inscriptions or  them and writing on the boxes
were parts of the state in which the goods in unopened boxes
were found  from which	inferences about  their	 origin	 and
recent	import	 could	arise.	 The  appellant's   conduct,
including  his	 untruthful  denial   of  their	 possession,
indicated consciousness of their smuggled character or means
rea. In	 any case,  there was  some evidence  to enable	 the
Courts to  come to  the conclusion  that the goods must have
been known  to the  appellant to  be smuggled even if he was
not a  party to	 a fraudulent evasion of duty. Consequently,
the  appellant	 had  been   convicted	only  under  Section
135(1)(ii) of  the Act. We do not find sufficient reasons to
interfere with this finding of fact or the sentence imposed.
It  would   also  follow   that	 the   goods  were   rightly
confiscated.
     Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.
V.M.K.					   Appeal dismissed.
544




