
Supreme Court of India
Karpuri @ Kapuri Yadav & Ors vs State Of Bihar on 6 May, 2009Author: ......................J.
Bench: B.N. Agrawal, G.S. Singhvi
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1231 OF 2002


Karpuri @ Kapuri Yadav & Ors.                         ...Appellant(s)

                                         Versus

State of Bihar                                        ...Respondent(s)


                                       O R D E R

           Heard learned counsel for the parties.
           The appellants were convicted by the trial court under Section 201 of the
Indian Penal Code and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years.
On appeal being preferred, the High Court confirmed their conviction and sentence.
Hence, this appeal by special leave.
           Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants pressed this appeal
on the question of sentence only and made a prayer that as the appellants have
remained in custody for about eight months, sentence for imprisonment awarded to
them may be reduced to the period already undergone.               In the facts and
circumstances of the case, we are of the view that the ends of justice would be met in
case the sentence of imprisonment awarded against these persons is reduced to the
period already undergone.
           The appeal is, accordingly, allowed in part.        While upholding the
conviction of the appellants, sentence of imprisonment awarded to them is reduced to
the period already


                                                                 ...2/-
                                          -2-
undergone. The appellants, who are on bail, are discharged from the liability of bail
bonds.

                                                                      ......................J.
                                                [B.N. AGRAWAL]



                                                                      ......................J.
                                                [G.S. SINGHVI]
New Delhi,
May 06, 2009.

