
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Aman Mittal on 4 September, 2019Author: L. Nageswara Rao
Bench: L. Nageswara Rao, Hemant Gupta
                                                            REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1328-1329 OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NOS. 9981-9982 OF 2017)


THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                              .....APPELLANT(S)

                                     VERSUS

AMAN MITTAL & ANR.                                   .....RESPONDENT(S)

                                    WITH

             CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1330-1331 OF 2019
     (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NOS. 1912-1913 OF 2018)

               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1332 OF 2019
      (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NO. 3321 OF 2018)




                          JUDGMENT

HEMANT GUPTA, J.

Crl. Appeal Nos. 1328-1329 of 2019 (@SLP (Criminal) Nos.9981-9982 of 2017)
                                  AND
Crl. Appeal Nos. 1330-1331 of 2019 (@SLP (Criminal) Nos.1912-1913 of 2017)

1)    Leave granted.


2)    The order dated October 4, 2017 passed by the Lucknow Bench of

      the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad is the subject matter of

      challenge in these appeals.


                                                                       1
3)      An FIR No. 130 was lodged on April 28, 2017 with Police Station Cantt,

        Lucknow for the offences punishable under Sections 265, 267, 420,

        34, 120-B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 1 and Sections 3/7 of the

        Essential Commodities Act, 19552 in respect of short delivery of petrol

        and diesel by 200-220 ml. on each sale of 5 liters.


4)      On April 27, 2017, the Special Task Force 3 of the State Police took up

        the investigation into the commission of offence viz. short delivery of

        petroleum products i.e. high-speed diesel and motor spirit at various

        retail outlets operating within the city of Lucknow. The STF with the

        aid of officers of the Department of Weight and Measures and the

        District Administration raided the premises of the retail outlets. The

        team found that 15 nozzles connected to four machines i.e.

        dispensing units with seals intact were operative and functional. The

        testing was carried out in the presence of Apar Nagar Magistrate, two

        Inspectors of Weights and Measures Department and the partners of

        the firm M/s. Shiv Narain & Sons and its Manager.          As per the

        inspection memo recorded on April 27, 2017, out of 15 nozzles, 10

        nozzles were used for sale of petrol and the remaining 5 nozzles were

        used for sale of diesel. 13 nozzles were involved in malpractice of

        short delivery.   The team derived 5 liters of petrol and diesel

        respectively in the testing work standard measurement kept at the


1    IPC
2      Act, 1955
3    STF



                                                                           2
     outlet but on calibration, it was found that the quantity of 200 ml.

     was short. For such short delivery, the FIR, as mentioned above, was

     lodged.


5)   In the FIR, it is alleged that some electronic chip was fixed inside the

     dispensing unit which was operated through a remote. Three remote

     controls bearing Nos. 2, 3 and 4 were recovered and two remote

     controls were recovered without any numbers. The inspection team

     also verified the storage of stocks available as on date in the

     underground tanks by using a dip rod. On verification of actual stock,

     the comparative record maintained by the dealer was found to be

     inconsistent rather the stock available was found to be excessive and

     was recorded accordingly. The dispensing machines were sealed by

     the inspection team and the sale was immediately stopped.           The

     accused were arrested on April 28, 2017. Later, on June 1, 2017, the

     Investigating Officer along with seven persons including the City

     Magistrate visited the retail outlet and with the help of technicians

     hired from General Energy Management Systems Pvt. Ltd. opened the

     dispensing machines. The seals were found intact both at the initial

     stage of inspection i.e. on April 27, 2017 and on June 1, 2017.     The

     electronic chips fixed inside the 24 dispensing units were taken into

     custody by the Investigating Officer. Such electronic chips recovered

     on June 1, 2017 are now with Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow

     for its forensic report. The Magistrate on an application made by the


                                                                         3
       Investigating Officer allowed the judicial remand of accused vide

       order dated June 7, 2017 and also permitted the investigation under

       Sections 467, 468, 471 IPC and Sections 12/30 of the Legal Metrology

       Act, 20094.


6)     It is on the basis of investigations carried out, the charge-sheet dated

       July 25, 2017 for the offences under Sections 265, 267, 420, 34, 120B

       IPC and Sections 3 and 7 of the Act, 1955, Sections 467, 468, 471 IPC

       and Sections 12/30 of the Weights and Measures Act, 1976 came to

       be filed before the competent court.     The Magistrate did not take

       cognizance of offence under Sections 471 and 120B of IPC for want of

       evidence but the Magistrate has taken cognizance of an offence

       under Section 30 of the Act.


7)     It is thereafter two applications were filed under Sections 167(2) and

       190(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 5 on July 26, 2017 on

       the ground that the prosecution has no material making out a case of

       offences mentioned in the chargesheet, therefore, the cognizance

       may not be taken.        The learned Magistrate rejected both the

       applications on July 27, 2017. It is thereafter the petition was filed

       under Section 482 of the Code before the High Court, which was

       decided by an order impugned in the present appeal. The High Court

       has passed a detailed order examining the following questions of law:

4    Act
5    Code



                                                                           4
                 “(i) Whether in view of the promulgation of Legal
               Metrology Act, 2009, the offences relating to weights and
               measures particularly short delivery of petroleum products
               sold to the public at large through dispensing machines,
               are open to be registered and investigated by the police
               authorities in terms of the provisions of IPC and Code of
               Criminal Procedure or the provisions of IPC and Cr.P.C. for
               the said purpose would stand ousted/obliterated/eclipsed
               by virtue of Section 51 of Legal Metrology Act, 2009;

               (ii) Whether the Legal Metrology Act and the Essential
               Commodities Act and the procedure envisaged thereunder
               has an overriding effect over the provisions of Code of
               Criminal Procedure insofar as the investigation/search and
               seizure in respect of the offences relating to weights and
               measures are concerned.

               (iii) Whether the investigation held by the investigating
               officer assuming as if the same was permissible, has been
               held in consonance with the relevant law applicable as on
               the date or not and if not, its effect;

               (iv) Whether the court below while taking cognizance of
               the offences has passed the orders in accordance with the
               well-settled principles of law and if not, its effect.

               (v) Directions and directives necessary in the case.”



8)   It was held that the Code is applicable so long as a different

     procedure is not prescribed under the special law with respect to the

     cognizable      or    non-cognizable      offences   but   application   of   the

     provisions of IPC has to be understood within the broader scope of

     special   law    in    the   light   of   exclusionary     provision   embodied

     therein. Thus, considering Sections 3 and 51 of the Act, the High

     Court held as under:

               “From a conjoint reading of this provision with the other



                                                                                   5
               provisions of the Act, the logical conclusion to serve the
               purpose of the Act, 2009 that can be deduced is that all
               other offences under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 except
               the offence under Section 26 are non-cognizable and
               compoundable when committed for the first time; whereas
               the offence under Section 26 of the Act is a non-
               cognizable offence triable as per the procedure prescribed
               under the Code of Criminal Procedure and the other
               offences when committed second time as well. Thus, the
               procedure of investigation, inquiry and trial under the
               Cr.P.C. would accordingly apply inasmuch as, no procedure
               in relation thereto is prescribed under the Special Act.”

9)    It was further held that Section 26 of the Act overrides the provisions

      of Sections 264 to 267 of IPC as Section 51 of the Act clearly excludes

      the application of IPC and Section 153 of the Code insofar as it relates

      with regard to weights and measures punishable under the special

      Act. The High Court held as under:

               “The violation of any provision of the Special Act or
               Section 26 once noticed against any offender, as is the
               situation in the present case, it would not attract violation
               of Section 264 to 267 IPC at all and the prosecution is
               bound to be guided by the relevant provisions under the
               Special Act. The Special Act has replaced the entire
               Chapter by defining the offences of all descriptions and
               classified them in the nature of non-cognizable
               compoundable offences, as such, the procedure deserves
               to be applied accordingly as per the classification of
               offences against other laws in the first schedule of Cr.P.C.
               insofar as criminal prosecution is concerned.”



10)   The High Court ordered that the trial court has not taken cognizance

      of offence under Sections 34, 120B, 471 of IPC or 26 of the Act.

      Therefore, there is no reason as to why the Court may not take into

      account such materials for the purposes of taking cognizance of the



                                                                               6
      offences, in the light of the orders passed on July 7, 2017 and August

      17, 2017. The High Court held that Sections 467, 468, 471, 120-B

      and 34 of IPC stand clearly attracted.


11)   In respect of third question, the High Court directed the District Judge,

      Lucknow to ascertain the quantitative and qualitative figures of the

      residual stock lying in the underground tanks and allow the stock to

      be delivered to the oil company for custody after due calibration

      through the dispensing pumps installed. The High Court issued the

      following directions:

                “(i) The Investigating Officer assigned the duty of
                investigation in case crime no. 130/2017 shall stand
                changed forthwith and the Superintendent of Police (City),
                North, Lucknow at present is hereby directed to take over
                the further investigation and cooperate with the District
                Judge, Lucknow to deliver the custody of petrol/diesel in
                the seized underground tanks to the respective oil
                company after due calibration of the same through the
                dispensing units. The District Judge/Investigating officer
                shall collect the samples for quality and quantity checks
                both in the calibrated containers to be provided by the
                department of Weights and Measures and oil company
                immediately on demand. The samples shall be collected
                as per the procedure of sample collection provided for
                quality/quantity check specified in the statutory Order,
                2005;

                (ii) The District Judge, Lucknow jointly with the
                investigating officer authorised hereinabove shall submit
                the calibration report of the residual stock to the court
                concerned not later than a period of 15 days from the date
                a copy of this order is communicated to them by the
                Senior Registrar of this Court;
                (iii) The investigating officer appointed hereinabove, in
                association with the District Judge, Lucknow, shall jointly


                                                                              7
              forward the report of calibration of the stock in the
              respective tanks by duly comparing the figures mentioned
              in the seizure memo/F.I.R. and resultant excessive figures
              be mentioned in clear figures taking aid of the totaliser
              reading in each dispensing unit alongwith their
              photographic evidence at the time of start/finish;

              (iv) For the purposes of sample reports, the District
              Judge/investigating officer are jointly authorised to
              requisition the quality check from any of the nearest
              defence laboratories notified in the statutory Order, 2005
              and quantity check from any of the centres mentioned in
              para-22 of the counter affidavit sworn by the Chief
              Secretary, Government of U.P. The reports shall be called
              for expeditiously and may be requested to be supplied not
              later than a period of 6 weeks from the date of submission
              of the samples. The reports so obtained may be filed in
              the respective courts by the investigating officer after
              endorsement by the District Judge;

              (v) The seized dispensing machines be released to the
              owner as soon as the residual stock in the underground
              tanks is handed over to the oil company concerned for
              which the oil company shall provide all the transport and
              custodial facility besides operational guidance to the
              investigating officer and learned District Judge, without
              asking for any remuneration;

              (vi)   The   investigating  officer  shall   submit  the
              supplementary report in terms of the observations made
              in this judgement not later than a period of two months,
              by taking over all the materials and record from the
              previous investigating officer in the form in which
              discovery and seizure were made; and

              (vii) The oil companies henceforth shall make use of
              collapsible pulsers essential in the dispensing machines in
              order to prevent malpractices. Thus, the State
              Government is directed to implement the installation of
              such a device in consultation with the oil companies within
              a planned time framework of not later than four months.”

12)   The State as well as one of the accused are in appeal before this



                                                                            8
         Court. At the outset, learned counsel for the parties stated that the

         directions issued by the High Court cannot be sustained in law,

         therefore, they have no objection if such directions are set aside.

         Such directions are liable to be set aside in view of the fact that the

         High Court, while exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the

         Code, cannot interfere in the manner of investigation, in terms of the

         Judgment of this Court in M. C. Abraham and Another v. State of

         Maharashtra and Others6 wherein it was held as under: -

                    “13. This Court held in the case of J.A.C. Saldanha [(1980)
                    1 SCC 554: 1980 SCC (Cri) 272] that there is a clear-cut
                    and well-demarcated sphere of activity in the field of crime
                    detection and crime punishment. Investigation of an
                    offence is the field exclusively reserved by the executive
                    through the police department, the superintendence over
                    which vests in the State Government. It is the bounden
                    duty of the executive to investigate, if an offence is
                    alleged, and bring the offender to book. Once it
                    investigates and finds an offence having been committed,
                    it is its duty to collect evidence for the purpose of proving
                    the offence. Once that is completed and the investigating
                    officer submits report to the court requesting the court to
                    take cognizance of the offence under Section 190 of the
                    Code of Criminal Procedure, its duty comes to an end. On
                    cognizance of the offence being taken by the court, the
                    police function of investigation comes to an end subject to
                    the provision contained in Section 173(8), then
                    commences the adjudicatory function of the judiciary to
                    determine whether an offence has been committed and if
                    so, whether by the person or persons charged with the
                    crime. In the circumstances, the judgment and order of
                    the High Court was set aside by this Court.”

13)      Therefore, the directions issued including in respect of change of

         Investigating Officer and that the District Judge to be associated with

6     (2003) 2 SCC 649



                                                                                    9
         various action, falling exclusively in the domain of the Investigating

         Agency are patently beyond the scope of the petition under Section

         482 of the Code and are, therefore, liable to be set aside.

14)      Learned counsel for the State vehemently argued that the Act does

         not exclude the offences under IPC.               It is contended that the Act

         provides for the offences and penalties but reading of Sections 3 and

         51 of the Act does not exclude the offences under the IPC. The Act

         will override only those offences which are inconsistent with the

         offences under IPC, except to the extent specified in the Act.


15)      Learned counsel for the State relied upon an order passed by this

         Court in State of Maharashtra v. Sayyed Hassan7 wherein, while

         interpreting the provisions of Food and Safety Standards Act, 2006, it

         was held that the provisions of the said Act is not the only provision

         that can be resorted to, the prosecution can be lodged for the

         offences under IPC as well. Learned counsel for the State also relied

         upon an order passed by this Court in Sangeetaben Mahendrabhai

         Patel v. State of Gujarat & Anr. 8 wherein, for a dishonour of

         cheque, the prosecution for an offence under Section 420 IPC was

         found to be maintainable even after the prosecution under Section

         138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 9 is lodged. It was held

         that the mens rea i.e. fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of
7     Criminal Appeal No. 1195 of 2018 decided on September 20, 2018
8     (2012) 7 SCC 621
9     NI Act
                                                                                  10
       issuance of cheque is not required to be proved in proceeding of an

       offence under Section 138 of the NI Act, whereas in the case under

       IPC, the issue of mens rea is relevant. It was held that the offences

       under Section 420 of IPC and Section 138 of NI Act are different, may

       on same facts.


16)    On the other hand, Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel for the

       accused argued that the Act is a complete Code providing for the

       standards of the weights and measures, the manner in which the

       same are required to be tested and also the offences for which the

       action can be taken.            Since the Act is a special statute having

       overriding effect, therefore, the accused cannot be charged for the

       offences under IPC. Reliance is placed upon judgment of this Court in

       Sharat Babu Digumarti v. Government (NCT of Delhi)10 as also

       the Division Bench judgment of Bombay High Court in Gagan Harsh

       Sharma & Anr. v. The State of Maharashtra & Anr.11 whereby,

       considering the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000 12,

       it was held that the offence under IPC cannot be lodged. It is pointed

       out that special leave petitions filed against the said judgment were

       dismissed by this Court on December 7, 2018.


17)    In this background, the arguments raised by learned counsel for the

       parties need to be examined but before we examine the arguments,
10 (2017) 2 SCC 18
11 Criminal Writ Petition No. 4361 of 2018 decided on October 26, 2018
12 IT Act
                                                                            11
certain provisions from the applicable statutes may be reproduced

hereunder:

        “THE LEGAL METROLOGY ACT, 2009

        2(g). "Legal Metrology" means that part of metrology
        which treats units of weighment and measurement,
        methods of weighment and measurement and weighing
        and measuring instruments, in relation to the mandatory
        technical and legal requirements which have the object of
        ensuring public guarantee from the point of view of
        security and accuracy of the weighments and
        measurements;

                      xx             xx           xx

        3. The provisions of this Act shall have effect
        notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained
        in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument
        having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this
        Act.
                      xx             xx           xx

        26. Whoever tampers with, or alters in any way, any
        reference standard, secondary standard or working
        standard or increases or decreases or alters any weight or
        measure with a view to deceiving any person or knowing
        or having reason to believe that any person is likely to be
        deceived thereby, except where such alteration is made
        for the correction of any error noticed therein on
        verification, shall be punished with fine which may extend
        to fifty thousand rupees and for the second and
        subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which
        shall not be less than six months but which may extend to
        one year or with fine or with both.

                      xx             xx           xx

        30. Penalty for transactions in contravening of
        standard weight or measure. – Whoever-
        (a) in selling any article or thing by weight, measure or
        number, delivers or causes to be delivered to the


                                                                      12
purchaser any quantity or number of that article or thing
less than the quantity or number contracted for or paid
for; or

(b) in rendering any service by weight, measure or
number, renders that service less than the service
contracted for or paid for; or

(c) in buying any article or thing by weight, measure or
number, fraudulently receives, or causes to be received
any quantity or number of that article or thing in excess of
the quantity or number contracted for or paid for; or

(d) in obtaining any service by weight, measure or
number, obtains that service in excess of the service
contracted for or paid for, shall be punished with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and; for the
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both.

              xx              xx           xx
51. The provisions of the Indian Penal Code and section
153 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in so far as
such provisions relate to offences with regard to weight or
measure, shall not apply to any offence which is
punishable under this Act.”

“THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973

153. Inspection of weights and measures.-(1) Any officer
in charge of a police station may, without a warrant, enter
any place within the limits of such station for the purpose
of inspecting or searching for any weights or measures or
instruments for weighing, used or kept therein, whenever
he has reason to believe that there are in such place any
weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are
false.

(2) If he finds in such place any weights, measures or
instruments for weighing which are false, he may seize the
same, and shall forthwith give information of such seizure
to a Magistrate having jurisdiction.”



                                                               13
               “THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860

               265.   Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.—
               Whoever fraudulently uses any false weight or false
               measure of length or capacity, or fraudulently uses any
               weight or any measure of length or capacity as a different
               weight or measure from what it is, shall be punished with
               imprisonment of either description for a term which may
               extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

                             xx              xx           xx

               267. Making or selling false weight or measure.—Whoever
               makes, sells or disposes of any instrument for weighing, or
               any weight, or any measure of length or capacity which he
               knows to be false, in order that the same may be used as
               true, or knowing that the same is likely to be used as true,
               shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
               for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
               with both.”
18)   We do not find any merit in the argument of Mr. Mukul Rohatgi that

      the Act is a complete Code which contains the provisions of offences

      and penalties under the said Act, therefore, for any violation of the

      provisions of the Act, the prosecution can be lodged only under the

      Act and not for the offences even if disclosed under IPC.


19)   In Sharat Babu Digumarti, an FIR was lodged for the offences

      under Sections 292 and 294 of IPC and Section 67 of IT Act.             This

      Court struck down the offences under Sections 292 and 294 of IPC in

      view of the provisions of Section 67 of the IT Act.


20)   The question examined was as to whether an activity emanating from

      electronic form which may be obscene would be punishable under

      Section 292 IPC or Section 67 of the IT Act or both or any other


                                                                              14
      provision of the IT Act. This Court held that Section 292 IPC makes

      offence sale of obscene books, etc. but once the offence has a nexus

      or connection with the electronic record the protection and effect of

      Section 79 cannot be ignored and negated in view of special provision

      for a specific purpose. The IT Act has to be given effect to so as to

      make the protection effective and true to the legislative intent. The

      Court held as under:

               “31.     Having noted the provisions, it has to be
               recapitulated    that   Section   67    clearly   stipulates
               punishment for publishing, transmitting obscene materials
               in electronic form. The said provision read with Sections
               67-A and 67-B is a complete code relating to the offences
               that are covered under the IT Act. Section 79, as has been
               interpreted, is an exemption provision conferring
               protection to the individuals. However, the said protection
               has    been    expanded     in   the    dictum    of Shreya
               Singhal [Shreya Singhal v. Union of India, (2015) 5 SCC 1 :
               (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 449] and we concur with the same.

               32. Section 81 of the IT Act also specifically provides that
               the provisions of the Act shall have effect notwithstanding
               anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law
               for the time being in force. All provisions will have their
               play and significance, if the alleged offence pertains to
               offence of electronic record. It has to be borne in mind that
               IT Act is a special enactment. It has special provisions.
 Section 292 IPC makes offence sale of obscene books, etc.
               but once the offence has a nexus or connection with the
               electronic record the protection and effect of Section 79
               cannot be ignored and negated. We are inclined to think
               so as it is a special provision for a specific purpose and the
               Act has to be given effect to so as to make the protection
               effective and true to the legislative intent. This is the
               mandate behind Section 81 of the IT Act. The additional
               protection granted by the IT Act would apply.”

21)   The Bombay High Court in Gagan Harsh Sharma has found that



                                                                                15
even a dishonest and fraudulent act falls within the scope of Section

66 of the IT Act and that the IT Act has been given overriding effect

notwithstanding   anything    inconsistent    therewith,    therefore,        an

offender gets out of net of IPC.     It was held that IPC is a general

statute whereas IT Act is a special statute and, therefore, special

enactment would prevail. The Bombay High Court held as under:

         “11. Reading of the said judgment, makes is clear that the
         Hon'ble Apex Court had considered the effect of the
         overriding provisions contained in the Information
         Technology Act and has observed that all the provisions in
         the enactment are of significance particularly if the
         alleged offences pertains to electronic record. By
         observing that the Information Technology Act is a special
         enactment and it contain special provision, the Hon'ble
         Apex Court has also considered the effect of Section 79
         contained in the Information Technology Act which is
         enacted for a specific purpose and has observed that the
         mandate behind Section 81 of the Information Technology
         Act needs to be understood in its proper perspective. It
         referred to the earlier precedents on the point where a
         special statute is pitted against a General enactment and
         thereafter has concluded by making reference Section 79
         and 81 that once the special provisions are accorded
         overriding effect to cover a criminal Act, the offender gets
         out of the net of the Indian Penal Code and in the case in
         hand of Section 292.

           ***                       ***                 ***

         21. Keeping the aforesaid authoritative pronouncements
         in mind, if the scheme of the Information Technology Act
         will have to be examined and given effect too. The said
         Act which is a special enactment so as to give fillip to the
         growth of electronic based transactions, and to provide
         legal recognition for E-commerce and, to facilitate E-
         Governance and to Ensure Security Practice and
         Procedures in the context of the use of Information
         Technology Worldwide. The said enactment contains a full



                                                                         16
              fledge mechanism for penalising certain acts which are
              committed without permission of the owner or any other
              persons who is in charge of a computer, computer system,
              or computer network and those acts are enumerated in
              Section 43. The said enactment also makes certain acts
              punishable and Chapter-XI of the Information Technology
              Act 2000 enumerates such acts. The same acts which are
              enumerated in Section 43 of the enactment which would
              invite penalty and compensation for accessing or securing
              any information as contemplated in Section 43, would
              amount to an offence under Section 66 if any person,
              dishonestly, fraudulently commits such an act. The said
              Section has an explanation appended to it to the effect
              that the word “dishonestly” and “fraudulently” used in the
              said Section will be assigned the same meaning as under
              the Indian Penal Code. In such circumstances when the
              Information Technology Act, 2000 specifically provides a
              mechanism for dealing with an act covered in Section
              43(a) and (j):—

                 “Section 43(a) Accesses or secures access to such
                 computer, computer system or computer network
                 (or computer resource);


                 43(j) Steel, conceals, destroys or alters or causes
                 any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any
                 computer source code used for a computer
                 resource with an intention to cause damage.”

              and if this is done with a fraudulent or dishonest intention,
              it becomes an offence under Section 66 of the Information
              Technology Act. Since, the Information Technology Act
              deals with the use of means of electronic communication
              and has evolved a complete mechanism in itself to deal
              with the offences in the use of electronic transactions, and
              in the backdrop of the specific facts of the case in hand,
              Section 66 would be attracted and in view of the
              mechanism contained in the said section, the invocation of
              the provisions of the Indian Penal Code is highly
              unwarranted. This view has already been authored by their
              lordships in case of Sharat Babu Digumarti (Supra).”

22)   It may be noticed that Bombay High Court considered the judgment


                                                                              17
      of this Court in Sayyed Hassan wherein this Court has held that an

      offence under Section 188 of IPC is wider in scope and did not cover

      only breach of law but is attracted in cases where the act complained

      of causes or tends to cause danger to human life, health or safety as

      well. The Court held as under:


                  “24. The aforesaid judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court is
                  therefore clearly distinguishable on facts but even the said
                  judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court reiterates the settled
                  position of law that where an act or an omission
                  constitutes for an offence under two enactments the
                  offender may be punished under either or both enactment
                  but was not liable to be punished twice for the same
                  offence. It is always possible that the same set of facts can
                  constitute offence under two different laws but a person
                  cannot be punished twice for the said act which would
                  constitute an offence.”

23)   The special leave petition against the said order was dismissed

      without any reasoned order but with the order “The Special Leave

      Petitions are Dismissed”.

24)   Though, the Special Leave Petition against the order of the Bombay

      High Court was dismissed but in view of three Judge Bench judgment

      in Khoday Distilleries Ltd. & Ors.                 v. Sri Mahadeshwara

      Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane Ltd.13, the dismissal of special leave

      petition does not amount to merger of the order of the High Court

      with the order passed in the Special Leave Petition. This Court held

      as under:

13 (2019) 4 SCC 376


                                                                                  18
“20. The Court thereafter analysed number of cases
where orders of different nature were passed and dealt
with these judgments by classifying them in the following
categories:

(i) Dismissal at the stage of special leave petition —
without reasons — no res judicata, no merger. [Proposition
based on judgments in Workmen v. Cochin Port Trust,
(1978)     3    SCC     119; Western  India  Match     Co.
Ltd. v. Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1958 Mad 398; Indian Oil
Corpn. Ltd. v. State of Bihar, (1986) 4 SCC 146; Rup
Diamonds v. Union of India, (1989) 2 SCC 356; Wilson v.
Colchester Justices, (1985) 2 All ER 97 (HL); Supreme
Court Employees' Welfare Assn. v. Union of India, (1989) 4
SCC 187; Yogendra Narayan Chowdhury v. Union of India,
(1996) 7 SCC 1; V.M. Salgaocar & Bros. (P) Ltd. v. CIT,
(2000) 5 SCC 373; Sree Narayana Dharmasanghom
Trust v. Swami Prakasananda, (1997) 6 SCC 78 and State
of Maharashtra v. Prabhakar Bhikaji Ingle, (1996) 3 SCC
463.

(ii) Dismissal of the special leave petition by speaking or
reasoned order — no merger, but rule of discipline and
Article 141 attracted. [Penu Balakrishna Iyer v. Ariya M.
Ramaswami Iyer, AIR 1965 SC 195; Abbai Maligai
Partnership Firm v. K. Santhakumaran, (1998) 7 SCC
386; Shankar       Ramchandra        Abhyankar v. Krishnaji
Dattatreya Bapat, (1969) 2 SCC 74; Sushil Kumar
Sen v. State of Bihar, (1975) 1 SCC 774; Gopabandhu
Biswal v. Krishna Chandra Mohanty, (1998) 4 SCC
447; Junior Telecom Officers Forum v. Union of India, 1993
Supp (4) SCC 693 and Supreme Court Employees' Welfare
Assn. Case, (1989) 4 SCC 187.

(iii) Leave granted — dismissal without reasons — merger
results. [Thungabhadra Industries Ltd. v. Govt. of A.P., AIR
1964 SC 1372].”

“26. From a cumulative reading of the various judgments,
we sum up the legal position as under:

26.1.          xx     xx    xx

26.2.   We reiterate the conclusions relevant for these


                                                               19
               cases    as      under:       (Kunhayammed         case
               [Kunhayammed v. State of Kerala, (2000) 6 SCC 359], SCC
               p. 384)

               “(iv) An order refusing special leave to appeal may be a
               non-speaking order or a speaking one. In either case it
               does not attract the doctrine of merger. An order refusing
               special leave to appeal does not stand substituted in place
               of the order under challenge. All that it means is that the
               Court was not inclined to exercise its discretion so as to
               allow the appeal being filed.”
25)   The Bombay High Court in Gagan Harsh Sharma has found that

      even a dishonest and fraudulent act falls within the scope of Section

      66 of IT Act.   We are not called upon in the present appeals to

      examine whether an accused can be tried for an offence under IPC in

      view of Section 66 of IT Act. Such question can be raised and decided

      in an appropriate case.


26)   In Sayyed Hassan, the Court held that Section 55 of Food and Safety

      Standards Act, 2006 being a specific provision made in the special

      enactment but still an offence under Section 188 of IPC is made out.

      The Court held as under:

               “8. There is no bar to a trial or conviction of an offender
               under two different enactments, but the bar is only to the
               punishment of the offender twice for the offence. Where
               an act or an omission constitutes an offence under two
               enactments, the offender may be prosecuted and
               punished under either or both enactments but shall not be
               liable to be punished twice for the same offence [T.S.
 Baliah v. T.S.Rengachari – (1969) 3 SCR 65]. The same set
               of facts, in conceivable cases, can constitute offences
               under two different laws. An act or an omission can
               amount to and constitute an offence under the IPC and at
               the same time, an offence under any other law [State of
               Bihar v. Murad Ali Khan – (1988) 4 SCC 655]. The High


                                                                             20
               Court ought to have taken note of Section 26 of the
               General Clauses Act, 1897 which reads as follows:
                  “Provisions as to offences punishable under
                  two or more enactments - Where an act or
                  omission constitutes an offence under two or more
                  enactments, then the offender shall be liable to be
                  prosecuted and punished under either or any of
                  those enactments, but shall not be liable to be
                  punished twice for the same offence.”

27)   However, the question as to whether the offences under Sections

      188, 272, 273 and 328 IPC have been made out against the

      respondents in the facts of that case, the matter was remitted back to

      the High Court to examine the contentions of respective parties.


28)   The Sharat Babu Digumarti is a judgment dealing with obscenity in

      the electronic form.    This Court has held that IT Act is a special

      enactment.    Since the offence has nexus or connection with the

      electronic record the protection and effect of Section 79 cannot be

      ignored and negated. Section 292 IPC makes sale of obscene books

      as an offence which cannot be made out in view of special provision

      made in the IT Act. The said judgment is, that an offence pertaining

      to electronic record falls within Section 67 of the IT Act, whereas,

      Section 292 IPC deals with an offence of obscenity in the printed

      format, therefore, two offences operate in different field.



29)   In   Sangeetaben       Mahendrabhai      Patel,   a   subsequent   First

      Information Report under Sections 406, 420 read with 114 of IPC was




                                                                         21
challenged on the ground that the accused has been tried earlier for

an offence under Section 138 of the NI Act and that accused cannot

be charged for the offence of criminal breach of trust, cheating and

abetment pertaining to the cheque for which proceedings were

initiated under Section 138 of the NI Act. In the said case, the Court

held that there may be overlapping of facts in both the cases but the

ingredients of the offences are entirely different.                Thus, the

subsequent case is not barred by any of the provisions of the NI Act.

The Court held as under:

         “37. Admittedly, the appellant had been tried earlier for
         the offences punishable under the provisions of Section
         138 of the NI Act and the case is sub judice before the
         High Court. In the instant case, he is involved under
         Sections 406/420 read with Section 114 IPC. In the
         prosecution under Section 138 of the NI Act, the mens rea
         i.e. fraudulent or dishonest intention at the time of
         issuance of cheque is not required to be proved. However,
         in the case under IPC involved herein, the issue of mens
         rea may be relevant. The offence punishable under
         Section 420 IPC is a serious one as the sentence of 7 years
         can be imposed.

         38.    In the case under the NI Act, there is a legal
         presumption that the cheque had been issued for
         discharging the antecedent liability and that presumption
         can be rebutted only by the person who draws the cheque.
         Such a requirement is not there in the offences under IPC.
         In the case under the NI Act, if a fine is imposed, it is to be
         adjusted to meet the legally enforceable liability. There
         cannot be such a requirement in the offences under IPC.
         The case under the NI Act can only be initiated by filing a
         complaint. However, in a case under IPC such a condition
         is not necessary.
         39. There may be some overlapping of facts in both the
         cases but the ingredients of the offences are entirely


                                                                           22
               different. Thus, the subsequent case is not barred by any
               of the aforesaid statutory provisions.”

30)   This Court in Sangeetaben Mahendrabhai Patel has upheld the

      prosecution for an offence under Section 420 IPC even when the

      prosecution under Section 138 of NI Act was lodged earlier. This Court

      has held that for an offence under Section 420 IPC, mens rea is an

      essential ingredient for an offence under Section 138, the factum of

      dishonour of cheque alone discloses an offence. Similarly, in Sayyed

      Hassan, this Court has held that the provision of Food and Safety

      Standards Act, 2006 is not the only provision that can be resorted to

      for lodging a prosecution.    The prosecution can be lodged for the

      offences under IPC as well.


31)   Section 51 of the Act provides that the provisions of IPC and of

      Section 153 of the Code insofar as such provisions relate to offences

      with regard to weight and measures only shall not apply to any

      offence which is punishable under the Act. Section 153 of the Code

      permits an officer in charge of police station to enter any place for the

      purpose of inspecting or searching any weights or measures or

      instruments for weighing, used or kept therein. Section 153 of the

      Code has been made inapplicable under the Act as power of search

      and seizure is vested with the designated authorities under the Act.

      Therefore, the entire Code is inapplicable in respect of the prosecution

      under the Act that the police cannot enter any place for the purpose



                                                                           23
      of inspecting or searching for any weights or measures.

32)   The question required to be examined is whether all the offences

      under IPC are excluded in view of Section 3 of the Act or only the

      offences relating to the weights and measures as are contained in

      Chapter XIII IPC alone stand excluded in view of Section 51 of the Act.


33)   It cannot be disputed that the Act is a special Act vis-à-vis IPC. In

      Macquarie Bank Limited v. Shilpi Cable Technologies Limited14,

      this Court adopted a doctrine of harmonious construction to hold that

      there was clear disharmony between the two parliamentary statutes

      which cannot be resolved by harmonious interpretation. This Court

      held as under:

                 “44.           Similarly,   in CTO v. Binani    Cements
                 Ltd. [CTO v. Binani Cements Ltd., (2014) 8 SCC 319] , the
                 rule of construction of two parliamentary statutes being
                 harmoniously construed was laid down as follows: (SCC
                 pp. 332-33, para 35)

                      “35. Generally, the principle has found vast
                      application in cases of there being two statutes:
                      general or specific with the latter treating the
                      common subject-matter more specifically or
                      minutely than the former. Corpus Juris Secundum,
                      82 C.J.S. Statutes § 482 states that when
                      construing a general and a specific statute
                      pertaining to the same topic, it is necessary to
                      consider the statutes as consistent with one
                      another and such statutes therefore should be
                      harmonised, if possible, with the objective of
                      giving effect to a consistent legislative policy. On
                      the other hand, where a general statute and a
                      specific statute relating to the same subject-
                      matter cannot be reconciled, the special or specific
14 (2018) 2 SCC 674


                                                                             24
     statute ordinarily will control. The provision more
     specifically directed to the matter at issue prevails
     as an exception to or qualification of the provision
     which is more general in nature, provided that the
     specific or special statute clearly includes the
     matter      in    controversy     (Edmond v. United
     States [Edmond v. United States, 1997 SCC OnLine
     US SC 45 : 137 L Ed 2d 917 : 520 US 651
     (1997)], Warden v. Marrero [Warden v. Marrero,
     1974 SCC OnLine US SC 136 : 41 L Ed 2d 383 : 417
     US 653 (1974)] ).”

              xx              xx           xx

47. Similarly, in R.S. Raghunath v. State of Karnataka [R.S.
Raghunath v. State of Karnataka, (1992) 1 SCC 335 : 1992
SCC (L&S) 286] , the non obstante clause contained in
Rule 3(2) of the Karnataka Civil Services (General
Recruitment) Rules, 1977 was held not to override the
Karnataka General Service (Motor Vehicles Branch)
(Recruitment) Rules, 1976. It was held: (SCC p. 348, para
13)

     “13. As already noted, there should be a clear
     inconsistency between the two enactments before
     giving an overriding effect to the non obstante clause
     but when the scope of the provisions of an earlier
     enactment is clear the same cannot be cut down by
     resort to non obstante clause. In the instant case, we
     have noticed that even the General Rules of which
     Rule 3(2) forms a part provide for promotion by
     selection. As a matter of fact Rules 1(3)( a), 3(1) and
     4 also provide for the enforceability of the Special
     Rules. The very Rule 3 of the General Rules which
     provides for recruitment also provides for promotion
     by selection and further lays down that the methods
     of recruitment shall be as specified in the Special
     Rules, if any. In this background if we examine the
     General Rules it becomes clear that the object of
     these Rules only is to provide broadly for recruitment
     to services of all the departments and they are
     framed generally to cover situations that are not
     covered by the Special Rules of any particular
     department. In such a situation both the Rules


                                                               25
                    including Rules 1(3)(a), 3(1) and 4 of the General
                    Rules should be read together. If so read it becomes
                    plain that there is no inconsistency and that
                    amendment by inserting Rule 3(2) is only an
                    amendment to the General Rules and it cannot be
                    interpreted as to supersede the Special Rules. The
                    amendment also must be read as being subject to
                    Rules 1(3)(a), 3(1) and 4(2) of the General Rules
                    themselves. The amendment cannot be read as
                    abrogating all other Special Rules in respect of all
                    departments. In a given case where there are no
                    Special Rules then naturally the General Rules would
                    be applicable. Just because there is a non obstante
                    clause, in Rule 3(2) it cannot be interpreted that the
                    said amendment to the General Rules though later in
                    point of time would abrogate the special rule the
                    scope of which is very clear and which co-exists
                    particularly when no patent conflict or inconsistency
                    can be spelt out. As already noted, Rules 1(3)( a), 3(1)
                    and 4 of the General Rules themselves provide for
                    promotion by selection and for enforceability of the
                    Special Rules in that regard. Therefore, there is no
                    patent conflict or inconsistency at all between the
                    General and the Special Rules.”


34)   In the light of principles laid down, we find that Section 3 of the Act

      completely overrides the provisions of Chapter XIII of IPC in respect of

      the offences and penalties imposable for violations of the provisions

      of the Act, it being special Act. Therefore, if the offence is disclosed

      to be made out under the provisions of the Act, an accused cannot be

      charged for the same offence under Chapter XIII of IPC. Reading of

      Section 51 of the Act makes it clear that the provisions of IPC insofar

      as they relate to offences with regard to weight or measure, shall not

      apply to any offence which is punishable under the Act. Therefore,

      the provisions of IPC which relate to offences with regard to weight


                                                                               26
      and measure as contained in Chapter XIII of IPC alone will not apply.

      No person can be charged for an offence relating to weight or

      measure falling under Chapter XIII of IPC in view of the provisions of

      the Act.


35)   The scheme of the Act is for the offences for use of weights and

      measures which are non-standard and for tampering with or altering

      any standards, secondary standards or working standards of any

      weight or measure. The Act does not foresee any offence relating to

      cheating as defined in Section 415 of IPC or the offences under

      Sections 467, 468 and 471 of IPC.      Similarly, an act performed in

      furtherance of a common intention disclosing an offence under

      Section 34 is not covered by the provisions of the Act. An offence

      disclosing a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence which is

      punishable under Section 120-B IPC is also not an offence under the

      Act. Since such offences are not punishable under the provisions of

      the Act, therefore, the prosecution for such offences could be

      maintained since the trial of such offences is not inconsistent with

      any of the provisions of the Act. Similar is the provision in respect of

      the offences under Sections 467, 468, 471 IPC as such offences are

      not covered by the provisions of the Act.


                                                                         27
36)   Thus, we partly allow the present appeals with the following

      directions:


      (i)      Directions given by the High Court, as mentioned in para 11

               above, are hereby quashed.

      (ii)     We uphold the order of the High Court that the offences

               under Sections 265 and 267 IPC are liable to be quashed.

      (iii)    The directions of the High Court in proceedings under

               Section 482 of the Code against the interest of the accused

               in a petition filed by the accused are beyond the jurisdiction

               of the High Court and, thus, all such observations and

               directions are quashed.

      (iv)     The directions issued by the High Court that the erring

               officers/officials named in the supplementary report shall be

               subject to disciplinary action are again beyond the scope of

               the High Court in a petition under Section 482 of the Code

               seeking quashing of the charge-sheet and are, thus,

               quashed.

      (v)      It is open to the investigating agency to charge the accused

               for such offences or any other offence by way of a

               supplementary report or at a subsequent stage during trial

               as considered appropriate by the investigating agency.

      (vi)     In other words, the entire order of the High Court is set aside

               except the order which relates to the quashing of the


                                                                         28
              charges under Sections 265 and 267 IPC but it shall be open

              to the investigating agency to take such steps as are

              required to complete the investigation in accordance with

              law.


Crl. Appeal No.         of 2019 (@SLP (Criminal) No.3321 of 2018)


37)   Leave granted.


38)   The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed by the High

      Court of Allahabad at Lucknow on November 24, 2017 whereby,

      petition under Section 482 of the Code for quashing of Crime

      No.0313, P.S. Hasanganj dated April 28, 2017 for the offences under

      Sections 265, 267, 420, 467, 468 and 34 IPC and Sections 3 and 7 of

      the Act, 1955 and Section 26/30 of the Act,    filed by the appellant

      who is being prosecuted, was dismissed.


39)   The present appeal was posted for final hearing along with Criminal

      Appeals arising out of SLP (Criminal) Nos. 9981-9982 of 2017 and

      1912-1913 of 2018. In the aforesaid case, it has been held that the

      offence under Chapter XIII of IPC cannot be lodged in view of the

      provisions of the Act whereas the prosecution under other offences of

      IPC has been found to be maintainable.


40)   In view of the said fact, the present appeal is partly allowed.   The

      offences under Sections 265 and 267 IPC are quashed in view of the


                                                                        29
    reasons recorded in the aforesaid appeals.




                                      .............................................J.
                                                     (L. NAGESWARA RAO)




                                      .............................................J.
                                                           (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 04, 2019.


                                                                               30

