
Supreme Court of India
Siddaling vs State Of Karnataka Through Kalagi ... on 9 August, 2018Author: R Banumathi
Bench: V Saran, R Banumathi
                                                       1

                                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  Criminal Appeal    No(s).     1606    of 2009

     SIDDALING                                                                Appellant(s)

                                                     VERSUS

     THE STATE, THROUGH KALAGI POLICE STATION                                 Respondent(s)



                                              J U D G M E N T

     R. BANUMATHI, J.


     (1)                 The appellant, accused-husband, has been convicted under

     Section 498-A I.P.C. and 306 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo

     rigorous                 imprisonment    for    two   years        and   five    years

     respectively.

     (2)                 Marriage of the appellant-Siddaling was solemnized with

     the deceased-Kavitha on 6th May, 2002.                      Within four months of

     the marriage, on 17th September, 2002, Kavitha committed suicide

     by jumping into a well of the village.                     Reason for such extreme

     step, taken by Kavitha, is stated to be the harassment due to

     the alleged dowry demand and also cruelty meted out to the

     deceased-Kavitha,                 as    the    appellant     was     having     illicit

     relationship with one woman.

     (3)                 The trial court convicted the appellant-accused and also

     his father under Sections 498-A and 304-B r/w 34 I.P.C. and
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.08.14

     Sections 306 r/w 34 I.P.C. and Sections 3, 4 and 6 of the Dowry
17:43:39 IST
Reason:


 Prohibition Act.
                                             2

(4)    The High Court partly allowed the appeal and acquitted the

appellant’s father of all the charges/offences.                         So far as the

appellant     is      concerned,      the    High        Court     maintained      the

conviction under Sections 498-A I.P.C. and 306 I.P.C.; but

acquitted the appellant for the other offences.

(5)    We have heard Mr. Girish Ananthamurthy, learned counsel

appearing    for     the    appellant,      and    Mr.    Joseph    Aristotle      S.,

learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent-State.

(6)    The facts in a nutshell are as follows.                   The appellant was

having illicit relationship with one woman which fact has been

proved by the prosecution by the evidence of PW-1, Shankar s/o

Harishchandar, father of the deceased; PW-10, Jamakibai, mother

of the deceased; PW-6, Sevu and PW-22, Hemla both brothers of

the deceased.         The prosecution has additionally adduced the

documentary        evidence   viz.     Agreement     dated       22nd    June,   2002,

executed before the Panchayat thus whereof the appellant has

admitted to be living with another woman and that was seen by

his wife-Kavitha.          In the said panchayat it was agreed that the

appellant    will     sever     his   relation     with    the     said    woman   and

agreed to live with his wife in the house of his wife-Kavitha.

It    has   been    brought     in    evidence     by     the    evidence     of   the

prosecution        witnesses,    mentioned        above,    that    the     appellant

continued    his     relation     with   another        woman    which     definitely

caused mental agony to his wife-Kavitha.

(7)    Mr. Ananthamurthy has submitted that there has to be a

mens rea to commit the offence punishable under Section 306

I.P.C. and that there ought to be active or direct act leading
                                         3

to the deceased to commit suicide, which is lacking in the

present case.        In support of his contention, learned counsel

placed reliance upon judgment of this Court in Gurucharan Singh

v. State of Punjab, (2017) 1 SCC 433.

(8)   As held in Randhir Singh v. State of Punjab, (2004) 13 SCC

129   vide   para    12,    abetment   involves      a   mental    process    of

instigating a person or in any manner aiding that person in

doing of the thing.         Courts should carefully assess the facts

of each case before deciding whether the cruelty meted out to

the victim which induces her to commit suicide.

(9)   In the case case in hand, the witnesses - PW-1, PW-6, PW-

10 and PW-22 have clearly in their statement stated that the

appellant    continued      his   relation    with   another      woman.     The

appellant’s    illicit      relation   with   another     woman    would    have

definitely created the psychological imbalance to the deceased

which led her to take the extreme step of committing suicide.

It cannot be said that the appellant’s act of having illicit

relationship with another woman would not have affected to

negate the ingredients of Sections 306 I.P.C.

(10) In our considered view, based upon the evidence and also

Agreement dated 22nd June, 2002, the High Court has rightly

maintained the conviction of the appellant under Sections 498-A

and 306 I.P.C.

(11) Insofar    as    the   submission   of    learned     counsel    for    the

appellant, praying for leniency in the quantum of sentence, we

are unable to accept the same.           Keeping in view the fact that

within four months of her marriage, the deceased-Kavitha has
                                  4

taken the extreme step of putting an end of her life and also

within three months of convening the panchayat, the deceased-

Kavitha has committed suicide, showing any leniency would be a

misplaced one.    Considering the facts and circumstances of the

present case, in our view, this is not a fit case for reducing

the quantum of sentence of the appellant.

(12) The appeal is accordingly dismissed.




                                       ..........................J.
                                        (R. BANUMATHI)



                                       ..........................J.
                                        (VINEET SARAN)
NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 9, 2018.

