
Supreme Court of India
Kanubhai Bhagvanbhai Nayak vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 December, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                                        REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1540 OF 2018
                          (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No. 8739 of 2018)

                         Kanubhai Bhagvanbhai Nayak            ….Appellant(s)


                                                 VERSUS


                         State of Gujarat                              ….Respondent(s)  
                                            J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.

                         1)   Leave granted.

                         2)   This   appeal   is   filed   against   the   final   judgment

                         and order dated 25.04.2016 passed by the High Court

                         of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Criminal Appeal No.1512

                         of 2011 whereby the Division Bench of the High Court

                         dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant herein and
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.12.03
                         confirmed the order of conviction and sentence dated
17:00:21 IST
Reason:


                                                                                              1
30.09.2011   passed   by   the   9th  Additional   Sessions

Judge, Vadodara in Sessions Case No.101 of 2010.

3)    Few   facts   need   mention   hereinbelow   for   the

disposal of the appeal.

4)    By   impugned   order,   the   Division   Bench   of   the

High Court dismissed the criminal appeal filed by the

appellant (accused) and confirmed his conviction and

sentence   awarded   by   the   9th   Additional   Sessions

Judge,   Vadodara   in   Sessions   Case   No.   101/2010

under   Section   302   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code,   1860

(hereinafter   referred   to   as   “IPC”)   which   gave   rise   to

filing of the present appeal by way of special leave by

the appellant(accused) in this Court.

5)    The   question,   which   arises   for   consideration   in

this appeal, is whether the High Court was justified in

dismissing the appeal filed by the accused and thereby

was   justified   in   confirming   the   conviction   and   the

sentence awarded by the Additional Sessions Judge. 




                                                                        2
6)    Heard   Ms.   Vibha   Datta   Makhija,   learned   senior

counsel for the appellant and Ms. Puja Singh, learned

counsel for the respondent.

7)    Having heard the learned counsel for the parties

and   on   perusal   of   the   record   of   the   case,   we   are

constrained   to   allow   the   appeal,   set   aside   the

impugned   order   and   remand   the   case   to   the   High

Court   for   deciding   the   criminal   appeal   afresh   on

merits. 

8)    The   need   to   remand   the   case   has   been

occasioned   because   we   find   that   the   Division   Bench

has neither discussed any issue arising in the case nor

appreciated the evidence and nor recorded its findings

on any of the issues arising in the case and urged by

the appellant.

9)    Mere   perusal   of   the   impugned   order   would

indicate that the Division Bench has first set out the

post mortem report and on its perusal observed that




                                                                       3
the injuries on the body of the deceased reveal that the

death was homicidal leading to murder. The Division

Bench then observed that the evidence led by “various

witnesses”   reveal   that   it   was   the   accused   who   was

present   at   the   scene   of   the   offence   and   carried   the

attack on deceased.  The Division Bench then observed

that   since   the   Additional   Sessions   Judge   had

“minutely   examined”   all   the   evidence   led   by   the

prosecution   and   has   given   cogent   and   convincing

reasons, the High Court is in complete agreement with

the view taken by the Additional Sessions Judge. It is

only   with   this   narration  of  facts,  the  Division  Bench

dismissed the appeal.

10)   In our opinion, keeping in view the powers of the

Appellate Court under Section 386 (b) of the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Division Bench should

have   examined   the   evidence   of   each   prosecution

witnesses on issues arising in the case and the same




                                                                        4
should   have   been   examined   in   the   light   of   the

challenge made by the accused in appeal and then a

finding should have been recorded either of affirmation

or modification or reversal, as the case may be.  

11)   There   is   neither   any   reference   to   any   evidence,

nor   its   appreciation  and  nor  there  is  any  discussion

much less finding in the impugned order.

12)   The High Court, in our opinion, is empowered in

its appellate jurisdiction to examine the issues of facts

and   law   while   examining   the   legality   and   the

correctness   of   the   impugned   order.     It   is   equally

incumbent   upon   the   Division   Bench   to   deal   with

issues urged and then record its findings one way or

the   other   keeping   in   view   the   law   laid   down   by   this

Court which governs the issues.


                                                                          5
13)    We,   therefore,   find   ourselves   unable   to   concur

with such disposal of the appeal and feel inclined to

set aside the impugned order and remand the case to

the Division Bench of the High Court with a request to

decide the appeal afresh on merits in accordance with

law.

14)    Having formed an opinion to remand the case, we

do not consider it proper to go into the merits of the

case.     We,   therefore,   leave   all   the   issues   open   to  be

decided   by   the   Division   Bench   on   merits,   in

accordance   with   law   uninfluenced   by   our

observations.


                                                                          6
15)    In   view   of   the   foregoing   discussion,   the   appeal

succeeds and is accordingly allowed. Impugned order

is set aside.   We request the High Court to dispose of

the   appeal   as   expeditiously   as   possible   preferably

within six months.      

 16) Pending   application(s),   if   any,   stand(s)   disposed

of.

                                 .………...................................J.
                                  [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                                   …...……..................................J.
                                               [INDU MALHOTRA]
New Delhi;
December 03, 2018 




                                                                                7

