
Supreme Court of India
C.B.I vs V.K. Bhutiani on 11 August, 2009Author: ......................J.
Bench: V.S. Sirpurkar, Deepak Verma
                                                       1


                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1354 OF 2007


C.B.I.                                                   .... APPELLANT

                                         Versus

V.K. BHUTIANI                                            .... RESPONDENT


                                       ORDER

         1.        The appellant-Central Bureau of Investigation has come up in

         this appeal against the order dated 20.4.2005 passed by the High Court of

         Delhi in Criminal Revision Petition No. 945 of 2003. In that Revision

         Petition, V.K. Bhutiani (respondent herein) had challenged the order on

         charge dated 23.8.2003 passed by the Special Judge, Delhi.         Those

         charges are as under:

                  "I, P.K. Bhasin, Special Judge, Delhi hereby charge you
                  V.K. Bhutiani, O.P. Rajvanshi, Mrs. Rashmi Aggarwal
                  Parveen Aggarwal and Neeraj Jain as follows:
                            That your accused V.K. Bhutiani, while being
                  posted as a Senior Manager in New Bank of India, E-
                  Block, Connaught Circus, New Delhi and you accused
                  O.P. Rajvanshi, Mrs. Rashmi Aggarwal, Praveen
                  Aggarwal and Neeraj Jain along with S. Mohd. Yusuf
                  (now dead) had entered into a




                  criminal conspiracy sometime during November and
                  December 1989 at New Delhi for defrauding/cheating
                  New Bank of India to the tune of Rs. 17.20 lacs by
                            2

resorting to cheating, forgery of documents in the nature
of valuable securities and for using those documents for
getting loan facilities to the extent of Rs. 17.20 lacs in the
name of M/s. Vikram Enterprises, proprietorship
concern of you, accused, O.P. Rajvanshi and also by
abuse and misuse of authority and also by abuse and
misuse of authority as a public servant you, accused V.K.
Bhutiani and thereby you all committed an offences
punishable     under     Section    120-B     r/w     Section
420/467/468/471 IPC and Section 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
           Secondly, in furtherance of the aforesaid
conspiracy your accused V.K. Bhutiani, O.P. Rajvanshi,
Rashmi Aggarwal, Parveen Aggarwal and Neeraj Jain
cheated New Bank of India and got released loans
amount of Rs. 17.20 lacs in the name of M/s. Vikram
Enterprises by way of two orders dated 28.12.1989 and
26.12.1989 respectively for Rs. 12.65 lacs and Rs. 2.25
lacs in favour of M/s. Hazi Gubar and S. Abdul Kareen
and one pay order dated 26.12.1989 for Rs. 2.30 lacs in
favour of M/s. Multiple Traders and thereby you all
committed an offence punishable under Section 420 IPC.




           Thirdly, that in furtherance of aforesaid
conspiracy you accused O.P. Rajvanshi forged on receipt
dated 20.12.89 for Rs. 4,35,000/- purporting to have been
issued by M/s. Hazi Gudar S. Abdul Kareen in favour of
M/s. Vikram Enterprises and you also forged one letter
dated 17.12.1989 purporting to have been written by M/s.
Hazi Gudar S. Abdul Kareem to Vikram Enterprises for
using the same for cheating New Bank of India by
obtaining loan of Rs. 17.20 lacs and you also used these
forged documents dishonestly and fraudulently and
                            3

thereby you committed an offence punishable under
Sections 467/468/471 IPC.
          Fourthly, that in furtherance of the aforesaid
conspiracy you accused Parveen Aggarwal forged on
invoice dated 15.12.89 for Rs. 2.30 lacs purporting to
have   been    issued   by      M/s.   Multiple   Traders,
proprietorship concern of your co-accused Rashmi
Aggarwal, in the name of Vikram Enterprises for being
used for the purpose of cheating New Bank of India by
obtaining loan of Rs. 17.20 lacs in the name of Vikram
Enterprises, firm of you co-accused O.P. Rajvanshi and
you also forged a receipt of Rs. 1 lac for the same
purpose purporting to have been issued by Multiple
Traders in favour of M/s. Vikram Enterprises and these
documents were then used for cheating New




Bank of India and thereby you committed an offence
punishable under Sections 467/468/471 IPC.
          Fifthly, that in furtherance of the aforesaid
conspiracy that you accused V.K. Bhutiani by corrupt or
illegal means and by abusing your position as a public
servant being a Senior Manager of New Bank of India
sanctioned loan of Rs. 17.20 lacs for M/s. Vikram
Enterprises, proprietorship concerns of your co-accused
O.P. Rajvanshi without any public interest and thereby
you committed an offence punishable under Section
13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
          And I hereby direct that all be tried by this
Court for the aforesaid offences.
                                                      Sd/-
                                Special Judge/Delhi
                                27.9.2003."
                                    4
2.        The Revision Petition was basically on the ground that the

respondent, who was a Senior Manager of the New Bank of India at the

relevant time, was in fact exonerated         by the Central Vigilance

Commission and in its report, he was found to be innocent. The charges,

which we have quoted above, were extremely serious and included also

the charge of conspiracy with a view to defraud the bank. In




the process, it is apparent from the charge that the respondent along with

other co-accused had entered into a criminal conspiracy to defraud the

bank by granting the loans which should never have been granted. The

allegation is regarding the securities which have been accepted against

those loans were worthless.    It has also come on record that that the

loans were never repaid.

3.        The High Court in its judgment has basically relied upon the

report of the Central Vigilance Commission and also relied on the ruling

of this Court in P.S. Rajya Vs. State of Bihar (1996) 9 SCC 1.

4.        We have carefully gone through the aforesaid ruling. In

paragraph 8 of the impugned order, the High Court opined as under:

     "In my opinion, this judgment squarely applies in the present
     case. The basic factors to establish conspiracy of petitioner
     were all before the Central Vigilance Commission.           After
     taking all these factors into consideration, it found that the
     petitioner was not actually involved in any corrupt practice or
     in the conspiracy of the other accused persons intended to
     cheat the bank. The discrepancy between the dates of making
                                    5

     a prayer for loan and the recommendation for it or




     opening of the account were all observed to be in accordance
     with practice, although a haste on the part of the petitioner
     was proved. So far as valuation of the property offered as
     security is concerned, the petitioner had actually not
     committed any fraud. He did not over value the property.
     The Central Vigilance Commission having taken note of the
     fact has held that it was a case of misjudgment rather than a
     case of conspiracy. The vigilance commission also went into
     the question whether the petitioner was at fault in not making
     enough inquiries about the genuineness of the documents
     issued by A-3 and others and about the genuineness of the
     business run by A-3. Yet the Vigilance Commission has given
     a clean chit to the petitioner although it found the petitioner
     guilty to the extent of making a faulty judgment in
     recommending the proposal." (emphasis supplied)
5.        We have deliberately quoted the above paragraph to note that

the High Court did not bother to examine the charge-sheet and the

allegations made therein nor did it examine the statement of the witnesses

and/or the reports of the handwritten experts which were the part of the

charge-sheet.

6.        In our opinion, the reliance of the High Court on the ruling

of P.S. Rajya (supra) was
                                     6

totally uncalled for as the factual situation in that case was entirely

different than the one prevalent here in this case.

7.        We were also taken through the report of the Central

Vigilance Commission. Para 7.1 of the said report reads as under:

         "The allegations against Shri V.K. Bhutiani are held
         proved only to the extent of making a faulty judgment in
         recommending the proposal for the PC limit as pointed out
         in para 6.61 and the article of charge is held proved only to
         the extent as various allegations have been substantiated or
         otherwise as mentioned in the assessment portion of the
         report."
8.        Thus, it cannot be held that the Central Vigilance Commission

had given a clean chit to the respondent-accused.

9.        In para 18 of the ruling in P.S. Rajya (supra), relevant part of

the report of Vigilance Commission was quoted. Para 18 of the said

judgment reads as under:

        "It may not be out of place to extract a portion from the order
        exonerating the appellant     from the charge framed in the
        departmental proceedings. It reads as follows:

                     "The Commission after careful consideration of
          the facts and records of the case, have advised that the
          savings of the applicant,Shri P.S. Rajya, were more than
          the assets acquired by him and, therefore, the charge of
          acquisition of assets disproportionate to income does not
          stand proved. A copy of the advice of the Commissioner is
          enclosed. The Commission have also advised that the ends
          of justice would be met by exonerating the charged officer
          Shri P.S. Rajya."
                                     7
                      The President has given careful consideration to
            the facts and records of the case and advice of the UPSC.
            The President has come to the conclusion that the advice of
            the UPSC be accepted.        It is, therefore, held that the
            articles of charge framed against Shri Rajya has not been
            proved. The President is, therefore, pleased to exonerate
            Shri Rajya, AIT (Retd.) of the charges framed against him
            and drop the proceedings initiated against him"

10.         From a mere glance of this, it will be seen that the Central

Vigilance Commission had exonerated the accused therein by writing a

clear cut finding that the charge of acquisition of assets disproportionate

to the income did not stand proved against the accused in that case. Such

is certainly not the case here.


11.         In our opinion, though the report of the Central Vigilance

Commission may be a relevant factor, it cannot be held to be "be all or

end all" of the matter for prosecuting the accused persons of such serious

offences.

12.         Mr. Manoj Jain, learned Additional Solicitor General

appearing on behalf of the appellant-C.B.I. very rightly argued that the

High Court has treated the said report to be "be all or end all" of the

matter. He submitted that the High Court was not correct in doing so.

13.         Learned counsel appearing for the respondent very candidly

admitted that from the report, it cannot be said that the respondent-

accused in this case was totally exonerated.          We have deliberately

quoted aforesaid para 7.1 of the report only to show that the respondent
                                    8

was not totally exonerated. Thus, the reliance by the High Court on the

aforementioned ruling of P.S. Rajya (supra) was uncalled for.

14.       The ruling of P.S. Rajya (supra) was considered by this Court

in State through SPE & CBI, Andhra Pradesh Vs. M. Krishna Mohan and

Another (2007) 14 SCC 667 wherein this Court, after              elaborate

discussion, found that where the fact




situation was different, the reliance could not be made all together on the

report of the Central Vigilance Commission. Relying on the ruling of

State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal 1992 Suppl.(1) SCC 335, this Court

reiterated the position that where there could be some material found in

the charge sheet, then it would not be the function of the court to

examine the charge-sheet with a view as to whether the accused could be

convicted or not. That would be a pre-mature exercise. The judgment in

the case of M.Krishna Mohan (supra) was against acquittal and reliance

on behalf of the defence was placed on the report of the Central Vigilance

Commission. In para 32 of the said judgment, this Court has made a

clear reference that there was a clear cut finding by the High Court to

the effect "we have already held that for the reasons given, on the

peculiar facts of this case, the criminal proceedings initiated against the

appellant cannot be pursued."

15.       We do not find any such reasoning having been given in the

present case by the High Court. On the other hand, a perusal of the

impugned order suggests that the High Court did not examine the
                                    9

material available by way of charge-sheet and has proceeded




to follow the ruling of P.S. Rajya (supra). We are, therefore, satisfied

that this appeal has to be allowed by setting-aside the impugned order

passed by the High Court.      Accordingly, the appeal succeeds.     The

impugned order is set-aside and the matter is remanded. Now the trial

court shall proceed with the trial since the charges have already been

framed. All the contentions in law and fact shall be available to the

respondent as well as    the prosecution.      This judgment shall not be

treated to be an expression of opinion on our part.




                                  ......................J.
                                  [ V.S. SIRPURKAR ]




                                       ......................J.
                                  [ DEEPAK VERMA ]
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 11, 2009.

