
Supreme Court of India
Laxman Ram Mane vs State Of Maharashtra on 7 October, 2010Author: .................J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, R.M. Lodha
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 19   OF 2005



  LAXMAN RAM MANE                       ..   APPELLANT(S)

                vs.

  STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                  ..   RESPONDENT(S)
                                                                   O
                                                             R D E R




       This appeal by way of special leave arises out of

the following facts:

       The deceased Vasudha @ Sangeeta was the daughter of

Chandrakant Kumbhar (PW.4) a resident of Tupgaon.     Vasudha

had married to the appellant, Laxman Ram Mane, on 16th May,

1990, that is about one and a half years prior to the date

of incident, and after the marriage the couple resided in
the     matrimonial     home       at   Vitthalwadi,          Pali    in   Raigad

District.     As per the prosecution story Vasudha had gone to

her parents' home about one month prior to the incident and

had disclosed to her father and brother of her husband's

dalliance with a girl Pragati by name, and that he would

often abuse and beat her. Chandrakant                      told Vasudha that he

would      talk    to   her    husband         on    this     issue   after   the

harvesting season was over.                   A few days after this visit




Chandrakant       received     a    message         that     his   daughter   had

drowned in the river.              He along with his son (PW.3) Vilas

and Pandharinath and other relatives                  then rushed to




                                        -2-
Pali and a complaint of a missing person was lodged at the

Pali police station by Pandharinath.      On the 9th August 1994

the police informed PW.4 that a dead body had been found

near village Shiloshi about 6 k.m. away from the village of

the appellant and the deceased. API Ramesh Deshmukh              who

was then attached to the Pali police station, recovered the

dead body which was identified by Chandrakant and Vilas.

After the completion of the investigation, a        charge-sheet




was filed against the appellant and his two sisters for

offences punishable under Section 498-A and Section 306

read with Section 34 of the IPC.        The accused pleaded not

guilty and were brought to trial.       In the cross examination

the suggestion made by the defence was that the deceased

had gone out to answer the call of nature near the river

and had accidentally slipped in     and had been drowned.

       The   Trial   Court   examined   the   various   pieces    of
evidence, they being (1) the evidence of the brother and

the father of the deceased PW.3 and PW.4 respectively; (2)

the evidence of Sunita Birwadkar (PW.2) a cousin of the

deceased who deposed about the cruelty and harassment by

the   accused   and   (3)     the   evidence      of    photographer      S.N.

Dadholkar    (PW.5)     who    deposed     that        he   had   taken    the

photograph of the appellant with a young girl and that girl

was identified as Pargati.           In the light of the aforesaid




circumstances the Trial Court convicted the appellants




                                    -3-

for offences under Section 306 and                Section 498-A of the

IPC   but   acquitted    his    sisters.    This       judgment    has    been
affirmed by the High Court in appeal.

       Before   us    today,   Mr.     Vinay   Navare,     the   learned

counsel for the appellant, has reiterated the arguments

that had been raised earlier. He has submitted that                    a

perusal of the Panchnama and the site plan revealed that

the deceased could not have committed suicide but had in

fact drowned in an accident when she had fallen into the

river while answering the call of nature. He has finally




argued that no offence under Section 498-A of the IPC was

made out and that a mere illicit relationship of a husband

with another woman did not amount to cruelty to the wife.

       We    have    considered   the    arguments       advanced   very

carefully.   First    and   foremost    this   is    a    matter    under

Article 136 of the Constitution by way of special leave.

Two courts have found against the appellant on a minute

appreciation of the evidence.           We see no reason to hold
otherwise.      Nonetheless      we    have   gone    into    the   evidence

referred to us        by the learned counsel. The fact that the

appellant had been misbehaving with his wife is in the

evidence of     PW.2 and PW.3 and PW.4. It has come in their

statements that she was being harassed by the appellant and

his   sisters   for    various   reasons      and    that    the    appellant

would also side with his sisters.             Be that as it may, the




                                      -4-

sisters have already been given the benefit of doubt by the

Trial Court and we have nothing more to say on this aspect.

It is clearly revealed that harassment meted out to the
deceased     and    a   presumption   under      Section    113-A   of   the

Evidence Act must therefore be raised against the appellant

as admittedly the accident happened about one and a half

years after the marriage.

        We are of the opinion that an illicit relationship

of a married         man with another woman would clearly amount

to   cruelty       within   the   meaning   of    Section    498-A.      Even

assuming for a moment that this did not amount to cruelty




within the meaning of Section 498-A it could still be used

as a piece of evidence of harassment and misbehaviour of

the appellant towards the deceased.

        We     have also     perused the      Panchnama and     the site

plan. We find it difficult to believe that a woman who had

been living in the area would have gone to answer the call

of nature at a place where the water was 9 ft. deep and at

a confluence of two rivers.           It appears to us, therefore,
that this was a case of suicide on account of harassment

meted out   to the deceased.

       The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

                                  .................J.
                                   (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)



                                 ....................J.
                                  (R.M. LODHA)
New Delhi,
October 7, 2010.

