
Supreme Court of India
Surinder Kumar And Anr vs State Of Haryana on 28 April, 1992Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 2037, 1992 SCR  (2) 910
Author: K Singh
Bench: Kuldip Singh (J)
           PETITIONER:
SURINDER KUMAR AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA

DATE OF JUDGMENT28/04/1992

BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH (J)
BENCH:
KULDIP SINGH (J)
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR 2037		  1992 SCR  (2) 910
 1992 SCC  Supl.  (2) 559 JT 1992 (3)	 64
 1992 SCALE  (1)999


ACT:
     Indian penal Code, 1860:
     Sections  34,  302 and 498-A-Death on account  of	burn
injuries-Dying	declaration  made by  deceased	in  hospital
before	Judicial Magistrate-Doctor certifying  that  patient
remained  conscious at the time of recording  of  statement-
Whether	 there	was  any infirmity  in	recording  of  dying
declaration-Conviction	based  on  such	 dying	declaration-
Whether justified.



HEADNOTE:
    The first appellant's second wife died of burn injuries
sustained  by her. The first appellant and his son from	 his
first  wife  were tried for the murder of the  deceased	 and
also  for  subjecting  her  to	cruelty.  The  trial   court
convicted both of the them under section 302 and 498-A	read
with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code on the basis of the
dying  declaration made by the deceased before the  Judicial
Magistrate.  The  High Court, on  appeal,  maintained  their
conviction and sentence under Section 302 read with  Section
34 Indian Penal Code but acquitted them of the offence under
Section 198-A read with Section 34.
     In	 the  appeal,  by special leave, on  behalf  of	 the
appellants-accused it was contended that the statement	made
by  the deceased before the doctor, who had admitted her  in
the  hospital,	giving cause of her death as  burn  injuries
sustained  by  her while cooking food on gas stove  was	 the
earliest  version and amounted to a dying  declaration,	 and
there  being  two  contradictory  statements  made  by	 the
deceased,  the dying declaration recorded by the  magistrate
was  not worthy of credit and conviction of  the  appellants
could not be based on it.
     Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
     HELD  : 1.1. The conviction of the appellants is  based
on  the	 dying	declaration  made by  the  deceased  in	 the
hospital before a Judicial Magistrate. The doctor  certified
that the patient remained conscious
						       911
during	the period her statement was recorded. The  Judicial
Magistrate recorded a certificate that the statement of	 the
deceased  was recorded by him and it contained true  version
of her statement and she had thumb marked the same. In	view
of  the doctor's certificate, there is no infirmity  in	 the
recording of the dying declaration by the magistrate and the
same inspires confidence. [912 C-D]
     1.2  It was the first appellant who brought  his  wife,
deceased, to the hospital and he remained present while	 the
deceased was examined by the doctor. It is nowhere mentioned
in  the	 record	 that what was recorded by  the	 doctor	 was
stated by the deceased. Therefore, what was recorded by	 the
doctor could not be the version of deceased herself. Had  it
been  so,  the doctor may not have used the  word  "alleged"
while  recording  that the patient received  injuries  while
cooking	 food  in  gas-stove. The doctor,  did	not  mention
anywhere  of  the  record about the state  of  mind  of	 the
deceased,  whether  she	 was conscious or not.	It  is	more
probable  that	what was recorded by the doctor was  at	 the
instance of the husband who was accompanying his wife at the
time of her examination by him. Therefore, the courts  below
have  rightly  rejected	 the  defence  plea  that  what	 was
recorded by the doctor was at the instance of the  deceased.
The  trial court has also rightly rejected the	evidence  of
defence witnesses. There is no infirmity in the judgments of
the courts below. [1912 G-H, 913 A-C]



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal	 No.
150 of 1992.
     From  the	Judgment and Order dated  21.8.1991  of	 the
Punjab and Haryana High Court in Criminal Appeal No.  210-DB
of 1989.
     U.R.  Lalit,  B.S.	 Katial and S.	Muralidhar  for	 the
Appellants.
     Ms. Indu Malhotra for the Respondent.
     The following order of the Court was delivered :
     Sheema,  second  wife  of	appellant  Surinder Kumar,
sustained  70 per cent burn injuries in an occurrence  which
took place of May 16, 1987 and ultimately succumbed to those
injuries on May 22, 1987. Surinder Kumar and his son  Sanjiv
from his first wife were tried for the murder of Sheema	 and
also  for  subjecting  her  to	cruelty.  The  trial   court
convicted both of them under Sections 302/34 and 498-A/34 of
the Indian Penal Code. They
						       912
were sentenced for life and a fine of Rs. 500  on the  first
count and rigorous imprisonment for two years and a fine  of
Rs.  200  on the second count. The High	 Court,	 on  appeal,
maintained  their  conviction  and  sentence  under  Section
302/34 Indian Penal Code. They were, however, acquitted	  by
the High Court of the offence under Section 498-A/34  Indian
Penal  Code. This appeal by way of special leave is  by	 the
appellants against their conviction and sentence.
     The conviction of the appellants is based on the  dying
declaration  made by the deceased in the hospital  before  a
Judicial. Magistrate. The doctor certified that the  patient
remained  conscious  during  the period	 her  statement	 was
recorded.  The	judicial Magistrate recorded  a	 certificate
that  the  statement of Sheema was recorded by	him  and  it
contained  true version	 of her statement and she had  thumb
marked the same. We have been taken through the text of	 the
dying  declaration.  We are satisfied that in  view  of	 the
doctor's certificate, there is no infirmity in the recording
of  the	  dying declaration by the magistrate and  the	same
inspires confidence.
     Mr.  U.R. lalit, learned senior advocate appearing	 for
the  appellants	 has  vehemently contended  that  Dr.  Ashok
Tandon	who admitted the deceased in the  hospital  recorded
that the patient `allegedly' got burns while cooking food on
gas-stove. Mr. Lalit further contended that Dr. Ashok Tandon
appearing  as  PW  11 has deposed that at the  time  of	 his
examination the patient was conscious and she told him	that
she  got the burn injuries while cooking food on  gas-stove.
Mr.  Lalit  has	 argued that the statement  made  by  Sheema
before the doctor giving cause of her death is the  earliest
version and amounts to a dying declaration. According to him
there being two contradictory statements by the deceased the
dying  declaration recorded by the Magistrate is not  worthy
of  credit and conviction of the appellants cannot be  based
on the same. We do not agree. it was accused Surinder  Kumar
who brought his wife Sheema to the hospital and he  remained
present while the deceased was examined by the doctor. It is
nowhere	 mentioned in the record that what was	recorded  by
the  doctor was stated by the deceased. it is  evident	that
what was recorded by Dr. Tandon could not be the version  of
Sheema herself. Had it been so the doctor may not have	used
the word "alleged" while recording that the patient received
injuries while cooking food on gas-stove. Dr. Tandon did not
mention	 anywhere on the record about the state of  mind  of
Sheema. It was nowhere recorded whether she was conscious or
not. It is difficult
						       913
to believe that the doctor made his deposition in the  court
on  the basis of his memory. it is more probable  that	what
was  recorded  by  Dr. Tandon was at  the  instance  of	 the
husband	 who  was accompanying his wife at the time  of	 her
examination  by Dr. Tandon. On the above reasoning both	 the
courts	below have rejected the defence argument  that	what
was recorded by Dr. Ashok Tandon was at the instance of	 the
deceased.  We see no ground to differ with  the	 conclusions
reached by the courts below.
     Mr.  Lalit	 has  further argued that  the	evidence  of
defence	 witnesses was not taken into consideration  by	 the
High  Court.  We  have read the	 statement  of	the  defence
witnesses  along  with Mr. Lalit. We are  not  impressed  by
their  testimony.  The trial court  rightly  rejected  their
evidence.
     We	 see  no infirmity in the judgments  of	 the  courts
below.	We  agree  with the reasoning  and  the	 conclusions
reached by the High Court.
     We, therefore, dismiss the appeal.
N.P.V.					    Appeal dismissed
						       914




