
Supreme Court of India
Ram Das vs State Of M.P on 5 April, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. No. 817 of 2007

                                                 1





                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 817 of 2007



             RAM DAS                                    .....   APPELLANT



                                               VERSUS

              
             STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                  .....   RESPONDENT




                                             O R D E R

          1.              At about 8:30a.m. on 19th July, 1990 Raju PW-1 and 

          his   father   Nand   Ram   hereinafter   referred   to   as   'the 

          deceased' were in their field guarding their crop, when 

          the appellant Ram Das arrived at that place carrying an 

          axe.     He   quarreled   with   the   deceased   asking   him   as   to 

          why he had dismantled a part of the mound in his field. 

          This   led   to   an   altercation   between   them   whereupon   the 

          appellant picked up a stone from his field and hit the 

          deceased on his chest and when he fell down caused him 

          7/8 injuries with the axe which he was already carrying. 

          On   the   cries   raised   by   Raju,   PW-1,   Ratanlal   and   Tansi 

          Pws-   2   and   3   also   arrived   at   the   spot   whereafter   the 

          appellant ran away towards the village.  The trial court 

          on an  examination of  the evidence  of Pws  - 1,  2 and  3 

          observed   that   the   evidence   could   not   be   believed   as 


Crl.A. No. 817 of 2007

                                                 2





          there   were   discrepancies   inter   se   the   witnesses.     It 

          also held that their evidence was not supported by the 

          medical   testimony   inasmuch   as   there   were   only   four 

          injuries   on   the   dead   body   whereas   the   witneses   had 

          stated them to be between 7 and 15 injuries.   The trial 

          court,   accordingly,   acquitted   the   accused.     An   appeal 

          was thereafter taken by the State of Madhya Pradesh to 

          the High Court and the High Court relying on the Pws - 

          1, 2 and 3 as also the medical evidence and finding that 

          the   judgment   of   the   trial   court   was   perverse   and   not 

          possible   on   the   evidence   that   had   come   before   it,   has 

          reversed the judgment of the trial court insofar as the 

          conviction   was   concerned   but   holding   that   there   was   no 

          intention on the part of the appellant to cause death, 

          as there was no pre-meditation and that it had happened 

          in the course of a sudden quarrel, convicted him under 

          Section    304 Part  2 of  the IPC  and sentenced  him to  8 

          years   rigorous   imprisonment.     This   appeal   by   way   of 

          special leave is before us by the accused Ram Das.




          2.              We have heard the learned counsel for the parties 

          and gone through the evidence very carefully.   We find 

          absolutely no reason to doubt the evidence of Pws - 1, 2 

          and   3.     PW   -1   Raju   was   about   10/12   years   old   and   was 

          also   the   author   of   the   First   Information   Report.     The 


Crl.A. No. 817 of 2007

                                                 3





          trial court had put certain questions to him during the 

          course of his examination in chief which he had answered 

          very lucidly and logically.   We also see that he cannot 

          be   said   to   be   so   young   that   he   would   not   be   able   to 

          understand   as   to   what   could   had   happened   in   his 

          presence. Likewise, we find that the evidence of P.Ws. 2 

          and   3,   Ratanlal   and   Tansi,   whose   fields   were   adjoining 

          those   of   the   deceased   have   fully   supported   the 

          prosecution   story.     Nothing   has   been   brought   out   on 

          record   as   to   why   these   two   witnesses   would   tell   a   lie 

          about a person for whom they did not have any ill-will. 

          We are, therefore, of the opinion that the conviction of 

          the   appellant   was   fully   justified.     We   are   indeed 

          surprised   as   to   how   in   the   facts   of   the   case     this 

          matter would fall under Section 304 Part 2 of the IPC, 

          as   the   medical   evidence   shows   five   injuries   on   the 

          person of the deceased, all on the head and with all the 

          bones of the head being fractures which could have been 

          caused   with   an   axe.     We   are,   however,   unable   to   do 

          anything   in   the   matter   as   the   State   has   not   chosen   to 

          file an appeal against the judgment of the High Court, 

          on this score.  The appeal is dismissed.  



                                           ..............................J
                                           [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]


Crl.A. No. 817 of 2007

                                 4





                             ..............................J
                             [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

          NEW DELHI
          APRIL 05, 2011.



