
Supreme Court of India
Narayan Malhari Thorat vs Vinayak Deorao Bhagat on 28 November, 2018Author: U U Lalit
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                         1
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




                                                                Reportable
                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1487                OF 2018
        (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.7933 of 2018)



  NARAYAN MALHARI THORAT                                  …Appellant

                                  VERSUS

  VINAYAK DEORAO BHAGAT AND ANR.                          …Respondents


                               JUDGMENT

  Uday Umesh Lalit, J.


  1.    Delay condoned. Leave granted.

  2.    This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated

  28.03.2016 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay,

  Nagpur Bench at Nagpur allowing Criminal Application No.380 of

  2015 preferred by the first respondent and thereby quashing the

  proceedings instituted against him vide FIR No.35/2015.

  3.    The aforesaid FIR No.35/2015 was lodged with Police Station,

  Washim on 14.02.2015 pursuant to information received from the
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                          2
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




  appellant. It was alleged that the daughter and son-in-law of the

  appellant were teachers in a village in a Zila Parishad School where

  the first respondent was also a teacher; the first respondent used to call

  on the mobile of the daughter of the appellant and used to harass her;

  that despite the efforts of the son-in-law in trying to make the first

  respondent see reason and stop calling said daughter, the first

  respondent continued calling her repeatedly; that on 09.02.2015 there

  was a verbal altercation between the son-in-law and the first

  respondent and that on 12.02.2015 said son-in-law committed suicide

  leaving a suicide note. True translation of said suicide note is to the

  following effect:

                   “Sir Police Station Officer, I humbly
              request that my family life has been ruined by
              Vinayak Bhagat & therefore he should not be
              pardoned this is humble request & he should be
              hanged till death this is my last wish”


  4.    After the crime was registered, the first respondent had

  preferred an application for anticipatory bail which was rejected by

  the Principal District & Sessions Judge, Washim on 21.02.2015. The

  matter was carried further by filing Criminal Application

  [ABA]No.96 of 2015 in the High Court. The prayer was rejected by
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                    3
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




  the High Court vide order dated 07.04.2015. It was observed by the

  High Court:

                     “… … …After hearing the learned
              counsel for the applicant and the learned APP
              for the State and on the backdrop of their
              submissions, I have gone through the material
              placed on record as well as presented for my
              perusal by the learned APP. Though, it was an
              attempt of the learned counsel for the applicant
              that the alleged material against the applicant of
              committing mischief is only a piece of paper i.e.
              so-called suicide note. The submission was,
              merely on the basis of this material, one cannot
              reach to a conclusion of either intention or
              abatement for attracting Section 306 of IPC.
              On a perusal of the report, it clearly reveals that
              it was not only a casual or occasional attempt of
              the applicant or a friendly association of the
              applicant with his colleague. The report itself
              states that the applicant was constantly
              establishing contact on mobile phone with the
              wife of the victim. The report states that the
              attempt was made to give an understanding to
              the applicant asking him to keep himself away
              from such activity. But in spite of such an
              attempt, the applicant neither paid any heed nor
              stopped his activities. The statements recorded
              by the investigating agency of the father and
              mother of the victim Sanjay clearly indicate that
              though, initially the relations between the
              couple and the applicant were homely and
              informal, the applicant started calling the wife
              of Sanjay constantly. Just 3-4 days earlier to the
              death of Sanjay, the applicant, who had been to
              the grocery shop of one Anand Kale, was given
              an understanding by Sanjay and in spite of
              grievance raised by Sanjay, the applicant was
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                       4
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




              giving phone calls to the wife of Sanjay. Sanjay
              was thus carrying mental pressure and
              depression. These facts are recorded in the
              statement of the mother of Sanjay. It will also
              be interesting to note what reveals from the
              statement of the wife of Sanjay. The wife of
              Sanjay in clear and unambiguous words stated
              that the applicant was continuously calling her
              in spite of the understanding given by her
              husband as well as by herself.”


  5.    The view taken by the High Court as aforesaid was challenged

  by filing Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.3497 of 2015 but this Court

  rejected the challenge on 29.04.2015 finding no merit in the Special

  Leave Petition.

  6.    The first respondent, thereafter, filed Criminal Application

  No.380 of 2015 in the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking

  quashing of the aforesaid FIR No.35/2015 registered pursuant to the

  reporting by the appellant, for the offence punishable under Section

  306 IPC. By way of interim relief, stay of further proceedings in

  connection with the Crime was also sought. It is a matter of record,

  that the investigation in the Crime has not been concluded.

  7.    The challenge raised by the first respondent was accepted by

  the High Court. After referring to the facts that the first respondent

  used to call on the mobile of the daughter-in-law and that there were
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                       5
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




  heated arguments between the son of the appellant and the first

  respondent, the High Court observed as under:

                    “The aforesaid indicates that there is no
              material whatsoever even of a prima facie
              nature to establish that the applicant had either
              an intention to aid or instigate or abet Sanjay
              to commit suicide. There is no reference to
              any active or direct act on the part of the
              applicant which led said Sanjay to commit
              suicide.    Similarly, there is neither any
              instigation nor any intentional act done which
              compelled the son of non-applicant no.2 to
              commit suicide. Even the chit found in the
              pocket of the deceased does not contain any
              such material to indicate any instigation or
              abetment on the part of the applicant herein
              that could be treated as having led Sanjay to
              commit suicide.”

        The decision of the High Court and the order quashing the FIR

  is presently under challenge.

  8.    We heard Mr. Sachin Patil, Advocate for the appellant, Mr.

  Pratik R. Bombarde, Advocate for the respondent and Mr. Nishant

  Ramakantrao Katneshwarkar, Advocate for the State.

  9.    It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the High Court

  was not justified in entering into questions whether the record prima

  facie established that the respondent had requisite intention in order

  to bring the matter within the confines of Section 306 IPC and in
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                        6
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




  quashing the FIR in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

  On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for first respondent

  relied upon decisions of this Court in Netai Dutta v. State of W.B.1;

  M. Mohan v. State represented by the Deputy Superintendent of

  Police2 and; State of Kerala and Others v. S. Unnikrishnan Nair

  and Others.3 in support of his submission that in exercise of

  jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the High Court was justified

  in quashing the FIR.

  10.   In Netai Dutta (supra) the suicide note had alleged that Netai

  Dutta had engaged the victim in several wrong doings; that the victim

  was required to be at the workplace during the day and night on

  certain occasions; and that though he had reported the fact that he

  could leave the workplace only by 8 o’ clock in the evening when all

  the restaurants were closed nothing was done by said Netai Dutta. It

  was in the backdrop of these facts that this Court found the case to be

  fit to exercise powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

  11.   In M. Mohan (supra) A-3 was stated to have told Kamatchi

  (victim) that “if you want to go by a car, you have to bring a car from


  1 (2005)2 SCC 659
  2 (2011)3 SCC 626
  3 (2015)9 SCC 639
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                       7
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




  your family”, whereupon said Kamatchi, her husband and the child

  were required to take public transport. Few days thereafter the victim

  committed suicide.      After filing of the charge-sheet A-3 was

  summoned under Sections 304B, 498A and 306 IPC. In proceedings

  under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the High Court quashed the charges under

  Sections 498A and 304B IPC but held that the accused had to face

  trial for the offence under Section 306 IPC, which view was under

  challenge before this Court. In the facts and circumstances of the

  case, this Court made following observations in paragraphs 48 and

  49:


           “48. In the instant case, what to talk of instances
           of instigation, there are even no allegations
           against the appellants. There is also no proximate
           link between the incident of 14-1-2005 when the
           deceased was denied permission to use the Qualis
           car with the factum of suicide which had taken
           place on 18-1-2005. Undoubtedly, the deceased
           had died because of hanging. The deceased was
           undoubtedly hypersensitive to ordinary petulance,
           discord and differences which happen in our day-
           to-day life. In a joint family, instances of this kind
           are not very uncommon. Human sensitivity of
           each individual differs from person to person.
           Each individual has his own idea of self-esteem
           and self-respect. Different people behave
           differently in the same situation. It is unfortunate
           that such an episode of suicide had taken place in
           the family. But the question that remains to be
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                       8
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




            answered is whether the appellants can be
            connected with that unfortunate incident in any
            manner?

            49. On a careful perusal of the entire material on
            record and the law, which has been declared by
            this Court, we can safely arrive at the conclusion
            that the appellants are not even remotely
            connected with the offence under Section 306
            IPC. It may be relevant to mention that criminal
            proceedings against the husband of the deceased
            Anandraj (A-1) and Easwari (A-3) are pending
            adjudication.”

  12.   In State of Kerala and others (supra) the person who

  committed suicide was a CBI official investigating into a crime.

  According to the suicide note left behind by the victim, two officials

  of CBI, who were in fact juniors to him, an advocate as well as Chief

  Judicial Magistrate were statedly responsible for the suicide. Again,

  considering the facts, this Court upheld the decision of the High

  Court in quashing the FIR.          The observations of this Court in

  paragraph 12 are noteworthy. Said paragraph 12 was to the following

  effect:


            “12. As we find from the narration of facts and the
            material brought on record in the case at hand, it is
            the suicide note which forms the fulcrum of the
            allegations and for proper appreciation of the same,
            we have reproduced it hereinbefore. On a plain
            reading of the same, it is difficult to hold that there
            has been any abetment by the respondents. The note,
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                             9
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




           except saying that the respondents compelled him to
           do everything and cheated him and put him in deep
           trouble, contains nothing else. The respondents were
           inferior in rank and it is surprising that such a thing
           could happen. That apart, the allegation is really
           vague. It also baffles reason, for the Department had
           made him the head of the investigating team and the
           High Court had reposed complete faith in him and
           granted him the liberty to move the Court, in such a
           situation, there was no warrant to feel cheated and to
           be put in trouble by the officers belonging to the
           lower rank. That apart, he has also put the blame on
           the Chief Judicial Magistrate by stating that he had
           put pressure on him. He has also made the allegation
           against the advocate.”

  13.   We now consider the facts of the present case.               There are

  definite allegations that the first respondent would keep on calling the

  wife of the victim on her mobile and keep harassing her which

  allegations are supported by the statements of the mother and the

  wife of the victim recorded during investigation. The record shows

  that 3-4 days prior to the suicide there was an altercation between the

  victim and the first respondent. In the light of these facts, coupled

  with the fact that the suicide note made definite allegation against

  first respondent, the High Court was not justified in entering into

  question whether the first respondent had the requisite intention to

  aid or instigate or abate the commission of suicide. At this juncture

  when the investigation was yet to be completed and charge-sheet, if
Crl. Appeal No. ……….of 2018(Arising
                                                                     10
out of SLP(Crl.)No.7933/2018)




  any, was yet to be filed, the High Court ought not to have gone into

  the aspect whether there was requisite mental element or intention on

  part of the respondent.


  14.   We, therefore, find merit in the submissions advanced on behalf

  of the appellant. The judgment and order under appeal is, therefore,

  set aside and the present appeal is allowed. Since the investigation

  into the matter was stalled as a result of the petition under Section

  482 Cr.P.C., we direct the concerned authorities to complete the

  investigation as early as possible.


  15.   We have not and shall not be taken up to have expressed any

  opinion on the merits of the matter which shall be considered at the

  appropriate stage.


  16.   The appeal stands allowed in aforesaid terms.


                                        …...…….…………………..……J.
                                        (Uday Umesh Lalit)



                        .……………..……..…………….……………J.
                                (Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud)
  New Delhi;
  November 28, 2018.

