
Supreme Court of India
Sunder Lal vs State Of Rajasthan on 7 May, 2007Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P.K. Balasubramanyan, D.K. Jain
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  690 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Sunder Lal

RESPONDENT:
State of Rajasthan

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 07/05/2007

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, P.K. BALASUBRAMANYAN & D.K. JAIN

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.   690     OF 2007
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.)No. 4589 of 2006)



Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Leave granted. 

2.	In this appeal judgment of a Division Bench of the 
Rajasthan High Court is the subject matter of challenge. The 
appellant was found guilty of offence punishable under 
Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short the 'IPC'), 
while the co-accused Laxmi Narain was found guilty of offence 
punishable under Section 302  read with Section 34 IPC. Each 
of the accused was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life 
and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- each with default stipulation. 
The trial Court's judgment of conviction & sentence was 
maintained.

3.	Background facts in a nutshell are as under:

4.	On 22.8.1998 a 'Parcha Bayan' (Ex.P20) of injured 
Heeralal (hereinafter referred to as the 'deceased') was 
recorded by the SHO, Police Station, Chechat, Distt. Kota, 
wherein it was stated that accused appellant Sunderlal told 
him as to why he has been abused. He told him that he should 
remove the stones. Subsequently in the night at about 2 a.m. 
when he was sleeping in his house, accused Sunderlal 
inflicted a blow on his head by 'Gandasi' with the intention to 
kill him and also inflicted injuries on his hand. He also stated 
that accused Laxmi Narain also inflicted injuries on his legs. 
When he cried Chaturbhuj,  Deva, Rameshwar came but both 
the accused appellants ran away. On the basis of this 'Parcha 
Bayan' Police registered a case for offences under Sections 
448, 307, 323 and 34 IPC. Subsequently, FIR No.125/1998 
(Ex.P.22) was registered on 22.8.1998 itself.  The injured was 
examined in the night itself at about 3 a.m. at Primary Health 
Centre, Chechat by Dr. Girish Chand (PW-1). The injured 
succumbed to the injuries at about 7 a.m. His post-mortem 
was conducted on 22.8.1998 itself by Dr. Ashok Mundara 
(P.W.22). The I.O. prepared the site plan and recorded the 
statements of the prosecution witnesses under Section 161 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short the 'Code') The 
accused persons were arrested and on the basis of their 
information, the weapons i.e. gandasi and lathi were 
recovered. After death of Heera Lal the case was converted for 
offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. After completion of  
the investigation, the police filed a challan against both the 
accused appellants. The case was committed and the trial 
Court framed the charges against the accused appellant 
Sunderlal for offence under Section 302 IPC and appellant 
Laxmi Narain for offence under Section 302 read with Section 
34 IPC. Both the accused denied the charges and claimed to 
be tried. 

5.	The trial Court found the evidence to be cogent and 
credible.  The dying declaration was found to be reliable.	The  
High Court found the judgment of the trial Court to be in order 
and dismissed the appeal. 

6.	In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the 
appellants submitted that the High Court should not have 
placed reliance on the so called dying declaration. The same 
was not worthy of acceptance. Additionally, when the recovery 
has been disbelieved, the conviction solely on the highly 
improbable dying declaration should not have been made.  
Alternatively, it was submitted that offence under Section 302 
IPC has not been made out. 

7.	In response, learned counsel for the respondent-State 
supported the order of the courts below. 

8.	The dying declaration was recorded at 3.45 a.m. on 
22.8.1998. It was categorically stated that he was sleeping in 
the night. The appellant came and assaulted him on his head 
with the gandasi with the intention of killing him and the co-
accused Laxmi Narain inflicted injuries on his legs. The dying 
declaration was treated as the first FIR when the investigation 
was taken. 

9.	At this juncture, it is relevant to take note of Section 32 
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short 'Evidence Act') 
which deals with cases in which statement of relevant fact by 
person who is dead or cannot be found, etc. is relevant. The 
general rule is that all oral evidence must be direct viz., if it 
refers to a fact which could be seen it must be the evidence of 
the witness who says he saw it, if it refers to a fact which 
could be heard, it must be the evidence of the witness who 
says he heard it, if it refers to a fact which could be perceived 
by any other sense, it must be the evidence of the witness who 
says he perceived it by that sense. Similar is the case with 
opinion. These aspects are elaborated in Section 60 of the 
Evidence Act. The eighth clauses of Section 32 are exceptions 
to the general rule against hearsay just stated. Clause (1) of 
Section 32 makes relevant what is generally described as 
dying declaration, though such an expression has not been 
used in any Statute. It essentially means statements made by 
a person as to the cause of his death or as to the 
circumstances of the transaction resulting in his death. The 
grounds of admission are: firstly, necessity for the victim being 
generally the only principal eye-witness to the crime, the 
exclusion of the statement might deflect the ends of justice; 
and secondly, the sense of impending death, which creates a 
sanction equal to the obligation of an oath. The general 
principle on which this species of evidence is admitted is that 
they are declarations made in extremity, when the party is at 
the point of death and when every hope of this world is gone, 
when every motive to falsehood is silenced, and the mind is 
induced by the most powerful considerations to speak the 
truth; a situation so solemn and so lawful is considered by the 
law as creating an obligation equal to that which is imposed by 
a positive oath administered in a Court of justice. These 
aspects have been eloquently stated by Lyre LCR in R. v. Wood 
Cock (1789) 1 Leach 500. Shakespeare makes the wounded 
Melun, finding himself disbelieved while announcing the 
intended treachery of the Dauphin Lewis explain:

		"Have I met hideous death within my
 view,
		Retaining but a quantity of life,

		Which bleeds away even as a form of wax,

		Resolveth from his figure 'gainst the fire?
		What is the world should	make me now deceive,
		Since I must lose the use of all deceit?

		Why should I then be false since it is true

		That I must die here and	live hence by truth?"
				(See King John, Act 5, Sect.4)

The principle on which dying declaration is admitted in 
evidence is indicated in legal maxim "nemo moriturus 
proesumitur mentiri  a man will not meet his maker with a lie 
in his mouth."

10.	This is a case where the basis of conviction of the 
accused is the dying declaration. The situation in which a 
person is on deathbed is so solemn and serene when he is 
dying that the grave position in which he is placed, is the 
reason in law to accept veracity of his statement. It is for this 
reason the requirements of oath and cross-examination are 
dispensed with. Besides, should the dying declaration be 
excluded it will result in miscarriage of justice because the 
victim being generally the only eye-witness in a serious crime, 
the exclusion of the statement would leave the Court without a 
scrap of evidence. 

11.	Though a dying declaration is entitled to great weight, it 
is worthwhile to note that the accused has no power of cross-
examination. Such a power is essential for eliciting the truth 
as an obligation of oath could be. This is the reason the Court 
also insists that the dying declaration should be of such a 
nature as to inspire full confidence of the Court in its 
correctness. The Court has to be on guard that the statement 
of deceased was not as a result of either tutoring, or prompting 
or a product of imagination. The Court must be further 
satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of mind after a 
clear opportunity to observe and identify the assailant. Once 
the Court is satisfied that the declaration was true and 
voluntary, undoubtedly, it can base its conviction without any 
further corroboration. It cannot be laid down as an absolute 
rule of law that the dying declaration cannot form the sole 
basis of conviction unless it is corroborated. The rule requiring 
corroboration is merely a rule of prudence. This Court has laid 
down in several judgments the principles governing dying 
declaration, which could be summed up as under as indicated 
in Smt. Paniben v. State of Gujarat (AIR 1992 SC 1817):

	(i)	There is neither rule of law nor of prudence that 
dying declaration cannot be acted upon without corroboration. 
[See Munnu Raja & Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh 
(1976) 2 SCR 764)]
	(ii)	If the Court is satisfied that the dying declaration is 
true and voluntary it can base conviction on it, without 
corroboration. [See State of Uttar Pradesh v. Ram Sagar Yadav 
and Ors. (AIR 1985 SC 416) and Ramavati Devi v. State of 
Bihar (AIR 1983 SC 164)]
	(iii)	The Court has to scrutinize the dying declaration 
carefully and must ensure that the declaration is not the 
result of tutoring, prompting or imagination. The deceased had 
an opportunity to observe and identify the assailants and was 
in a fit state to make the declaration. [See K. Ramachandra 
Reddy and Anr. v. The Public Prosecutor (AIR 1976 SC 1994)]

	(iv)	 Where dying declaration is suspicious, it should 
not be acted upon without corroborative evidence. [See 
Rasheed Beg v. State of Madhya Pradesh (1974 (4) SCC 264)]
	(v)	Where the deceased was unconscious and could 
never make any dying declaration the evidence with regard to 
it is to be rejected. [See Kaka Singh v State of M.P. (AIR 1982 
SC 1021)]
	(vi)	A dying declaration which suffers from infirmity 
cannot form the basis of conviction. [See Ram Manorath and 
Ors. v. State of U.P. (1981 (2) SCC 654)
	(vii)	Merely because a dying declaration does contain the 
details as to the occurrence, it is not to be rejected. [See State 
of Maharashtra v. Krishnamurthi Laxmipati Naidu (AIR 1981 
SC 617)]
	(viii)	Equally, merely because it is a brief statement, it is 
not to be discarded. On the contrary, the shortness of the 
statement itself guarantees truth. [See Surajdeo Oza and Ors. 
v. State of Bihar (AIR 1979 SC 1505).
	(ix)	Normally the Court in order to satisfy whether 
deceased was in a fit mental condition to make the dying 
declaration look up to the medical opinion. But where the eye-
witness said that the deceased was in a fit and conscious state 
to make the dying declaration, the medical opinion cannot 
prevail. [See Nanahau Ram and Anr. v. State of Madhya 
Pradesh (AIR 1988 SC 912)].
	(x)	Where the prosecution version differs from the 
version as given in the dying declaration, the said declaration 
cannot be acted upon. [See State of U.P. v. Madan Mohan and 
Ors. (AIR 1989 SC 1519)].
	(xi)	Where there are more than one statement in the 
nature of dying declaration, one first in point of time must be 
preferred. Of course, if the plurality of dying declaration could 
be held to be trustworthy and reliable, it has to be accepted. 
[See Mohanlal Gangaram Gehani v.State of Maharashtra (AIR 
1982 SC 839)]  

12.	In the light of the above principles, the acceptability of 
alleged dying declaration in the instant case has to be 
considered. The dying declaration is only a piece of untested 
evidence and must like any other evidence, satisfy the Court 
that what is stated therein is the unalloyed truth and that it is 
absolutely safe to act upon it. If after careful scrutiny the 
Court is satisfied that it is true and free from any effort to 
induce the deceased to make a false statement and if it is 
coherent and consistent, there shall be no legal impediment to 
make it basis of conviction, even if there is no corroboration. 
[See Gangotri Singh v. State of U.P.{JT 1992 (2)SC 417), 
Goverdhan Raoji Ghyare v. State of Maharashtra (JT 1993 (5) 
SC 87), Meesala Ramakrishan v. State of Andhra Pradesh (JT 
1994 (3) SC 232),  State of Rajasthan v. Kishore (JT 1996 (2) 
SC 595) and Muthu Kutty and Anr. v. State by Inspector of 
Police, T.N. (2005 (9) SCC 113).

13.	This brings us to the crucial question as to which was 
the appropriate provision to be applied.  It is stated that the 
occurrence took place at night with practically no light and 
therefore, no identification would have been possible.  In the 
scheme of the IPC culpable homicide is genus and 'murder' its 
specie.  All 'murder' is 'culpable homicide' but not vice-versa. 
Speaking generally, 'culpable homicide' sans 'special 
characteristics of murder is culpable homicide not amounting 
to murder'. For the purpose of fixing punishment, 
proportionate to the gravity of the generic offence, the IPC 
practically recognizes three degrees of culpable homicide.  The 
first is, what may be called, 'culpable homicide of the first 
degree'. This is the gravest form of culpable homicide, which is 
defined in Section 300 as 'murder'.  The second may be termed 
as 'culpable homicide of the second degree'. This is punishable 
under the first part of Section 304. Then, there is 'culpable 
homicide of the third degree'.  This is the lowest type of 
culpable homicide and the punishment provided for it is also 
the lowest among the punishments provided for the three 
grades. Culpable homicide of this degree is punishable under 
the second part of Section 304.

14.	The academic distinction between 'murder' and 'culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder' has always vexed the 
Courts.  The confusion is caused, if Courts losing sight of the 
true scope and meaning of the terms used by the legislature in 
these sections, allow themselves to be drawn into minute 
abstractions.  The safest way of approach to the interpretation 
and application of these provisions seems to be to keep in 
focus the keywords used in the various clauses of Sections 
299 and 300. The following comparative table will be helpful in 
appreciating the points of distinction between the two offences.

		Section 299					Section 300

A person commits culpable homicide		Subject to certain 
exceptions
if the act by which the death is		culpable homicide is 
murder  caused is done 					if the act by 
which the 
							death is caused is done -

INTENTION

(a) with the intention of causing  		(1) with the 
intention of 
    death; or					causing death; or

(b) with the intention of causing 		(2) with the 
intention of 
    such bodily injury as is likely  	causing such 
bodily injury 
	 to cause death; or 				as the offender 
knows to be
								likely to cause the 
death of
								the person to whom the 
harm 
								is caused; or

								(3) With the intention 
of 
								causing bodily injury 
to any
								person and the bodily 
injury
								intended to be 
inflicted 
								is sufficient in the 
								ordinary course of 
nature
								to cause death; or

KNOWLEDGE
****

(c) with the knowledge that the act      (4) with the 
knowledge that
	 is likely to cause death.			the act is so 
imminently
								dangerous that it must 
in all
								probability cause death 
or
								such bodily injury as is 
								likely to cause death, 
and 
								without any excuse for 
								incurring the risk of 
causing
								death or such injury as 
is
								mentioned above.

15.	Clause (b) of Section 299 corresponds with clauses (2) 
and (3) of Section 300.  The distinguishing feature of the mens 
rea requisite under clause (2) is the knowledge possessed by 
the offender regarding the particular victim being in such a 
peculiar condition or state of health that the internal harm 
caused to him is likely to be fatal, notwithstanding the fact 
that such harm would not in the ordinary way of nature be 
sufficient to cause death of a person in normal health or 
condition.  It is noteworthy that the 'intention to cause death' 
is not an essential requirement of clause (2).  Only the 
intention of causing the bodily injury coupled with the 
offender's knowledge of the likelihood of such injury causing 
the death of the particular victim, is sufficient to bring the 
killing within the ambit of this clause.  This aspect of clause 
(2) is borne out by illustration (b) appended to Section 300.

16.	Clause (b) of Section 299 does not postulate any such 
knowledge on the part of the offender.  Instances of cases 
falling under clause (2) of Section 300 can be where the 
assailant causes death by a fist blow intentionally given 
knowing that the victim is suffering from an enlarged liver, or 
enlarged spleen or diseased heart and such blow is likely to 
cause death of that particular person as a result of the 
rupture of the liver, or spleen or the failure of the heart, as the 
case may be.  If the assailant had no such knowledge about 
the disease or special frailty of the victim, nor an intention to 
cause death or bodily injury sufficient in the ordinary course 
of nature to cause death, the offence will not be murder, even 
if the injury which caused the death, was intentionally given. 
In clause (3) of Section 300, instead of the words 'likely to 
cause death' occurring in the corresponding clause (b) of 
Section 299, the words "sufficient in the ordinary course of 
nature" have been used.  Obviously, the distinction lies 
between a bodily injury likely to cause death and a bodily 
injury sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause 
death. The distinction is fine but real and if overlooked, may 
result in miscarriage of justice.  The difference between clause 
(b) of Section 299 and clause (3) of Section 300 is one of the 
degree of probability of death resulting from the intended 
bodily injury.  To put it more broadly, it is the degree of 
probability of death which determines whether a culpable 
homicide is of the gravest, medium or the lowest degree.  The 
word 'likely' in clause (b) of Section 299 conveys the sense of 
probable as distinguished from a mere possibility.  The words 
"bodily injury.......sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to 
cause death" mean that death will be the "most probable" 
result of the injury, having regard to the ordinary course of 
nature.

17.	For cases to fall within clause (3), it is not necessary that 
the offender intended to cause death, so long as the death 
ensues from the intentional bodily injury or injuries sufficient 
to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.  Rajwant and 
Anr. v. State of Kerala, (AIR 1966 SC 1874) is an apt 
illustration of this point.

18.	In Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab, (AIR 1958 SC 465), 
Vivian Bose, J. speaking for the Court, explained the meaning 
and scope of clause (3). It was observed that the prosecution 
must prove the following facts before it can bring a case under 
Section 300, "thirdly".  First, it must establish quite 
objectively, that a bodily injury is present; secondly the nature 
of the injury must be proved.  These are purely objective 
investigations.  Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an 
intention to inflict that particular injury, that is to say, that it 
was not accidental or unintentional or that some other kind of 
injury was intended.  Once these three elements are proved to 
be present, the enquiry proceeds further, and fourthly it must 
be proved that the injury of the type just described made up of 
the three elements set out above was sufficient to cause death 
in the ordinary course of nature.  This part of the enquiry is 
purely objective and inferential and has nothing to do with the 
intention of the offender.

19.	The ingredients of clause "Thirdly" of Section 300, IPC 
were brought out by the illustrious Judge in his terse language 
as follows:

"To put it shortly, the prosecution must prove 
the following facts before it can bring a case 
under Section 300, "thirdly".

First, it must establish, quite objectively, that 
a bodily injury is present.

Secondly, the nature of the injury must be 
proved.  These are purely objective 
investigations.

Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an 
intention to inflict that particular bodily injury, 
that is to say that it was not accidental or 
unintentional, or that some other kind of 
injury was intended.
Once these three elements are proved to be 
present, the enquiry proceeds further and,

Fourthly, it must be proved that the injury of 
the type just described made up of the three 
elements set out above is sufficient to cause 
death in the ordinary course of nature.  This 
part of the enquiry is purely objective and 
inferential and has nothing to do with the 
intention of the offender."

20.	The learned Judge explained the third ingredient in the 
following words (at page 468):

"The question is not whether the prisoner 
intended to inflict a serious injury or a trivial 
one but whether he intended to inflict the 
injury that is proved to be present.  If he can 
show that he did not, or if the totality of the 
circumstances justify such an inference, then 
of course, the intent that the section requires 
is not proved.  But if there is nothing beyond 
the injury and the fact that the appellant 
inflicted it, the only possible inference is that 
he intended to inflict it. Whether he knew of its 
seriousness or intended serious consequences, 
is neither here or there.  The question, so far 
as the intention is concerned, is not whether 
he intended to kill, or to inflict an injury of a 
particular degree of seriousness but whether 
he intended to inflict the injury in question 
and once the existence of the injury is proved 
the intention to cause it will be presumed 
unless the evidence or the circumstances 
warrant an opposite conclusion."

21.	These observations of Vivian Bose, J. have become locus 
classicus.  The test laid down by Virsa Singh's case (supra) for 
the applicability of clause "Thirdly" is now ingrained in our 
legal system and has become part of the rule of law.  Under 
clause thirdly of Section 300 IPC, culpable homicide is 
murder, if both the following conditions are satisfied: i.e. (a) 
that the act which causes death is done with the intention of 
causing death or is done with the intention of causing a bodily 
injury; and (b) that the injury intended to be inflicted is 
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.  It 
must be proved that there was an intention to inflict that 
particular bodily injury which, in the ordinary course of 
nature, was sufficient to cause death, viz., that the injury 
found to be present was the injury that was intended to be 
inflicted.

22.	Thus, according to the rule laid down in Virsa Singh's 
case, even if the intention of accused was limited to the 
infliction of a bodily injury sufficient to cause death in the 
ordinary course of nature, and did not extend to the intention 
of causing death, the offence would be murder.  Illustration (c) 
appended to Section 300 clearly brings out this point.

23.	Clause (c) of Section 299 and clause (4) of Section 300 
both require knowledge of the probability of the act causing 
death.  It is not necessary for the purpose of this case to dilate 
much on the distinction between these corresponding clauses. 
It will be sufficient to say that clause (4) of Section 300 would 
be applicable where the knowledge of the offender as to the 
probability of death of a person or persons in general as 
distinguished from a particular person or persons  being 
caused from his imminently dangerous act, approximates to a 
practical certainty.  Such knowledge on the part of the 
offender must be of the highest degree of probability, the act 
having been committed by the offender without any excuse for 
incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.

24.	The above are only broad guidelines and not cast iron 
imperatives. In most cases, their observance will facilitate the 
task of the Court. But sometimes the facts are so intertwined 
and the second and the third stages so telescoped into each 
other that it may not be convenient to give a separate 
treatment to the matters involved in the second and third 
stages.

25.	The position was illuminatingly highlighted by this Court 
in State of Andhra Pradesh v. Rayavarapu Punnayya and Anr. 
(1976 (4) SCC 382), Abdul Waheed Khan @ Waheed and Ors.   
v. State of Andhra Pradesh (JT 2002 (6) SC 274), Augustine 
Saldanha v. State of Karnataka (2003 (10) SCC 472) and 
Thangaiya v. State of Tamil Nadu (2005 (9) SCC 650). 

26.	Though the occurrence took place at night, the existence 
of light, however, feeble has been established.  The accused 
and deceased were well known to each other.  So identification 
by deceased, since he was seeing him from close quarters, is 
possible. If persons are known to each other, from the manner 
of walk, talking and peculiar features of gait identification is 
possible.  The courts below have rightly held that deceased 
could have easily identified the accused persons.     

27.	Considering the fact that the occurrence took place in the 
night in almost dark conditions with feeble light and attack 
was made indiscriminately, the appropriate conviction would 
be under Section 304 Part I, IPC. Custodial sentence of 10 
years would meet the ends of justice. 

28.	 The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.  

