
Supreme Court of India
Tersem Singh vs State Of Punjab on 5 April, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. Nos. 42-43 of 2011

                                             1




                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 42-43 of 2007





         TERSEM SINGH                               .....   APPELLANT



                                           VERSUS

          
         STATE OF PUNJAB                          .....   RESPONDENT





                                         O R D E R

       1.         These   appeals   by   way   of   special   leave   are 

       directed against the concurrent findings of the Sessions 

       Judge   Jalandhar   and   of   the   High   Court   of   Punjab   and 

       Haryana   whereby   the   appellant   has   been   convicted   and 

       sentenced to death for having murdered his wife and two 

       minor children on the 21st of September, 2007.  

       2.       As per the prosecution story given by Piare Lal PW 

       his   daughter   Rajwinder   Kaur   had   been   married   to   Tarsem 

       Singh   appellant   about   twelve   years   earlier.     He   was 

       present   in   his   house   in   village   Pandori,   Masharkti 

       (District Jalandhar) when he received a message at about 

       11:00p.m.   on   the   21st  September,   2007   from   village 

       Khambra that a gas cylinder had burst in his daughter's 

       house   and   that     his   son-in-law   Tarsem   Singh   had 


Crl.A. Nos. 42-43 of 2011

                                             2




       sustained   injuries   and   his   daughter   Rajwinder   Kaur   and 

       his   grand   sons   Harwinder   Singh   aged   8   years   and 

       Gurvinder Singh aged 10 years, had been killed.   Piare 

       Lal along with his wife and nephew   Makhan Singh rushed 

       to   village   Khambra   and   on   examining   the   site   he 

       suspected   that   the   appellant   had   killed   his   wife   and 

       children by inflicting injuries on them and then setting 

       them   on   fire   post   murder.     An   FIR   was,   accordingly, 

       lodged at the Police Station  on the 22nd September, 2007 

       in   which   he   further   stated   that   the   appellant   had 

       threatened   a   few   days   earlier   that   he   would   kill 

       everyone in his family.  

       3.       The   prosecution   placed   reliance   on   several 

       witnesses   including   PW-4   Hardev   Singh   to   whom   the 

       appellant   had   made   an   extra   judicial   confession,   PW   5 

       Balbir   Singh   who   had   seen   him   coming   out   of   the   house 

       with a ghotna(pestle) and the evidence of Dr. Aman Sood 

       PW-9 who had carried the post mortem examinations on the 

       dead bodies and opined that the injuries on the head had 

       been   caused   by     ghotna     and   that   the   bodies   had   been 

       burnt after death.   Relying on these pieces of evidence 

       the   trial   court   and   the   High   Court   convicted   the 

       appellant and awarded him a  death sentence.  

       4.       When these matters came up for hearing on the 24th 

       July,   2009   notice   had   been   issued   confined   to   the 

       question of sentence only and we have heard Mr. Dushyant 


Crl.A. Nos. 42-43 of 2011

                                             3




       Parashar   and   Mr.   Anil   Grover,   learned   counsel   for   the 

       appellant   and   the   learned   Additional   Advocate   General 

       for   the   State   of   Punjab   respectively   on   this   question 

       today.

       5.        We find that the evidence against the appellant is 

       basically   that   of   extra   judicial   confession   and   last 

       seen as supported by the medical evidence.   We also see 

       that there is rule or law that a death sentence cannot 

       be awarded in a case based on   circumstantial evidence, 

       but   as   a   matter   of     prudence   the   courts   are   chary   in 

       awarding   a   death   sentence   in   such   cases.     We   are, 

       therefore,   of   the   opinion   that   the   award   of   the   death 

       sentence   in   the   circumstances   of   the   case   was   not 

       justified.

       6.        As the notice was a limited one we direct that the 

       sentence   on   the   appellant   be   commuted   from   death   to 

       life.     With   this   modification   in   the   sentence,   the 

       appeals are dismissed.


                                       ..............................J
                                       [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                       ..............................J
                                       [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

       NEW DELHI


Crl.A. Nos. 42-43 of 2011

                             4




       APRIL 05, 2011.



