
Supreme Court of India
Reema Salkan vs Sumer Singh Salkan on 25 September, 2018Author: . .………………………….
                                                     1

                                                                           REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CRIMINAL  APPEAL NO.1220  OF  2018
                                   (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.5495 of 2018)

                         Reema Salkan                                   …..Appellant(s)
                                                    
                                                   :Versus:

                         Sumer Singh Salkan                            ....Respondent(s)
                                                J U D G M E N T


                         A.M. Khanwilkar, J.


                         1.   Leave granted.

                         2.   This  appeal takes exception to the judgment and order

                         passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi dated May 31,

                         2018 in Revision Petition (Criminal) No.204 of 2015, whereby

Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
                         the High Court partly allowed the revision petition preferred by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2018.09.25
14:19:21 IST
Reason:


                         the appellant and was pleased to set aside the judgment and
                                  2

order   dated   28th  January,   2015   in   Petition   No.363   of   2014,

passed by the Judge, Family Courts, North Rohini, Delhi, to

the limited extent of not granting maintenance amount to the

appellant/wife from 10th  December, 2010 onwards. The High

Court   instead   directed   the   respondent/husband   to   pay   the

maintenance amount at the rate of Rs.9,000/­ per month from

9th December, 2010 onwards to the appellant/wife. 

3.    There   is   a   chequered   history   of   litigation   between   the

parties.   Shorn   of   unnecessary   details,   the   relevant   facts   for

determination of the present appeal are that the appellant and

the respondent got married on 24th March, 2002, according to

Hindu   rites   and   ceremonies   at   Infantry   Hostel,   Delhi

Cantonment,   Delhi.   The   respondent,   being   a   permanent

resident of Canada, had assured the appellant that he would

take her with him to Canada on 28 th March, 2002 on a Tourist

Visa.  However, soon after the marriage, relations between the

appellant   and   the   respondent   became   strained.   The

respondent, being a permanent resident of Canada, returned

to   Canada   without   making   any   arrangements   to   take   the
                                    3

appellant   to   Canada   even   on   a   Tourist   Visa,   as   assured.

Rather, he caused impediments in issuance of the Tourist Visa

to   the   appellant,   by   giving   an   application   in   writing   in   that

behalf to the Canadian Immigration Department. As relations

between   the   appellant   and   the   respondent   became   strained,

the appellant filed a complaint before the Women Cell against

the respondent and her in­laws. On 16 th July, 2003, she also

filed an application under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure   for   grant   of   maintenance   of   Rs.2   lakh   per   month

from the respondent before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,

Delhi.     Be   it   noted   that   during   the   pendency   of   the   said

application,   interim   maintenance   amount   was   fixed,   which

issue   travelled   upto   this   Court   by   way   of   Criminal   Appeal

Nos.2347­2349/2014, which was disposed of by this Court on

28th  October,   2014   on   the   finding   that   the   cause   of   justice

would   be   subserved   if   the   appellant   was   granted   a   sum   of

Rs.20,000/­ per month as interim maintenance commencing

from November 1, 2014. However, for the   reasons stated by

the  Family  Court  in its judgment dated 28 th  January, 2015,
                                     4

the   final   maintenance   amount   was   fixed  at   Rs.10,000/­   per

month  starting  from 17th  July, 2003 till 8th  December, 2010

and   no   maintenance   was   granted   with   effect   from   8 th

December,   2010.     The   application   for   maintenance,   filed   in

2003,   was   finally   disposed   of   on   28 th  January,   2015   in   the

following terms:

                                     “Relief:

             In view of my finding on issue no.1 above the petition
      u/s   125   Cr.P.C.   is   partly   allowed   and   the   respondent   is
      directed to pay maintenance to the petitioner as under:­

      1.      From the date of filing of the petition i.e. 17.07.2003
      till 08.12.2010, @ of Rs.10,000/­ per month. 

      2.      With effect from 08.12.2010 onwards the petitioner is
      not entitled to any maintenance and her claim in this respect
      stands dismissed. 
      The respondent shall clear off the arrears of maintenance if
      any,   within   three   months   from   the   date   of   order.   Any
      payment   made   towards   interim   maintenance   during   the
      pendency of the present petition and any maintenance paid
      for   the  concurrent  period,  as  per   the order  passed   by  any
      other   competent   court   in   any   other   proceeding/litigation
      between   the   parties,   the   money   already   deposited   by   the
      orders   of   the   Superior   Courts   or   by   the   order   of   the
      predecessor   of   this   court,   by   the   respondent   shall   be
      adjusted, if required. No orders as to costs.
      File be consigned to record­room.” 

4.    Against   this   decision,   the   appellant   filed   a   revision

petition   before   the   High   Court   being   Revision   Petition
                                       5

(Criminal) No.204 of 2015, which has been partly allowed on

the following terms:

      “85. Consequently,   the   impugned   order   dated   28.01.2015
      is set­aside to the extent of non granting the maintenance in
      favour   of   the   petitioner   /wife   from   09.12.2010   onwards.
      However,   the   impugned   maintenance   in   favour   of   the
      petitioner/wife till 08.12.2010 at the rate of Rs. 10,000/­ per
      month   is   upheld.   The   respondent   is   directed   to   pay
      maintenance   amount   of   Rs.9,000/­   per   month   from
      09.12.2010 onwards. Hence, the present revision petition is
      allowed.   The   arguments   of   the   learned   counsel   for   the
      respondent   and   the   judgments   relied   upon   by   the
      respondent are of no help. 

      86.   The   present   petition  is   allowed   and   disposed   of   in  the
      above terms.”



5.    The respondent has not filed any independent petition to

assail   the   judgment   of   the   High   Court   rather,   it   is   the

appellant who has questioned the correctness of the quantum

of   maintenance   amount   as   determined   by   the   Family   Court

and the High Court, by filing the present appeal. As a result,

the   sole   question   to   be   decided   in   the   present   appeal   is

regarding   the   quantum   of   monthly   maintenance   amount

payable by the respondent to the appellant.
  
6.  According   to   the   appellant,   the   High   Court   in   the

impugned   judgment   has  inter   alia  overlooked   the   following
                                 6

points   while   determining   the   monthly   maintenance   amount

payable by the respondent to the appellant:

     (i)     Order   dt.   28.10.2014   passed   by   this   Court   in

     Criminal   Appeal   no.2347­49   of   2014   filed   by   Appellant

     against   reduction   &   non­payment   of   interim

     maintenance,   whereby   this   Court   granted   Rs.20,000/­

     interim   maintenance,   cannot   be   reduced   as   there   has

     been no change in circumstances of parties since then.

     Rather, it can only be increased in final maintenance; 

     (ii)    Appellant’s   Evidence,   Affidavit   of   Financial   Status

     Exhibited   proves   that   Respondent   owns   vast   capital

     assets including 26.50 bigha (6.625 hectare) agricultural

     land in Meerut, UP; 

     (iii)   Respondent  [B.Com, MA (Economics) & MBA from

     USA] has worked in USA, Dubai, Canada for nearly 20

     years   and   hence   can   be   presumed   to   be   gainfully

     occupied, a fact which he is concealing, besides having

     savings,   investments,   social   &   medical   security   and

     insurance of Canada Govt.; and 
                                7
     (iv)   Respondent’s   last   disclosed   salary   for   the   year

     2010,   on   the   basis   whereof   quantum   could   have   been

     calculated.   As   per   the   last   disclosed   salary   of   Cad

     $48,372.34   p.a.   (equal   to   Rs.21,28,368/­   @Rs.44   per

     Cad.$), monthly salary comes to Rs.1,77,364/­. Even if

     minimum increase @ 5% per annum is added to salary of

     base year i.e. 2010, Respondent’s monthly salary would

     be   Rs.2,51,800/­.   In   absence   of   disclosure,   this   is   a

     reasonable presumption for increase in salary. On adding

     Rs.50,000/­   per   month   agricultural   income,

     Respondent’s   monthly   income   can   be   presumed   to   be

     Rs.3 Lakh.

7.     The respondent, on the other hand, has supported the

decision  of  the  High Court but at the same time, by  way of

counter affidavit filed to oppose this appeal, has urged that the

impugned   judgment   suffers   from   flawed   reasoning   on   the

following counts:  

     (a)    The High Court does not deal with the reasoning of

     appreciation of evidence. 
                           8
(b)   The   High   Court   does   not   notice   that   the   Family

Court, after a trial, has had an opportunity to observe the

demeanour of the parties and has commented on it. 

(c)   In   Paragraph   38   of   the   judgment,   the   High   Court

doesn’t   overturn   the   reasoning   of   the   reduction   of   the

interim   maintenance   from   Rs.25,000/­   (Rupees   Twenty

Five Thousand Only).

(d)   The   High   Court   does   not   overturn   the   reasoning

that   she   has   not   established   anywhere   that   she,   as   a

lawyer and an admittedly well educated and competent

professional, is unable to maintain herself.

(e)   The   High   Court   also   noted   the   scandalous

allegations   made   by   the   Petitioner,   against   the

Respondent’s family which would reinforce his allegation

of the Petitioner’s vindictiveness. 

(f)   The   High   Court   has   noted   judgments   of   various

High Courts wherein the principle laid down is that the

laws   of   maintenance   are   supposed   to   support   but   not

enrich; payments cannot continue ad­infinitum. 
                                   9
     (g)    The wife, too, is expected to mitigate her own losses

     by showing at least some semblance of effort at work and

     earning. 

     (h)    The   maintenance   should   be   in   accordance   with

     tenure   of   marriage,   meaning   thereby   that   long   tenure

     marriages   with   children   or   even   with   just   a   long   term

     investment   of   time,   loss   of   earnings   and   so   on   can   be

     computed   monetarily,   but   not   so   a   4   day   marriage

     resulting   in   a   15   year   litigation,   driven   by   a   desire   for

     vengeance with a motive to harass.
 
8.   We   have   heard   the   appellant   appearing   in­person   and

Ms.   Malavika   Rajkotia,   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the

respondent.
 
9.   As aforesaid, the sole question is about the quantum of

monthly   maintenance   amount   payable   by   the   respondent   to

the  appellant.  In that, the Family Court has unambiguously

held that the respondent neglected to maintain the appellant,

for the elaborate reasons recorded in its judgment dated 28 th

January,  2015.  That finding  of fact has been upheld by  the
                                 10

High   Court   vide   the   impugned   judgment.   The   Family   Court

has also found as a fact that the appellant was unemployed,

though   she   is   an   MA   in   English   and   holds   a   Post­graduate

Diploma in Journalism and Mass Communication and is also

a Law Graduate enrolled with the Bar Council of Delhi. The

High   Court   has   not   disturbed   that   finding   recorded   by   the

Family Court. Resultantly, both the Courts have concurrently

found that, in law, the respondent was obliged to maintain the

appellant.
 
10. The Family Court, however, restricted the liability of the

respondent   to   pay   maintenance   amount   only   between   17 th

July,   2003   and   8th  December,   2010,   which   view   did   not

commend to the High Court. The High Court, instead directed

the respondent to pay a monthly maintenance amount to the

appellant   even   after   9th  December,   2010,   but   limited   the

quantum to Rs.9,000/­ per month.

11. The High Court has recognized the fact that the appellant

was not in a position to maintain herself but it restricted the

maintenance amount to Rs.9,000/­ per month on the finding
                                 11

that   the   respondent   was   unemployed   and   had   no   source   of

income. However, having found that the respondent was well­

educated and an able­bodied person, the High Court went on

to hold that he was liable to maintain his wife. The High Court

further noted that the respondent had failed to produce any

evidence   regarding   his   unemployment   or   that   he   had   no

source   of   income.   Resultantly,   the   High   Court   posed   a

question   as   to   how   the   respondent   was   able   to   manage   his

affairs   after   his   return   from   Canada,   since   2010.   Therefore,

the High Court applied notional income basis to arrive at his

(respondent’s)   minimum   income   of   Rs.18,332/­   as   per   the

current   minimum   wages   in   Delhi,   as   a   person   possessing

qualifications of B.Com., MA (Eco.) and MBA from Kentucky

University, USA, and on that basis, directed the respondent to

pay Rs.9,000/­per month to the appellant from 9 th December,

2010 onwards until further orders.

12. The manner in which the proceedings, instituted by the

appellant   under   Section   125   Cr.P.C.,   have   progressed   from

2003 leaves much to be desired. During the pendency of the
                                 12

maintenance   application   filed  by   the  appellant   on  16 th  July,

2003, the respondent’s father filed a civil suit which, according

to  the  appellant,   was intended to prevent attachment of the

family property of the respondent from execution of the order

in her favour passed in the maintenance proceedings. The suit

for declaration filed by the respondent’s father was dismissed

on 30th  August, 2003, after a full­fledged trial but to prevent

attachment   of   land/family   property   in   interim   maintenance

case,   he   moved   an   application   for   restoration   of   the   suit.

Further, despite the injunction order passed by the Delhi High

Court dated 28th  October, 2004, which was operating against

the   respondent,   he   approached   the   courts   in   Canada   and

obtained an ex­parte divorce allegedly to escape the liability to

pay   the   maintenance   amount   and   also   adopted   delaying

tactics   in   the   progress   of   the   subject   maintenance

proceedings.     Furthermore,   the   Magistrate   granted   interim

maintenance of Rs.25, 000/­ per month from the date of filing

of the maintenance petition on the prima facie finding that the

respondent’s monthly salary, earned in Canada, was over Rs.1
                                    13

lakh in the year 2003.  That issue was finally resolved by this

Court vide order dated 20 th  October, 2014 by observing that

the cause of justice would be subserved if the appellant was

granted   a   sum   of   Rs.20,000/­   per   month   as   an   interim

maintenance,   commencing   from   November,   2014.     That

interim   arrangement   was   continued   till   the   final   disposal   of

the maintenance petition by the Family Court. 
 
13. Be that as it may, the High Court took into account all

the   relevant   aspects   and   justly   rejected   the   plea   of   the

respondent about inability to pay maintenance amount to the

appellant   on   the   finding   that   he   was   well   educated   and   an

able­bodied   person.   Therefore,   it   was   not   open   to   the

respondent to extricate from his liability to maintain his wife.

It would  be apposite to advert to the relevant portion of the

impugned judgment which reads thus:  

      “79.   The   respondent   during   the   cross   examination   has
      admitted   that   he   too   is   B.Com,   M.A.(Eco.)   and   MBA   from
      Kentucky   University,   USA;   the   respondent   is   a   Canadian
      citizen working with Sprint Canada and is earning Canadian
      $(CAD)   29,306.59   as   net   Annual   Salary.   However,   he   has
      claimed   that   he   has   resigned   from   Sprint   Canada   on
      23.11.2010 and the same has been accepted on 27.11.2010
      and the respondent since then is unemployed and has got no
      source of income to maintain himself and his family. 
                              14
80. In  the   instant   case,   the  petitioner   has  filed   the  case
under Section 125 Cr.P.C., 1973 for grant of maintenance as
she does not know any skill and specialised work to earn her
livelihood   i.e.   in   paragraph   26   of   maintenance   petition
against her husband. However, the respondent husband who
is   well   educated   and   comes   from   extremely   respectable
family simply denies the same. The respondent husband in
his written statement does not plead that he is not an able­
bodied person nor he is able to prove sufficient earning or
income of the petitioner. 

81. It is an admitted fact emerging on record that both the
parties   got   married   as   per   Hindu   Rights   and   Customs   on
24.03.2002 and since then the petitioner was living with her
parents   from   10.08.2002   onwards,   and   the   parents   are
under   no   legal   obligation   to   maintain   a   married   daughter
whose   husband   is   living   in   Canada   and   having   Canadian
citizenship. The plea of the respondent that he does not have
any source of income and he could not maintain the wife is
no answer as he is mature and an able bodied person having
good health and physique and he can earn enough on the
basis of him being able bodied to meet the expenses of his
wife.   In   this   context,   the   observation   made   in  Chander
Prakash v. Shrimati Shila Rani, AIR 1968 Del 174 by this
Court is relevant and reproduced as under: 

       "7.........an able bodied young man has to be presumed
       to be capable of earning sufficient money so as to be
       able reasonably to maintain his wife and child and he
       cannot  be  heard  to  say  that  he  is not  in  position  to
       earn enough to be able to maintain them according to
       the family standard. It is for such able­bodied person
       to show to the Court cogent grounds for holding that
       he is unable, for reasons beyond his control, to earn
       enough to discharge his legal obligation of maintaining
       his wife and child." 

82. The husband being an able­bodied person is duty bound
to maintain his wife who is unable to maintain herself under
the personal law arising out of the marital status and is not
under   contractual   obligation.   The   following   observation   of
the   Apex   Court   in  Bhuwan   Mohan   Singh   v.   Meena,  AIR
2014 SC 2875, is relevant: ­ 
                                     15


           "3.….Be it ingeminated that Section 125 of the Code of
           Criminal   Procedure   (for   short   “the   Code”)   was
           conceived to ameliorate the agony, anguish, financial
           suffering of a woman who left her matrimonial home
           for the reasons provided in the provision so that some
           suitable arrangements can be made by the court and
           she can sustain herself and also her children if they
           are   with   her.   The   concept   of   sustenance   does   not
           necessarily mean to lead the life of an animal, feel like
           an unperson to be thrown away from grace and roam
           for   her   basic   maintenance   somewhere   else.   She   is
           entitled in law to lead a life in the similar manner as
           she   would   have   lived   in   the   house   of   her   husband.
           That   is   where   the   status   and   strata   come   into   play,
           and that is where the obligations of the husband, in
           case   of   a   wife,   become   a   prominent   one.   In   a
           proceeding   of   this   nature,   the   husband   cannot   take
           subterfuges to deprive her of the benefit of living with
           dignity. Regard being had to the solemn pledge at the
           time   of   marriage   and   also   in   consonance   with   the
           statutory law that governs the field, it is the obligation
           of the husband to see that the wife does not become a
           destitute, a beggar. A situation is not to be maladroitly
           created where under she is compelled to resign to her
           fate   and   think   of   life   “dust   unto   dust”.   It   is   totally
           impermissible.   In   fact,   it   is   the   sacrosanct   duty   to
           render   the   financial   support   even   if   the   husband   is
           required to earn money with physical labour, if he is
           able­bodied. There is no escape route unless there is
           an order from the court that the wife is not entitled to
           get   maintenance   from   the   husband   on   any   legally
           permissible grounds. 
                                                          (emphasis applied) 

     83. The respondent's mere plea that he does not possess 
     any source of income ipso facto does not absolve himself of 
     his moral duty to maintain his wife in presence of good 
     physique along with educational qualification.” 

The view so taken by the High Court is unassailable. Indeed,

the respondent has raised a plea to question the correctness of
                                     16

the said view, in the reply affidavit filed in this appeal, but in

our   opinion,   the   finding   recorded   by   the   High   Court   is   un­

exceptionable.

14. The   only   question   is:   whether   the   quantum   of

maintenance   amount   determined   by   the   High   Court   is   just

and proper. The discussion in respect of this question can be

traced only to paragraph 84 of the impugned judgment which

reads thus: 

      “84. So   far,   the   quantum   of   maintenance   is   concerned
      nothing consistent is emerging on record to show the specific
      amount which is being earned by the respondent after 2010,
      however the husband is legally bound to maintain his wife as
      per the status of a respectable family to which he belongs.
      The husband being able­bodied along with high qualification
      B.Com, M.A.(Eco) and MBA from Kentucky University, USA
      could   earn   at   least   minimum   of   Rs.   18,332/­   as   per   the
      current   minimum   wage   in   Delhi.   Therefore,   the   petitioner
      being   wife   is   entitled   to   Rs.   9,000/­   per   month   from
      09.12.2010 onwards till further orders.”

15. The   principle   invoked   by   the   High   Court   for

determination of monthly maintenance amount payable to the

appellant   on   the   basis   of   notional   minimum   income   of   the

respondent as per the current minimum wages in Delhi, in our

opinion, is untenable. We are of the considered opinion that

regard must be had to the living standard of the respondent
                                 17

and   his   family,   his   past   conduct   in   successfully   protracting

the disposal of the maintenance petition filed in the year 2003,

until   2015;   coupled   with   the   fact   that   a   specious   and

unsubstantiated   plea   has   been   taken   by   him   that   he   is

unemployed   from   2010,   despite   the   fact   that   he   is   highly

qualified and an able­bodied person; his monthly income while

working in Canada in the year 2010 was over Rs.1,77,364/­;

and that this Court in Criminal Appeal Nos.2347­2349/2014

has   prima   facie   found   that   the   cause   of   justice   would   be

subserved if the appellant is granted an interim maintenance

of   Rs.20,000/­   per   month   commencing   from   November   1,

2014. At this distance of time, keeping in mind the spiraling

inflation   rate   and   high   cost   of   living   index   today,   to   do

complete justice between the parties, we are inclined to direct

that the respondent shall pay a sum of Rs.20,000/­ per month

to the appellant towards the maintenance amount with effect

from January 2010 and at the rate of Rs.25,000/­ per month

with effect from 1st  June, 2018 until further orders. We order

accordingly.  
                                 18
16. We, therefore, direct the respondent to pay the enhanced

maintenance amount, as determined in terms of this order, to

the appellant within a period of eight weeks from today after

duly adjusting the amount already deposited in Court/paid to

the   appellant   till   date.   The   appellant   will   be   entitled   to

forthwith withdraw the maintenance amount deposited by the

respondent   in   Court,  if  any.   The  impugned   judgment   of  the

High   Court   is   accordingly   modified   in   the   aforementioned

terms.

17. The appeal is allowed in the aforementioned terms. 


                                             .………………………….CJI.
                                            (Dipak Misra)



                                            …………………………..….J.
                                            (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                            …………………………..….J.
                                            (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
September 25, 2018. 

