
Supreme Court of India
Amit Pandey E.T.C vs State Of Bihar & Ors on 9 September, 2013Bench: H.L. Gokhale, J. Chelameswar
           

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1423-1426  OF 2013
                (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) Nos.6710-6713/2012)


      AMIT PANDEY ETC.                           Appellant(s)
                           :VERSUS:
      STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                      Respondent(s)






                                  O R D E R

               Leave granted.
      2.       Heard Mr. Riturag Biswas in support of this appeal  filed  by
      the complainant and Mr. Nagendra Rai, learned senior counsel appearing
      for some of the accused respondents. We have also  heard  the  counsel
      for the State of Bihar. All respondents are served.
      3.       This appeal by special leave seeks to challenge the orders of
      bail granted by the High Court to Ram Pujan Pandey and Amukh Pandey in
      Criminal Miscellaneous  No.7415/2012,  Jitendera  Pandey  in  Criminal
      Miscellaneous No.7005/2012, Tanuj Pandey   in  Criminal  Miscellaneous
      No.3879/2012  and  Hare   Ram   Pandey   in   Criminal   Miscellaneous
      No.1630/2012. All these accused have been charged under Section 302 of
      IPC in FIR No.258 of 2011  at  Madhaura  Police  Station  in  District
      Chhapra, State of Bihar. The counsel for the appellants  submits  that
      the impugned orders granting bail to these persons state that no  role
      is attributed to them while, in fact, the charge-sheet very much shows
      as to how they did play part in the occurrence leading to  the  murder
      of one Nagendra Pandey. Thus, if we see the charge-sheet, we find that
      Jitendra Pandey went to pull up Nagendra Pandey from  the  motorcycle,
      and Amukh Pandey and Hare Ram Pandey pushed  the  injured  complainant
      down and Jitendra Pandey had used the dagger. In this state of affair,
      it is difficult to understand as to how the learned  Single  Judge  of
      the High Court came to the conclusion that  there  was  no  overt  act
      attributed to these four persons. We may, however, add that we do  not
      find any specific role attributed to Tanuj Pandey.

      4.       Having heard the learned counsel in defence, we are still  of
      the view that in this situation, the order of bail was  not  justified
      as far  as  these  four  respondents-accused,  namely,  Amukh  Pandey,
      Jitendra Pandey, Hare Ram Pandey and Ram Pujan Pandey  are  concerned.
      We are not satisfied with the order of bail that has been  granted  to
      them by the High Court. Consequently, we allow these appeals  and  set
      aside the orders passed by the learned single Judge of the High  Court
      grating bail to these  four  accused.  These  accused  will  surrender
      before the concerned Police Station within two weeks from today.
               These appeals are disposed of accordingly.

                                                  .........................J
               (H.L. GOKHALE)








                                     .........................J
                                     (J. CHELAMESWAR)


      New Delhi;
      September 9, 2013.

