
Supreme Court of India
Sasthi Keot vs The State Of West Bengal on 8 February, 1974Equivalent citations: 1974 AIR  525, 1974 SCR  (3) 313
Author: V Krishnaiyer
Bench: Krishnaiyer, V.R.
           PETITIONER:
SASTHI KEOT

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL

DATE OF JUDGMENT08/02/1974

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH

CITATION:
 1974 AIR  525		  1974 SCR  (3) 313
 1974 SCC  (4) 131


ACT:
Maintenance    of   Internal   Security	  Act,	  1971	  s.
3(3)--Vagueness	 of  grounds--opportunity not  afforded	 for
making representation--Effect of.



HEADNOTE:
Pursuant to an order of detention issued under s. 3(1)	read
with  s. 3(2) of the Maintenance of internal  Security	Act,
1971  the petitioner was detained.  One: of the	 grounds  of
detention,  which weighed with the detaining authority,	 the
Government  and the Advisory Board was that  the  petitioner
was  a "man of desperate habits and dangerous character	 and
also prone to committing theft of underground cables".
Allowing the petition tinder Art. 32 of the Constitution,
HELD  : The order of detention is in violation of both	Art.
22(5)  of  the	Constitution  and s. 3(3)  of  the  Act	 and
therefore  must be quashed.  The grounds "desperate  habits"
and "dangerous character" cannot be regarded as anything but
vague  grounds.	  Apart	 from the vice	of  vagueness  every
desperate or dangerous man cannot be run down under s. 3  of
the  Act.  Moreover, the vital %-et injurious dossier  about
the  petitioner	 has  not  been	 communicated  to  him	and,
opportunity  afforded  for making a  proper  representation.
[314 B]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL  ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Writ Petition No. 1607  of
1973.
Under Art. 32 of the Constitution for issue of a writ in the
nature of habeas corpus.
Sadhu Singh, for the petitioner--
Dalip Singh and G.  S. Chatterjee, for the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA IYER, J.-The petitioner has moved this Court under-
art.  32 of the Constitution for the issuance of a  writ  of
habeas	corpus,	 he being under detention by  order  of	 the
District  Magistrate,  Burdwan, under sub-s.(1),  read	with
sub-s.(2) of S. 3 of MISA (Maintenance of Internal  Security
Act, 1971).  Various grounds, similar to those considered by
us  in Bhut Nath Mate v. State of West Bengal(1), have	been
urged,	and our conclusions thereon are similar to those  we
have already expressed in the other writ petitions.
It is important to note that in the atlidavit-in-opposition,
filed  on  behalf of the respondent we find a  statement  as
under
"I  further state that it appears from the records that	 the
detenue	 petitioner  is	 a  man	 of  desperate	habits	 and
dangerous  character and also prone to committing  theft  of
underground telecommunication cable."
(1)  Writ  Petition No. 1456 of 1973; judgment delivered  on
February 8, 1974.
314
This has been relied upon by the State as additional  ground
in  'Support  of  the detention, apart	from  the  theft  of
cables,	 recited in the detention order and repeated in	 the
counter	 affidavit.   Counsel candidly ,admitted  that	this
additional  circumstance  had been placed before  the  State
Government  and	 the  Advisory	board,	and  certainly	 was
before .the District Magistrate when he passed the detention
order.	It is perfectly plain that the authorities have been
influenced by the report ,of the police that the  petitioner
was  "a man of desperate habits and dangerous character	 and
also prone to committing theft of underground cables." We do
not regard 'desperate habits' and 'dangerous Character'	 .as
anything but vague.  Apart from the vice of vagueness  which
perhaps	 may not matter so far as the satisfaction.  of	 the
authorities  is concerned, every desperate or dangerous	 man
cannot	be run down under s. 3 of the MISA.  Moreover,	this
vital  yet  injurious dossier about the petitioner  has	 not
been communicated to him and opportunity afforded for making
a   proper  representation  contra.   Therefore	  there	  is
violation  both	 of art. 22(5) of the  Constitution  and  of
s.3(3) of the Act.  In this view we are constrained to quash
the detention order on the petitioner and
direct his release.
P.B.R.
Petition allowed.
315
