
Supreme Court of India
Soma Chakravarty vs State Through Cbi on 10 May, 2007Author: M Katju
Bench: Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  710 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Soma Chakravarty

RESPONDENT:
State Through CBI

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/05/2007

BENCH:
Markandey Katju

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 710 OF 2007
(Arising out of  Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.552/2006)



Markandey Katju, J.

1.	Leave granted.  

2.	This appeal has been filed against the judgment and order of the Delhi 
High Court dated 22.10.2005 in Criminal Revision Petition No. 10/2005.

3.	Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.

4.	The Criminal Revision Petition was filed in the High Court 
challenging the order of the Special Judge, Delhi in Case CC No. 63/2001 
titled CBI vs. Priya Uppal & Ors., by which the appellant and two others 
had been charged for offences under Section 420 read with Sections 120-B, 
429, 468 and 471 of Indian Penal Code  as well  as under various provisions 
of the Prevention of Corruption Act.  The appellant along with the other 
accused in this case allegedly entered into a criminal conspiracy and by 
misusing their official position caused undue pecuniary advantage to 
themselves to the tune of Rs.30,30,057/- and caused a corresponding loss to 
the Indian Trade Promotion Organization (ITPO) which is a wing of the 
Central Government, from whose account money was released against bogus 
receipts of advertisements which had actually never been carried by any 
newspaper or other publication. 

5.	The prosecution case is that the publicity department of ITPO was 
concerned with the release of advertisements in newspapers.  There were 
two types of advertisements; (1) regular advertisement & (2) ad hoc 
advertisements.  Regular advertisements were given to the national dailies 
and other leading newspapers and magazines, whereas ad hoc 
advertisements were those which were issued on ad hoc basis from time to 
time with the specific approval of the Chief Managing Director or Executive 
Director only.  The procedure for release of advertisements on behalf of 
ITPO was as follows:  
6.	Requests were received from Indian and foreign 
magazines/newspapers/publications for the advertisements which were 
processed by the publicity officer of the rank of Deputy Manager level and 
were put before the CMD/ED through the Senior Manager/Deputy General 
Manager for his approval.  On receipt of the approval from the 
CMD/Executive Director by the publicity Division the concerned manager 
sent letters/release orders to the party for publication of the material.  After 
the advertisements were published the concerned officer of the publicity 
Division of ITPO had to process and pass the bills for making payment to 
the advertising agency.  Copy of the letter sent and copy of the 
newspapers/magazine were also forwarded or attached to the bill submitted 
by the agency.

7.	The prosecution alleged that at the relevant time Shri Bal Krishan, 
Deputy Manager was in charge of the work relating to ad hoc 
advertisements.  He was the authorized officer to process the bills for such 
advertisements.  It is alleged that Shri Ajay Uppal, proof Reader/Senior 
Assistant of ITPO floated 6 bogus firms and submitted 76 bogus bills worth 
Rs.30,30,057/- for payment by signing under fictitious names like, Sanjay 
Gupta, Neeraj, Atul, etc.  With these bills he enclosed photocopies of fake 
advertisements.  Out of 76 bogus bills, 14 were dishonestly processed and 
verified by the accused Soma Chakravarty and P. K. Jindal, in connivance 
with the co-accused to cheat the ITPO and give wrongful gain to themselves 
and to the other accused in this case.  It is stated that the appellant also had 
the knowledge that Bal Krishan had been authorized to verify the bills 
pertaining to ad hoc advertisements.   All the bogus vouchers had been filled 
in by the co-accused Gyase Ram who was neither posted in the publicity 
division nor was authorized to do so.  It is further alleged that the appellant 
knew that those bogus bills had not been entered in the bills register of the 
publicity Division of ITPO and no file had been opened/created in respect of 
these firms claiming to have published advertisements.  The file numbers 
written on the fictitious bills were also fake.  None of these bills bore initial 
or signatures of Shri Balkrishan, who was incharge of the ad hoc 
advertisements of ITPO at the relevant time.  As regards the other accused, 
P.K. Jindal, the allegation is that he as Senior Manager of Accounts passed 
bills worth Rs.1,75,000/- related  to these transactions.  On these facts, the 
CBI concluded that there was sufficient evidence of conspiracy to cheat 
along with the other evidence of forgery, cheating and corruption.  
Accordingly a charge sheet was filed.  The trial court after examining the 
allegations and evidence collected by the investigation framed the impugned 
charges against the appellant Ms. Soma Chakravarty & Mr. P.K. Jindal.  
Against the framing of charges a criminal revision was filed in the High 
Court which dismissed the same by the impugned judgment.

8.	On behalf of the appellant it was contended before the High Court that 
there was no material before the Special Judge entitling him to frame 
charges against the accused.  It was submitted on behalf of the accused 
Soma Chakravarty that she did nothing more than processing some of those 
14 bills and sending them to the accounts division of ITPO from where the 
payments had been collected by cheques.  It was submitted that the appellant 
was working as Deputy Manager in the publicity division of I.T.P.O. and 
had signed 13 bills and sanction forms after they had been processed by 
Gyase Ram and all the 13 bills contained the signatures of Gyase Ram when 
they were put  before her for her signature.  She contended that she had 
signed those bills in the normal course of her duties and the bills were 
passed by the accounts section.  She attributed lack of vigilance to the 
accounts section which was required to verify those bills with reference to 
the sanction for the advertisement.  She claimed that Bal krishan, the officer 
authorized to deal with the ad hoc advertisement, was himself a beneficiary 
of part of the alleged money cheated out of ITPO.  It was claimed on behalf 
of the appellant Soma Chakravarty that the investigation had failed to reveal 
any mens rea on her part.  She contended that she was implicated only 
because of her failure to take sufficient care while initialing the bills in 
question.  She contended that it was not possible for her to detect at the time 
of initialing the bills that any fraud was being played on her by co-accused 
Gyase Ram and others.  Accordingly she sought to be discharged from the 
case.  Similarly, the other co-accused P.K. Jindal also denied any 
involvement in the offence and alleged that there was hardly any allegation 
against him in the charge sheet. 

9.	The High Court dismissed the Criminal Revision Petition filed by the 
appellant, and hence this appeal by special leave. 

10.	Learned counsel for the appellant relied on the decisions of this Court 
in Union of India and another  vs. Major J. S. Khanna etc.  1972 (3) SCC 
873,  State of Maharashtra and others vs. Som Nath Thapa and others 
1996 (4) SCC 659 and  L Chandraiah vs. State of A.P. and another  2003 
(12) SCC 670  and contended that before framing the charges the court must 
have some material on the basis of which it can come to the conclusion that 
there is a prima facie case against the accused.  In our opinion there was 
such material before the Court while framing the charge.

11.	It may be mentioned that the settled legal position, as mentioned in 
the above decisions, is that if on the basis of material on record the Court 
could form an opinion that the accused might have committed offence it can 
frame the charge, though for conviction the conclusion is required to be 
proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has committed the offence.  
At the time of framing of the charges the probative value of the material on 
record cannot be gone into, and the material brought on record by the 
prosecution has to be accepted as true at that stage.  Before framing a charge 
the court must apply its judicial mind on the material placed on record and 
must be satisfied that the commitment of offence by the accused was 
possible.  Whether, in fact, the accused committed the offence, can only be 
decided in the trial.  

12.	Learned counsel for the appellant contended that in view of the 
aforesaid decisions no charge could be framed against the appellant as there 
was no material to show that she was prima facie guilty or had any mens rea.  
We cannot agree.

13.	The facts of the present case disclose that advertisements of six bogus 
firms had been published and 76 bogus bills worth Rs.30,30,057/- were 
submitted for payment by signing under the fictitious names like, Sanjay 
Gupta, Neeraj, Atul, etc.  Out of these 76 bogus bills 14 were said to be 
dishonestly processed and verified and signed by the appellant Soma 
Chakravarty and co-accused P. K. Jindal.  All the bogus bills were filled by 
co-accused Gyase Ram who was neither posted in the publicity division nor 
was authorized to do so.  These bogus bills had not been entered in the bills 
register of the ITPO and no file had been opened or created in respect of 
these firms claiming to have published the advertisements.  The file numbers 
written on the fictitious bills were also fake.  None of these bills bore the 
initial or signatures of Shri Bal Krishan who was incharge of the ITPO at the 
relevant time.  

14.	It was contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the 
appellant had signed the aforesaid 13 bills in the normal course of her duty 
and it was the Accounts section which was negligent in not verifying these 
bills.  

15.	In our opinion once a person signs on a document he or she is 
expected to make some enquiry before signing it.  In fact, accused Soma 
Chakravarty was never assigned any duty in respect of processing or signing 
the bills for ad hoc advertisements, and she was assigned duty only of 
regular advertisements.  Moreover, these bills were not sanctioned/approved 
by the competent authority i.e. the Chairman/Executive Director.

16.	No doubt Soma Chakravarty contended that she signed these fake bills 
by negligence but without any mala fide intention, but this is a matter which, 
in our opinion, is to be seen at the time of the trial.  There are serious 
allegations of misappropriation of a huge amount of money belonging to the 
government, and it cannot be said at this stage that there is no material at all 
for framing the charge against her.  Hence, we agree with the view taken by 
the High Court in this connection.

17.	In view of the above, we find no infirmity in the impugned judgment 
and this appeal is consequently dismissed.  However, we make it clear that 
any observation made by us in this judgment or in the impugned judgment of 
the High Court will not influence the trial court, which shall decide the case 
on its merits, as expeditiously as possible.

