
Supreme Court of India
Munir Sayed Ibna Hussain vs The State Of Maharashtra & Anr on 12 November, 1975Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 1992, 1976 SCR  (2) 687
Author: M H Beg
Bench: Beg, M. Hameedullah
           PETITIONER:
MUNIR SAYED IBNA HUSSAIN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/11/1975

BENCH:
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
BENCH:
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
GOSWAMI, P.K.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR 1992		  1976 SCR  (2) 687
 1976 SCC  (3) 548


ACT:
     Sec 421  of Criminal  Procedure Code-Practice  of	High
Court in  dismissing criminal  appeals	without	 giving	 any
reasons	 disapproved-Power   of	 High  Court  to  dismiss  a
Criminal appeal in limine.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellant  an owner of a hotel was prosecuted along
with five  others for forcibly dispossessing the complainant
who  was   the	Manager	  of  the   Hotel  and	further	 for
misappropriating certain  properties  including	 some  money
belonging to  the complainant.	According to  the appellant,
the complainant	 was merely  a	licensee.  The	Trial  Court
acquitted accused  Nos. 3  to 6	 and convicted accused No. 1
and 2.	The High  Court admitted the appeal of accused No. 2
and acquitted him. The appeal of the appellant accused No. 1
was, however,  rejected by  the High Court it limine without
giving any reasons for the rejection.
     On an appeal by Special Leave,
^
     HELD: 1.  There is	 a whole  catena of cases which have
come up	 to this  Court from  the Bombay High Court in which
this Court  has consistently  disapproved  of  the  practice
followed by the Bombay High Court of not giving reasons when
exercising  its	 power	of  summary  dismissal	of  criminal
appeals which  lie both	 on questions  of fact	and law.  In
other High  Courts such	 appeals are automatically admitted.
The power  of summary  rejection under	section 421  of	 the
Criminal Procedure  Code should	 be only  exercised when the
Court is  satisfied from  a, perusal of the judgment as well
as  the	 record	 that  there  is  absolutely  no  reasonable
possibility of	its success  for reasons  to be mentioned in
the order  of dismissal.  In the present case, it cannot be-
said that  there are  no arguable points. It is difficult to
believe that  the judgments  of this court have neither come
to the	knowledge of the Bombay High Court nor were cited on
behalf of'  the appellant  In any  case, the law having been
declared by  this Court,  it is	 the duty of the Bombay High
Court  to   act	 in  accordance	 with  Article	141  of	 the
constitution and  to apply  it by  giving proper  reasons to
justify whatever  be its  view. The  judgment of  the Bombay
High Court  was set  aside and it was directed that the case
should, be  treated as	admitted for  regular hearing in she
Bombay High  Court and	should be  disposed of in accordance
with law. [688-C, E, F, G, 689-AB] F



JUDGMENT:
     CRIMINAL APPELLATE	 JURISDICTION: Criminal	 Appeal	 No.
191 of 1971.
     (Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order of
the Bombay High Court dated 25-2-1972 in criminal appeal No.
683 of 1971.)
     M/s. M. K. Ramamurthi & Co. for the appellant.
     M. N. Shroff and Vineet Kumar, for the respondents.
     The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     BEG, J. The allegations, on questions of fact raised in
the appeal  now before	us, were quite unusual. The judgment
of a  Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay in Criminal
Appeal No.  683 of  1971, in  respect of  coaccused Syed Ali
Naki Hade  Hasan, who  was acquitted on 25-2-1972, shows the
nature of the allegations made by the prosecutor
688
in this	 case. On  those allegations, it became necessary to
consider whether  the accused,	who had	 been put  on  trial
together with  six others,  was actually  in possession of a
Hotel. The  appellant claimed  to be the owner of a hotel of
which Jagannath,  complainant, was  said to  be the manager.
The case  of the  Manager was  that he	had been  forcefully
dispossessed by	 the accused  and  that	 certain  properties
belonging to him and others, including some money, were mis-
appropriated by	 the   accused. Therefore, the appellant and
five others were charged under Section 395 Indian Penal Code
as well	 as under  Section 452	read with  Section 34 I.P.C.
According to  the accused,  Shri Jagannath  and his brother,
the complainant,  were only  licensees. However,  these	 are
questions relating  to the  merits of  a case  in which	 the
Trial Court  had acquitted  accused numbers  3 to  8 and the
High Court  acquitted accused  No. 2. The appeal of the only
remaining accused,  accused No.	 1,  who  is  the  appellant
before us  by special leave was, however, rejected in limine
by the	High  Court  without  giving  any  reasons  for	 the
rejection.
     There is  a whole	catena of  cases which	have come up
here from  the Bombay  High Court  in which  this Court	 has
consistently disapproved  of the  practice followed  by	 the
Bombay High  Court of not giving reasons when exercising its
power of  summary dismissal  of criminal s appeals which lie
both on	 questions of  fact and	 law. In  other High Courts,
such appeals  are automatically admitted. In any case, it is
not  possible	for  this   Court  to  exercise	 its  powers
satisfactorily without	giving an appellant, who may have an
arguable case,	an opportunity	of first presenting his case
to the High Court and getting a decision from it.
     The power	of a  summary rejection	 of a  criminal	 1st
appeal, even  though it	 is exercisable under the provisions
of Section  421 Criminal  Procedure  Code,  should,  in	 our
opinion, be only exercised when the Court is satisfied, from
a perusal  of the judgment as well as the record, that there
is absolutely  no reasonable  possibility of its success for
the reasons  mentioned in  the order.  In a case such as the
one now	 before us, it cannot be said that there are no such
arguable  points   that,  after	  the  High   Court  had  an
opportunity of	fully considering both sides of the case, it
must necessarily  dismiss the  appeal.	At  least,  in	such
cases, where  there are	 arguable  points,  the	 High  Court
should give  its grounds  and  reasons	in  support  of	 its
decision to  reject summarily  on some	absolutely clinching
ground. This  Court has	 laid down  the duty  upon the	High
Court to  record reasons. (See: Mushtak Hussein v. The State
of Bombay (13; Krishna Vithu Surosha v. State of Maharashtra
(2); Mustaq  Ahmed Mohmed  Hussain &  Anr. v.  The State  of
Gujarat(3);  Kapurchand	  Kesrimal  Jain  v.  The  State  of
Maharashtra(4) .
     It is difficult to believe that judgments of this Court
have neither  come to the knowledge of the Bombay High Court
nor were  cited on behalf of the appellant. In any case, the
law having  been declared  by this  Court, it is the duty of
the Bombay High Court to act in accord
     (1) [1955] SCR 809.	  (2) [1974] (3) S.C.C. 404.
     (3) [1973] (1) S.C.C. 702.	  (4) [1973] (3) S.C.C. 299.
689
ance with Article 141 of the Constitution and to apply it by
giving proper reasons to justify whatever be its view.
     Accordingly, we  allow the	 appeal and  set  aside	 the
order of  the High  Court rejecting the appeal summarily and
order that  the case will be treated as admitted for regular
hearing of both sides by the Bombay High Court, and disposed
of in accordance with the law. ,,
P.H.P.					     Appeal allowed.
690
