
Supreme Court of India
Bhagwat vs The State Of Maharashtra on 19 September, 2018Author: N Sinha
Bench: K Joseph, N Sinha
                                            NON-REPORTABLE

               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1046 OF 2011

BHAGWAT                                   Appellant(s)

                                 VERSUS

STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                      Respondent(s)




                   J U D G M E N T

NAVIN SINHA, J.

1.   The appellant stands convicted under Section 302

IPC and sentenced to life imprisonment for the death of

his wife at home by burn injuries on 06.04.2003. The

deceased expired the next day. The High Court acquitted

him of the charge under Section 498-A IPC regarding

dowry demand.


2.   Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that

                                                          1
there is no eye witness to the occurrence. There were

three dying declarations at variance with each other.

Conviction         has   been   erroneously        based    on    the    third

dying     declaration       merely      because      it     was     made    in

presence of the Special Judicial Magistrate. Reliance

in support of the submission was placed on State of

Rajasthan v. Shravan Ram & Another, AIR 2013 SC 1890.

In the alternative it was submitted that the deceased

may have died on account of accidental burns while

cooking       or    brewing     tea.     The      appellant        may     have

assaulted her under some grave provocation with regard

to some occurrence inside the house to which no one

else    may    have      been   privy.      The    appellant       had     also

suffered       burn      injuries      on    his     left        hand    while

attempting to save the deceased. The deceased was taken

to the hospital by the appellant which is further proof

of his innocence. The conviction under Section 302 IPC

therefore deserves to be altered to one under Section

304-II IPC, if not acquittal.


3.     Learned counsel for the State opposing the appeal



                                                                              2
submitted     that    the    third    dying        declaration    stands

proved by PW-7 the Special Judicial Magistrate, who had

recorded the same. PW-8, the Doctor who certified the

condition of the deceased at the relevant point of time

had    also   been    examined.      There    was     no   evidence    in

support of the submission that the deceased had died

either in an accidental fire or that the appellant may

have assaulted her under grave and sudden provocation.


4.     Having heard the learned counsel for the parties,

we find that the conviction cannot be said to have been

based exclusively on the dying declaration made before

PW-7. Though there is no eye witness to the occurrence,

there    is   sufficient     circumstantial         evidence     to   hold

that    the   appellant     alone    was     the    assailant    of   the

deceased.


5.     PW-1 Vijay and PW-9, both sons of the deceased have

consistently deposed that the appellant was addicted to

consuming liquor and in an inebriated condition, he

would often assault the deceased. On the date of the

occurrence,     the    two    witnesses       were     asked     by   the


                                                                         3
appellant to go out of the room. The appellant closeted

himself with the deceased. Thereafter, the witnesses

heard shouts for help and when the door was opened they

saw    their    mother          with   burn    injuries.     The    spot    map

Exh.19 concluded that there was no evidence of any

firewood or fire in the kitchen for brewing tea or

cooking food. The High Court has appropriately observed

that    if     it    was    a    case    of    accidental     fire    in    the

kitchen, the burn injuries would primarily have been on

front    portion       of       the    body.   The   post-mortem       report

Exh.21       noticed       the    following     burn   injuries       on    the

deceased:

             Head face neck                            9%

             Back                                      18%

             Back Upper Limbs                          18%

             Both Lower Limbs                          34%

             Anterior Chest upto
             Umbilicus Deep Burns                      11%




6.     There    is     absolutely        no    material      on    record    to

suggest any assault under grave and sudden provocation.

                                                                              4
The     conduct     of     the    appellant        in         absconding     for

approximately        three       months    from        the     date   of    the

occurrence,        till    he     was     taken        into     custody,     was

contrary to normal human behavior and belies his claim

to innocence. It is not possible to accept the plea of

any burn injuries on his hands three months later. The

deceased died a homicidal death inside the matrimonial

home.     In   the        circumstances        noticed          hereinbefore,

undoubtedly        the    appellant     owed      an    explanation        under

Section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872 with regard to

how the deceased had met a homicidal death inside the

house. He failed to discharge the onus completely. The

aforesaid, in our opinion, are sufficient to uphold the

conviction of the appellant.


7.    Since an argument has been made with regard to

three inconsistent dying declarations, we consider it

only proper to deal with them also. The first dying

declaration, Exh.10 was recorded by a police officer at

the hospital. It speaks of an accidental fire. Though

it    bears    a    seal    of    a     medical        officer     below     the

certification of fitness, it is not signed by anyone.

                                                                               5
Except      for    the    policeman     who   recorded    the   same      no

doctor has been examined in support of the same. The

second      dying       declaration   stated    to    have    been     made

orally before her relatives Pw’s- 2,3 and 6 blamed the

appellant         for    having   set    her    on    fire,     with      an

additional statement of a dowry demand. The third dying

declaration Exh.27 also blamed the appellant for having

set the deceased on fire. It was recorded by PW-7, a

Special Judicial Magistrate who proved the same. PW-8,

the Doctor who certified the fitness and was present

during the same has also testified. We consider the

dying declaration, in the facts and circumstances of

the    case,        a     corroborative       material.      The     dying

declaration recorded by PW7 and proved by him certainly

commends to us for acceptance.


8.    The    first        dying   declaration        is   not      only    a

suspicious document, but it is also considered a self-

serving statement by the appellant, attributed to the

deceased for saving himself. If the statement had been

recorded in the hospital there is no reason why the


                                                                           6
doctor in whose presence it may have been recorded, not

to have initialed it and deposed in support of the

same.   The 2nd dying declaration is oral in nature made

before the relatives of the deceased, which may be

considered self-serving. In any event the appellant has

been acquitted of the charge under Section 498A. The

third dying declaration has been duly proved by PW-7

and PW-8. We see no reason why it cannot be relied upon

as the truth.

9. In Harjit Kaur v. State of Punjab (1999) 6 SCC 545,

the deceased was stated to have made two inconsistent

dying declarations. The first declaration before the

police spoke of an accidental fire while the second

made before the sub-divisional magistrate blamed the

accused for setting the deceased on fire. Rejecting the

contention   for   acceptance   of   the    first   dying

declaration, it was observed as follows :


         “7. It was then contended by the learned
         counsel that this dying declaration
         should not be accepted as true because
         in her first dying declaration made to
         the   police   officer   on   30-4-1992,
         Parminder Kaur had stated that she had


                                                        7
        received burns as a result of an
        accident and that no one else was
        responsible for the same. Both the
        courts below after considering this
        inconsistency have thought it fit to
        rely upon the second dying declaration.
        It has been rightly held as an attempt
        on her part to save her husband and the
        in-laws.    The    circumstance    clearly
        indicates that she was not a free person
        then. The reasons given by the trial
        court and the High Court for not
        considering the first dying declaration
        as   voluntary    and   true   are   quite
        convincing and we see no reason to
        differ from them. Therefore, the second
        dying declaration cannot be regarded as
        untrue merely because it is contrary to
        her statement made earlier. What she has
        stated in the second dying declaration
        appears   to    be   more   probable   and
        natural….”



10. In Shravan Ram (supra) relied upon by the learned

counsel for the appellant the dying declaration stated

to have been recorded by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate

was neither exhibited nor the Sub-Divisional Magistrate

was examined.


11. The conviction of the appellant therefore calls for

no interference. The appeal is dismissed.




                                                      8
12. We are informed that the appellant has completed

approximately 15 years of custody.            If that be so, let

a copy of this order be forwarded to the Maharashtra

State   Legal   Services   Authority        so      that         necessary

assistance is made available to the appellant through

the concerned District Legal Services Authority with

regard to the consideration for remission in accordance

with law, if the appellant, so desires.




                               ...................................................J.
                                                         (NAVIN SINHA)




                               ...................................................J.
                                                         (K.M. JOSEPH)


New Delhi;
September 19, 2018




                                                                                  9

