
Supreme Court of India
Geeta vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 3 December, 2018Author: J Abhay Sapre
                                                                      REPORTABLE

                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1544  OF 2018
                          (Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No. 9651 of 2018)

                         Geeta & Ors.                                  ….Appellant(s)



                                                VERSUS



                         State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.               ….Respondent(s)   
                                           J U D G M E N T




                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.

                         1.   Leave granted.

                         2.   This appeal is filed against the final judgment

                         and   order   dated   05.09.2018   passed   by   the   High
Signature Not Verified



                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad in an Application
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.12.03
17:00:20 IST
Reason:


                                                                                        1
filed   under   Section   482   of   the   Code   of   Criminal

Procedure,   1973   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “the

Code”)   bearing   No.29904   of   2018   whereby   the

Single   Judge   of   the   High   Court   dismissed   the

application filed by the appellants herein.

3.    Few facts need mention infra to appreciate the

short controversy involved in this appeal.

4.    By   impugned   order,   the   Single   Judge   of   the

High  Court  dismissed the appellants’ petition filed

under   Section   482   of   the   Code   wherein   the

challenge was to quash the order dated 18.06.2018

as   well   as   the   entire   proceedings   in   in   Complaint

Case   No.   537/2018   under   Section   498­A   of     the

Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as

“IPC”) Police Station Dhanuara, Dist. Amroha, J.P.

Nagar   pending   in  the Court  of 2nd  Additional  Civil




                                                                    2
Judge   (Junior   Division)   Judicial   Magistrate,

Amroha, JP Nagar. 

5.    The   short   question,   which   arises   for

consideration   in   this   appeal,   is   whether   the   High

Court   was   justified   in   dismissing   the   appellants’

application filed under Section 482 of  the Code. 

6.    Heard   Mr.   Pradeep   Kumar   Yadav,   learned

counsel for the appellants.   None appeared for the

respondents.

7.    Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

appellants and on perusal of the record of the case,

we are inclined to set aside the impugned order and

remand the case to the High Court for deciding the

appellants’   application,   out   of   which   this   appeal

arises, afresh on merits in accordance with law after

notice to other side.


                                                                  3
8.    On perusal of the impugned order, we find that

the   Single   Judge   has   only   quoted   the   principle   of

law   laid   down   by   this   Court   in   several   decisions

relating to powers of the High Court on the issue of

interference in cases filed under Section 482 of the

Code  from  Para  2 to the concluding  para but has

failed to even refer to the facts of the case at hand

much   less   in   detail   to   appreciate   the   factual

controversy. 

9.    In   other   words,   the   Single   Judge   has   not

mentioned the bare facts of the case with a view to

appreciate the factual controversy, such as, what is

the   nature   of   the   complaint/FIR   filed   against   the

appellants, the allegations on which it is filed, the

offences   under   which   appellants   prosecution   is

sought,    who filed the complaint/FIR/proceedings,




                                                                    4
whether  it  pertains to a cognizable offence or not,

the   grounds   on   which   the   complaint/FIR/

proceedings   is   challenged,   why   such   grounds   are

not made out under Section 482 of the Code etc. 

10.   We are, therefore, at a loss to know the factual

matrix of the case much less to appreciate except to

read the legal principles laid down by this Court in

several decisions. 

11.   In our view, the learned Judge ought to have

first set out the brief facts of the case with a view to

understand  the   factual  matrix  and then  examined

the challenge made to the proceedings in the light of

the   principles   of   law   laid   down   by   this   Court   to

enable   him   to   record   the   findings   as   to   on   what

basis   and   the   reasoning, these principles apply  to




                                                                     5
the facts of the case at hand so as to either call for

any interference therein or not. 

12.   Indeed, this is the least that is required in the

order   in   support   of   the   conclusion.   It   enables   the

Higher   Court   to   appreciate   the   facts   in   its   proper

perspective and also enable to examine the question

as to whether the reasoning given is factually and

legally sustainable. 

13.   We find that the aforementioned exercise was

not   done   by   the   High   Court   while   passing   the

impugned order. 

14.    We, therefore, find ourselves unable to concur

with the  High Court and feel inclined to set aside

the   impugned   order   and   remand   the   case   to   the

High Court (Single Judge) with a request to decide

the application afresh on merits in accordance with




                                                                     6
law   keeping   in   view   aforementioned   observations

after issuing notice to respondent Nos. 1 and 2.

15.     Having formed an opinion to remand the case

in the light of our reasoning mentioned above, we do

not consider it proper to go into the merits of the

case.

16.     In view of the foregoing discussion, the appeal

succeeds   and   is   accordingly   allowed.   Impugned

order is set aside. The case is remanded to the High

Court for its decision on merits uninfluenced by any

of our observations in this order.



                               ………...................................J.
                                 [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                                   …...……..................................J.
                                               [INDU MALHOTRA]
New Delhi;
December 03, 2018 




                                                                                7

