
Supreme Court of India
Dilshad @ Billi vs State(Nct Of Delhi) on 17 September, 2009Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, J.M. Panchal
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 192 OF 2008




          DILSHAD @ BILLI                       .....             APPELLANT

                                    VERSUS

      STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                     .....              RESPONDENT


                                  WITH
                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 193 of 2008



                                 O R D E R

      We     have    heard    the   learned    counsel      for   the

parties at length.


      The primary point urged by the learned counsel

for the appellant is that on the facts of the case the

common intention on the part of the accused could not

be discerned and only Deen Mohammad who is said to have

fired the fatal shot could have been sentenced for the

murder.    The   learned     counsel   has   also   cited    several

judgments in support of her case.


      Undoubtedly, there are certain observations in
the    cited   judgments     which    prima   facie   support the




argument raised by the learned counsel            but it must be

observed that in determining a case of common intention

inter se several accused, the facts of the case have to

be given primary importance.           In other words, no hard

and fast rule can be laid down as a legal proposition

with    respect   to   the   common   intention   which   may   be

shared between the accused.


        In the present matter, we find that Din Mohammad

alone was armed with a pistol, Dilshad-appellant was

armed with an iron rod and that           during the course of

the robbery all the accused had tried to restrain P.W.

2 - Rekha Vij, the wife of the deceased from attempting

to save her husband and had subsequently removed her

forcibly as she lay on top of him and he had then been

shot on the chest.       It has also     come in evidence that

in that process the appellants had also given her a

beating and also hit her with a cricket wicket on her

hand.    The learned counsel has, however, contended that

as there was no medical evidence to show any injury on

her person the story given by P.W. 2 with regard to the

beating that she had received could not be believed. We
note that it is not her case that she had been given a

beating that had caused any visible injury to her as

she had deposed that she had been beaten up and then

removed from atop her husband when she was trying to

save him.   To our mind, therefore, the common intention

is writ large on the peculiar facts of this case.

      The appeals are thus dismissed.


                                      ..................J
                                      [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                      ..................J
                                      [J.M. PANCHAL]

NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 17, 2009.

