
Supreme Court of India
Ram Ratan vs State Of Rajasthan on 8 October, 2010Author: A Alam
Bench: Aftab Alam, R.M. Lodha
                                                                                        NON-REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1965 OF 2010

              (Arising out of S.L.P. (Criminal) No.5386 of 2010)


Ram Ratan                                                                                ....Appellant


                                               Versus


State of Rajasthan                                                                            ....Respondent




                                        JUDGMENT

AFTAB ALAM, J. 

1.     Heard counsel for the parties.

2.     Leave granted.

3.     This appeal is directed against the judgment and order, dated August 


27, 2009 passed by a learned single judge of the Rajasthan High Court in the 


appellant's   appeal   (Criminal   Appeal   No.1139  of  2006)   from  the   judgment 


and order of conviction and sentence passed against him by the trial court. 

4.     The Special Court, Kota, specified under the Scheduled Castes and the 


Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, by its judgment and 


order dated October 16, 2006 in Sessions Case no.89 of 2006, convicted the 


appellant under sections 307, 326 and 324 of the Penal Code and sentenced 


                                                                                            2




him to rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and a fine of Rs.500 (in default 1 


month's simple imprisonment) under section 307, imprisonment for 5 years 


and   a   fine   of   Rs.500   (in   default   1   month's   simple   imprisonment)   under 


section 326 and imprisonment for one year under section 324 of the Penal 


Code.  All the sentences were to run concurrently. 

5.     The High Court disposed of the appeal by a brief order that runs into 


no more than four pages and a few lines in the paper book. On the first half 


page   the   High   Court   stated   the   sections   under   which   the   appellant   was 


convicted   and   the   sentences   awarded   to   him   for   the   respective   offences. 

Next, it very briefly stated about the prosecution case and the charge sheet 


submitted   by   the   police.   It   then,   restated   the   sections   under   which   the 


appellant   was   convicted   and   the   respective   sentences   given   to   him   under 


those sections by the trial court. In the next paragraph, it vaguely stated the 


submissions   made   by   the   counsel   for   the   appellant   and   in   the   two   lines 


thereafter, the submissions made by the public prosecutor. Then comes the 


consideration of the matter by the court, which is as under all of six lines:

       "I,   after  hearing   the  arguments  of  Learned   Advocates   of  both 

       the sides and perusing the facts and circumstances of this case, 

       while  confirming the   order   of conviction   of the  appellant  and 

       while keeping in the view the facts that this is his first offence 

       and that he is not habitual offender, I think it justified to order 6 

       years'   rigorous   imprisonment   in   place   of   7   years'   rigorous 

       imprisonment   while   maintaining   rest   of   the   judgment   as   it 

       was."


                                                                                                3
6.      After the above, the judgment concludes with the direction to the jail 


officials that the appellant should be given the benefit of section 432 of the 


Code keeping in view his conduct in the jail.

7.      We   feel   sorry   in   reminding   the   High   Court   that   an   appeal   under 


section 374 of the Criminal Procedure Code is both on facts and law, and the 


High Court hearing the appeal is the last court of facts. To put it mildly, the 


High Court was rather cavalier in disposing of the appellant's appeal in the 


manner as seen above. 

8.      We may note here that even though no appeal against the High Court 


judgment is preferred by the State, Mr. Irshad Ahmad, counsel appearing for 


the State of Rajasthan was equally critical of the way the High Court did not 


take into account the material evidences against the appellant. 

9.      For the aforesaid reasons, we are constrained to interfere in the matter. 

The order of the High Court is set aside and the appellant's appeal before the 


High Court (single judge Criminal Appeal no.1139 of 2006) is restored to its 


file for a fresh hearing and decision in accordance with law. 

10.     It   is   hoped   and   expected   that   the   High   Court   will   finally   hear   and 


dispose of the appeal without any undue delay and preferably by the end of 


this year. In case for any reason, the appeal is not disposed of by the end of 


                                                                                   4




the year, it will be open to the appellant to make a prayer for bail before the 


High Court. 

11.     In the result the appeal is allowed but with no order as to costs.

                                                ...................................J

                                                (AFTAB ALAM) 





                                                ....................................J

                                                (R.M. LODHA)                   




New Delhi,

October  8, 2010



