
Supreme Court of India
Budhadev Karmaskar vs State Of West Bengal on 15 September, 2011Author: ...........................J.
Bench: Markandey Katju, Gyan Sudha Misra
                                                                       REPORTABLE
                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 135 OF 2010

BUDHADEV KARMASKAR                            Appellant (s)

                             VERSUS

STATE OF WEST BENGAL                          Respondent(s)
                            O  R  D  E  R

           Heard learned Amicus Curiae and learned counsel 

for the parties.

           This  case  was  initially  a  criminal  appeal,  but 

later     was   converted   into   a   Public   Interest   Litigation 

suo motu  by our order dated 14th  February, 2011. By that 

order   we   dismissed   the   criminal   appeal   of   the   appellant 

and upheld his conviction. However, we were of the opinion 

that the problems of sex workers required urgent attention 

by this Court. Hence, we proceeded thereafter to continue 

with the case as a Public Interest Litigation and passed 

several   orders   thereon,   including   an   order   dated 

19.07.2011   setting   up   a   Panel   with   Mr.   Pradip   Ghosh, 

Senior Advocate, as its Chairman.

           Today, the case has been listed again before us 

and a Third Interim Report dated 12.09.2011 of the Panel 

appointed   by   our   order   dated   19.07.2011   has   been   filed 

before us by the Chairman of the Panel Mr. Pradip Ghosh, 

learned senior counsel.

                                   :1:
           From   a   perusal   of   the   report   submitted   by   the 


Panel report it appears that the Panel has been doing very 

good and sincere work in connection with the task which we 

have entrusted to it.  The Panel has taken great pains and 

has   held   regular   meetings   to   discuss   the   problem   of   sex 

workers.

            We have earlier pointed out in one of our orders 

that the problem of sex workers cannot be resolved in a 

very   short   time   and   will   require   long,   patient   effort. 

Our     initial   aim   was   to   create   awareness   in   the   public 

that sex workers are not bad girls, but they are in this 

profession   due   to   poverty.     No   girl   would   ordinarily 

enjoy   this   kind   of   work,   but   she   is   compelled   to   do   it 

for   sheer   survival.   Most   sex   workers   come   from   poor 

families,   they   are   subjected   to   ill   treatment   by   the 

owners of the brothels, they are often beaten, not given 

proper   food   or   medical   treatment,   and   made   to   do   this 

degrading work.  Probably much of the money paid by their 

customers is taken away by others.

            We   are   happy   to   note   that   the   Panel   has   set 

about its task in right earnest, and is considering ways 

and means to implement our ideas so that the sex workers 

can  get  some  technical  training  through    which  they  can 

earn   their   livelihood   and   thus   lead   a   life   of   dignity 

which is guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of 

India.

                                      :2:
          In the Third Interim Report the Panel has prayed 

for the following :-

    (a)     An   appropriate   order   directing   the   State 
    Governments   and   the   Local   Authorities   to   issue 
    Ration Cards to the sex workers treating them as 
    persons   in   special   category   and   relaxing   the 
    rigours   of   the   Rules/requirements   regarding   the 
    verification   of   their   address   and   without 
    mentioning their profession in the Card;

    (b)   An   appropriate   order   be   made   directing   the 
    Central Government and the Election Commission to 
    issue Voter's Identity Cards to the sex workers in 
    relaxation   of   the   rules/requirements   in   that 
    behalf   and   without   insisting   on   strict   proof   of 
    their   address/profession   and   without   specifying 
    their profession on the face of the Card;

    (c.)   An   order   be   made   directing   the   Central 
    Government   and   the   State   Governments   to   ensure 
    that the admission of the children of sex workers 
    in   appropriate   classes   in   the   Government   schools 
    and   Government   sponsored   schools   and   the   schools 
    run   by   the   Municipal   and   District   level 
    authorities is not hampered in any way, because of 
    their impaired social status.

    (d)   An   appropriate   order   be   made   directing   the 
    Central Government to suitably alter and widen the 
    UJWALA   Scheme   within   a   period   of   six   months   as 
    directed by order dated 24.08.2011 (vide paragraph 
    26 of the said order) made in this matter.

    (e)   An   order   or   direction   be   made   to   the   effect 
    that the amount paid or to be paid by the Central 
    Government,   State   Governments   and   the   Union 
    Territories   to   the   Secretary   General   of   this 
    Hon'ble   Court   as   directed   by   order   dated 
    24.08.2011,   be   deposited   in   the   Bank   Account   of 
    the Panel in the UCO Bank Supreme Court Compound 
    Branch, in the name of "Panel Appointed by Supreme 
    Court   in   Criminal   Appeal   No.   135/2011"     to   be 
    operated   jointly   by   the   Chairman   of   the   Panel 
    Mr. Pradip Ghosh and Mr. Jayant Bhusan, a member 
    of   the   Panel,   in   terms   of   the   order   dated 
    24.08.2011.

                                   :3:
    (f)  Such appropriate orders as may be deemed fit 
    and proper be made, for compliance by the Central 


      Government   of   the   earlier   order   made   by   the 
      Hon'ble Court on 24.08.2011 with regard to office 
      accommodation,  secretarial  staff  assistance and
      furnishing          the         office         with         necessary 
      infrastructure and to furnish report of compliance 
      in this Hon'ble Court within a period to be fixed 
      by the Hon'ble Court."

            We   are   of   the   opinion   that   the   suggestions   of 

the   Panel   are   good   suggestions.   Sex   workers   face   great 

difficulty   in   getting   ration   cards,   voter's   identity 

cards   or   in   opening   bank   accounts,   etc.     We   are   of   the 

opinion   that   the   authorities   should   see   to   it   that   sex 

workers   do  not   face  these   difficulties  as   they  are   also 

citizens of India and have the same fundamental rights as 

others.
            We,   therefore,   recommend   that   the   suggestions 

made by the Panel in its Third Interim Report (which has 

been   quoted   above)   shall   be   seriously   taken   into 

consideration   by   the   Central   Government,   the   State 

Governments   and   other   authorities   and   hence   all   efforts 

shall   be   made   to   implement   these   suggestions 

expeditiously. If there is any difficulty in implementing 

them, then on the next date we should be told about such 

difficulty.

            Needless   to   say,   without   a   proper   office   and 

infrastructure   the   Panel   will   not   be   able   to   discharge 

its   duties  properly.     We,     therefore,   again  request   the

                                        :4:


Central  Government  and  the  State  Government  of  Delhi  to 

do the needful in this connection expeditiously.

             We are informed that in pursuance of our order 

dated   24.08.2011   the   Central   Government   has   deposited   a 

sum of           Rs. 10 Lakh with the Secretary General 

of this Court.  Some of the States/Union Territories have 

made   payment   as   directed   by   us.   However,   some   of   the 

States/Union   Territories   are   yet   to   make   payment.     We 

direct that those States or Union Territories which have 

not   yet   made   payment   shall   make   payment   within   three 

weeks   from   today   (except   those   which   have   no   sex 

workers).

             We   further   direct   that   the   amount   deposited 

with   the   Secretary   General   of   this   Court   shall   be 

transferred to the account of the Panel in the UCO Bank, 

Supreme   Court   Compound   Branch   in   Savings   A/C   No. 

02070210000939.

             List   this   case   on   15.11.2011   by   which   time 

another report shall be submitted by the Panel.  We hope 

and trust that the recommendations made by the Panel will 

be implemented by then by the concerned authorities.





                                    ...........................J.
                              (MARKANDEY KATJU)




NEW DELHI;                    ..........................J.
SEPTEMBER 15, 2011            (GYAN SUDHA MISRA)





