
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Dr. Budhikota Subharao on 16 March, 1993Equivalent citations: 1993 SCR  (2) 329, 1993 SCC  (2) 567
Author: R Sahai
Bench: Sahai, R.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DR. BUDHIKOTA SUBHARAO

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/03/1993

BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
PANDIAN, S.R. (J)

CITATION:
 1993 SCR  (2) 329	  1993 SCC  (2) 567
 JT 1993 (3)   389	  1993 SCALE  (2)44


ACT:
Code of Criminal Procedure 1973:
Section 482.  Court proceedings--Mala fides--May be legal or
factual--Procuring	   order	on	   incorrect
facts--Reprehensible--Practice and procedure.
High Court--Judge may have unchallenged and unfettered power
to   direct  office  to	 list  case   before   him--Judicial
discipline restricts excercise of this power.
Judgments--Structures  of 'sharp practices'  suppression  of
facts, obtaining orders by playing fraud--Use of.



HEADNOTE:
The  respondent,  an ex-Naval Officer and  Computer  Science
Graduate  was accused of leaking Atomic	 Energy	 Secrets-and
violating the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.  He
riled  an application for quashing the charge  sheet  framed
under  the Official Secrets Act, 1923 and the Atomic  Energy
Act,  1962  and	 for  release of  his  passport	 before	 the
Division  Bench of the High Court which passed an  order  on
13.2.1991  that it may be presented before the trial  Judge.
On  the	 very next day the Additional Sessions	Judge  after
hearing the parties directed that the passport and  identity
card  of  the respondent be returned, and he  permitted	 the
respondent  to	leave  India and travel abroad	as  per	 his
itinerary  during the period from 17.2.1991 to 22.2.1991  on
executing a personal bond of Rs.50,000.
The appellant  State was disturbed by this order as  serious
charges	 had  been levelled against the respondent  who	 had
been arrested, earlier, just when he was about to leave	 the
country and board the plane, for leakage of official secrets
and  whose  bail  had even, been cancelled  by	this  Court;
appeared to be in danger of leaving the country again.
Since the order was passed on 14.2.91 and the respondent was
to fly
301
on 17.2.91 and 16.2.91 was a Saturday, the State  Challenged
the  correctness  of  the order	 passed	 by  the  Additional
Sessions  Judge by way of a writ petition under Article	 227
of  the	 Constitution  read with  section  482	of  Criminal
Procedure  Code and a Single Judge, who under the rules	 was
entitled  to bear such a petition, passed an ex-parte  order
on  15.2.91 staying that part of the order  which  permitted
the  respondent	 to  leave  the	 country  and  directed	 the
application to be listed for further orders on 18.2.91.
The  Respondent	 on  coming to know of this  order,  in	 the
evening,  approached  the Division Bench of the	 High  Court
where  the-main	 petition was pending  on  16.2.1991,  which
after making an observation that the Public prosecutor ought
to have brought it to the notice of the Sin& Judge that	 the
main  matter was pending before the Division Bench  and	 the
trial  Judge  had  passed  the order  in  pursuance  of	 the
direction  issued by the Division Bench, directed  that	 the
matter,	 being urgent, it should be placed before  the	same
single Judge.
Consequent thereto the parties appeared before the Judge  on
16.2.1991  who	after  hearing them  confirmed	the  interim
order.
When  the  revision  petition filed by	the  State  directed
against	 the  order acquitting the respondent  accused,	 was
taken  up  for hearing and observations	 were  made,  during
course	of judgment dictated in open court from 5th to	12th
October,  1991 against the public prosecutor and the  State,
the  respondent	 appears  to have made	a  mention  on	10th
October	 that the writ petition filed by the  State  against
the  order  of the trial judge releasing  his  passport	 and
permitting him to travel abroad may be summoned and disposed
of.  This request was accepted and on direction of the Judge
the  office listed the case before him on 11th October,	 and
when  the  petition was taken up, on 11th October,  and	 the
public	prosecutor  was asked if she had  any  objection  to
hearing it was stated by her that it did not survive.
The Judge after completion of judgment in criminal  revision
on  12th  October, took up the writ  petition.	 The  Single
Judge  passed the order which is the subject matter  of	 the
appeal	and directed the payment of  Rs.25,000	compensation
for consultancy loss, suffered by the respondent due to	 the
ex-parte  order obtained by the State against the  order  of
the trial judge permitting the respondent to go abroad.
302
The State appealed to this Court questioning the validity of
the order of the Single Judge dated 28.10.91.
Allowing the State's appeal and the intervention application
of  the Public prosecutor and setting aside the order  dated
28.10.91 passed in the Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition and
dismissing the same as infurctuous this Court.
HELD : 1. Disclosing correct facts and then obtaining  order
in  favour  is not same as procuring an order  on  incorrect
facts.	 Former is legitimate being part of advocacy  latter
is reprehensible and against profession. [307D]
2.  Mala  fides violating the proceedings may  be  legal  of
factual.   Former arises as a matter of law where  a  public
functionary acts deliberately in defiance of law without any
malicious intention or improper motive whereas the latter is
actuated  by extraneous considerations.	 But neither can  be
assumed	 or readily inferred.  It requires  strong  evidence
and unimpeachable proof. [308C]
In the instant case, neither the order passed by the  Single
Judge  granting ex-parte order of stay	preventing  opposite
party  from going abroad was against provisions of  law	 nor
was the State guilty of acting mala fides in approaching the
Single	Judge  by way or writ petition.	 The  order  of	 the
trial  Judge  could not be challenged  before  the  Division
Bench, under the rules of the court, the correctness of, the
order  could be assailed only in the manner it was  done  by
the State. [308D]
3. Any party aggrieved by an order is entitled to  challenge
it in a court of law.  Such action is neither express malice
nor malice in law. [308E]
4.  Sharp practice is not a court language.  It is sorry  to
say so.	 Facts did not justify it.  Legal propriety does not
countenance  use of such expressions favourably.  The  Judge
in the instant case, used very harsh language without  there
being any occasion for it. [309C]
5. A State counsel with all the aura of office suffers	dual
handicap  of  being  looked upon by the other  side  as	 the
necessary devil and the courts too at times, rind it  easier
to  frown  upon him.  The moral responsibility	of  a  state
counsel,  to place the facts correctly, honestly and  fairly
before	the court, having access to State  records,  coupled
with his duty to
303
secure	an  order in favour of his client  requires  him  to
discharge  his duty responsibly and sensibly.  Even so if  a
State  lawyer  who owes a special duty and  is	charge	with
higher	standard of conduct in his zeal or due to  pressure,
not uncommon in the present day, adopts a partisan  approach
that  by  itself is not sufficient to warrant a	 finding  of
unfairness or resorting to sharp practice. [309D-E]
6.The  public prosecutor may have exhibited more zeal.	 But
that could not be characterised as unfair.  May be it  would
have  been proper and probably better to inform	 the  Single
Judge about the earlier order passed by the Division  Bench.
But  assuming  the  public prosecutor  did  not	 inform	 and
remained  content  with its disclosure in the  body  of	 the
petition  she could not be held to have	 acted	dishonestly.
[309F]
7.A  Judge  of	the High Court	may  have  unchallenged	 and
unfettered power to direct the office to list a case  before
him.  But that by itself restricts the exercise of power and
calls  for strict judicial discipline.	If the Judge in	 the
instant	 case, would have avoided sending for  and  deciding
the petition, which as pointed out by the senior counsel for
the State had become infructuous, it would have been more in
keeping with judicial culture. [309H, 310A-B]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No.275  of
1993.
From  the Judgment and Order dated 14.10.1991 of the  Bombay
High Court in Crl.  W.P. No. 180 of 1991.
Altaf  Ahmed,  Addl.  Solicitor General,  B.R.	Handa,	Mrs.
Manjula
Rao,  S.M. Jadhav, A.S. Bhasme and A.M. Khanwilkar  for	 the
Appellant.
Dr.  B. Subha Rao Respondent-in-person.
V.M.  Tarkunde,	 A.M.  Khanwilkar and  A.K.  Panda  for	 the
Intervenor.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
R.M.SAHAI, J. Strictures of 'sharp practice', suppression of
facts,	obtaining  orders by playing fraud  upon  the  court
against	 State	by Mr.	Justice Saldanha   a of	 the  Bombay
High Court, while deciding Criminal
304
Miscellaneous Petition filed by the opposite party,  accused
of leaking official secrets and violating provisions of	 the
Atomic	 Energy	  Act,	1962  and  awarding   Rs.25,000	  as
compensation, for consultancy loss, suffered by him, due  to
ex-parte  order obtained by the State against order  of	 the
trial  Judge  permitting the opposite party  to	 go  abroad,
compelled the State to file this appeal and assail the order
not only for legal infirmities but factual inaccuracies.
Reasons to quote the teamed Judge which, 'compelled the con-
secience  of  court to pass' the impugned order	 were,	'the
unfortunate proceedings that bristled (s) with mala  fides'.
Basis  for  these  inferences was,  the	 conclusion  by	 the
learned	 Judge, that the State, deliberately,  procured	 the
interim order by another learned Judge by filing a  separate
writ  petition,	 when  it knew that the	 main  petition	 for
quashing of the proceedings was pending before the  division
bench  (Puranik	 & Saldanha, JJ.). The learned	Judge  felt,
strongly,  against the public prosecutor as she being  aware
of  the proceedings before the Division Bench failed in	 her
duty of apprising the learned Judge of correct facts.
Was this so?  Did the State procure the order by  concealing
facts?	 Was  the  public  prosecutor  guilty  of  violating
professional ethics or her duty as respondent officer of the
court?	What led to all this was an application filed by the
opposite  party, in the writ petition pending  for  quashing
the charge-sheet framed under [The Indian] Official  Secrets
Act,  1923 and the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, for	 release  of
his  passport  on  which the division  bench  of  which	 Mr.
Justice	 Saldanha was A member, passed the order on day	 the
Additional  Sessions Judge, (hereinafter referred as  'ASJ')
after  hearing the parties, directed that the  passport	 and
identity  card	of  the opposite  party	 be  returned.	 He,
further,  permitted  the opposite party to leave  India	 and
travel	abroad as per the itinerary during the	period	from
17.2.91	  to  22.2.91  on  executing  a	 personal  bond	  of
Rs.50,000. The State was, obviously, disturbed by this order
as  serious charges had been levelled against  the  opposite
party who had been arrested, earlier, just when he was about
to  leave  the country and board the plane, for	 leakage  of
official secrets and whose bail had, even, been cancelled by
this court, appeared to be in danger of leaving the  country
again.	 Since	the  order was passed  on  14.2.91  and	 the
opposite  party	 was  to  fly on  17.2.91  and	16.2.91	 was
Staturday the State challenged the correctness of the  order
passed by the
305
ASJ  by	 way  of a writ petition under Article	227  of	 the
Constitution  read  with Section 482 of	 Criminal  Procedure
Code and the learned Judge, who under the rules was entitled
to hear such a petition, passed an ex-parte order on 15.2.91
staying that part of the order which permitted the  opposite
party  to leave the country and directed the application  to
be  listed for further orders on 18.2.91. On coming to	know
of this order, in the evening, the opposite party approached
the  Division Bench where the main petition was	 pending  on
16th  February, which after making an observation  that	 the
public prosecutor ought to have brought it to the notice  of
the  learned single Judge that the main matter	was  pending
before the Division Bench and the trial Judge had passed the
order  in pursuance of the direction issued by the  Division
Bench,--directed that the matter, being urgent, it should be
placed	before the same learned single Judge.	Consequently
parties	 appeared before the learned Judge on 16th  February
who,  after hearing, confirmed the interim order  passed,  a
day earlier.
With confirmation of interim order the proceedings which had
commenced on the application filed by the opposite party  to
leave the country came to an end.  But the writ petition  in
which  the interim order was passed remained  pending.	 And
when  the revision filed by the State, directed against	 the
order  acquitting the accused, was taken up for	 hearing  by
Mr.  Justice  Saldanha, and observations  were	made  during
course	of judgment dictated in open court from 5th to	12th
October	 1991 against the public prosecutor and	 the  State,
the  opposite party appears to have made a mention  on	10th
October	 that the writ petition filed by the  State  against
the  order  of the trial Judge releasing  his  passport	 and
permitting him to travel abroad may be summoned and disposed
of.   The  request  was accepted and  on  direction  of	 the
learned Judge the office listed the case before him on	11th
October.   When the petition was taken up, on 11th  October,
and the public prosecutor was asked if she had any objection
to  hearing  it was stated by her that it did  not  survive.
But  the  learned  Judge after	completion  of	judgment  in
criminal revision on 12th October, appears to have, taken up
the writ petition.  It was pointed out by the learned senior
counsel for the State that since the criminal revision filed
by  the State against the order acquitting the	accused	 has
been dimissed, the writ petition had become infructuous	 and
orders may be passed accordingly.
Yet  the  learned  Judge passed the  impugned  order.	What
weighed	 with the learned Judge to infer mala fides  against
the State was that the
306
order  dated  14.2.91 having been passed in  open  court  in
presence  of the opposite party and counsel for	 the  State,
permitting  the	 opposite  party to  leave  the	 country  on
17.2.91,   the	opposite  party,  genuinely   expected	 the
according  to the learned Judge, rightly, that	any  further
application  which  the	 State	would  make  could  only  be
addressed  to  the  bench, namely, the bench  of  Puranik  &
Saldanha,  JJ.,	 before	 whom  the  petition  was   pending,
therefore,  the	 opposite  party,  justifiably,	 waited	 and
watched	  in  the  bench,  whole  day  for  moving  of	 any
application  but  the  State  instead  of  moving  any	such
application filed a fresh writ petition and obtained an	 ex-
parte order, the information of which was given to  opposite
party in the evening.  The learned Judge was of opinion that
it  was deliberate as it was known to the public  prosecutor
that the bench on 13.2.91 after scrutinising the papers	 was
of opinion that it was a genuine case in which the  passport
should	be  released  and  the	opposite  party	 should	  be
permitted  to travel abroad but due to paucity of  time	 the
bench  instead	of passing the order directed  the  opposite
party  to  approach  the trial	Judge.	 The  learned  Judge
further held that even though the public prosecutor and	 the
Inspector  of Police knew these facts and that the  opposite
party was to fly on 17.2.91 yet the notice was obtained from
the  learned Judge returnable on 18.2.91 by which  time	 the
delegation from Reliance Industries of which the accuse	 was
to  be	a member was to have left the  country.	  Since	 the
effect	of the interim order and the fixing of the  petition
on  18.2.91 nullified the opposite party's going  to  United
States	of  America,  the  court felt  that  the  order	 was
obtained not only unfairly, but that it constituted a  sharp
practice.  The motive of the public prosecutor and the State
was  further  attempted	 to be shown  to  be  dishonest	 and
motivated  as  the averments in the petition  on  which	 the
interim	 order was obtained were false to  their  knowledge.
The falsity found was that the State had deliberately  tried
to  mislead the court by alleging that the trial  was  fixed
for  hearing on 18.2.91 and the same had been  adjourned  to
24.2.91.  The court found that the learned single Judge	 was
misled in passing the order as was clear from ground  number
six  which was to the effect that the trial being fixed	 for
18.2.91	 the  trial Judge was not justified in	issuing	 the
orders in favour of opposite party.  The learned Judge	also
felt  aggrieved by the conduct of the public  prosecutor  in
not  informing the learned single Judge that the  main	writ
petition was already listed for hearing before the  division
bench  and  that the direction to the ASJ  to  consider	 the
application  for return of passport had been issued  by	 the
bench.	 The  learned single Judge was	not  satisfied	with
explanation  of the State that a petition under Article	 227
of the Constitution read with
307
Section	 482 of Criminal Procedure Code	 being	maintainable
before	the learned single Judge under the High Court  rules
it had no option but to proceed in accordance with law.	 The
learned	 single	 Judge pointed out that if the	State  would
have pointed out to the Registry the correct facts then	 the
case  could not have been listed before the  learned  single
Judge.
That  any party aggrieved by an order passed by a  Court  is
entitled to approach the higher court cannot be disputed nor
can it be disputed that a petition under Article 227 of	 the
Constitution read with Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure
Code  against the order of trial Judge was maintainable	 and
under  rules  of  the court it could be	 listed	 before	 the
learned single Judge only.  The State, therefore, in  filing
the petition against the order of the sessions Judge did not
commit	any  illegality or any impropriety.  A copy  of	 the
writ  petition,	 has  been annexed  to	this  special  leave
petition  which, does not show any disclosure  of  incorrect
facts or any attempt to mislead the court.  Even the learned
single	Judge did not find that the trial was not fixed	 for
18.2.91.  Disclosing correct facts and then obtaining  order
in  favour is not same as procurring an order  on  incorrect
facts.	 Former is legitimate being part of advocacy  latter
is  reprehensible and against profession.  But if the  State
persuaded  the	court  to stay the operation  of  the  order
passed by the trial Judge while mentioning the details about
the  pendency-of  the earlier petition before  the  division
bench  and  issuing of directions to the sessions  Judge  to
decide	the application for release of passport etc.  it  is
difficult to imagine how any inference of obtaining order on
incorrect  facts  could	 be  drawn.   During  arguments	 the
opposite party attempted to highlight averments in paragraph
six  of	 the writ petition to the effect that  the  Division
Bench  had dismissed the application of the  opposite  party
when no such order was passed.	The sentence, in fact, reads
as under:
The application was dismissed and directed the respondent to
move  trial  court and further directed the trial  court  to
consider the same in accordance with law.
True,  the application was not dismissed.  But the  sentence
had  to be read in its entirety.  No court could  be  misled
from the use of the word dismissed as the directions  issued
by the court were mentioned correctly.	The inference  drawn
by  court  and the finding recorded by it of  obtaining	 the
order by 'suppression of facts and making positively,  false
statements' is
308
factually  incorrect and legally unsound.  The grief of	 the
opposite  party	 in missing an opportunity of going  to	 the
United States and the grievance against functionaries of the
State,	namely, public prosecutor and prosecuting  Inspector
can  be appreciated.  We can, also, visualise the  vehemence
and eloquence of the opposite party, of which he is  capable
of,  as	 appeared from his submission when  he	appeared  in
person	in  this  court, but what has baffled  us  that	 the
learned	 Judge	was  persuaded	to  record  the	 finding  of
suppression of facts on such weak and insufficient material.
Mala-fides  violating  the  proceedings	 may  be  legal	  or
factual.   Former arises as a matter of law where  a  public
functionary acts deliberately in defiance of law without any
malicious intention or improper motive whereas the latter is
actuated  by extraneous considerations.	 But neither can  be
assumed	 or readily inferred.  It requires  strong  evidence
and  unimpeachable  proof Neither the order  passed  by	 the
learned	 single	 Judge	granting  ex-parte  order  of	stay
preventing  opposite  party from going	abroad	was  against
provisions  of law nor was the State guilty of	acting	mala
fides in approaching the learned single Judge by way of writ
petition.   The	 order	of  the trial  Judge  could  not  be
challenged  before the Devision Bench.	Under the  rules  of
the  court, the correctness of, the order could be  assailed
only  in  the manner it was done by the	 State.	  Any  party
aggrieved by an order is entitled to challenge it in a court
of law.	 Such action is neither express malice nor malice in
law.
The  opposite party was charged with very  serious  offence.
He was arrested when he was about to leave the country.	 The
State  was possessed of material that he had, even,  applied
for  matrimonial  alliance in response to  an  advertisement
issued	from  New  York.   The order  of  the  trial  Judge,
therefore,  permitting opposite party to leave	the  country
without trial must have created a flutter in the department.
It  was by all standard a sensational and a sensitive  case.
The public prosecutor and the prosecuting Inspector who were
entrusted  with	 responsibility to  prosecute  the  opposite
party  must have felt worked up by the order permitting	 the
opposite  party	 to leave the country.	Decision  must	have
been taken to prevent the opposite party by approaching	 the
High Court by way of a writ petition instead of	 approaching
the  Division Bench.  Assuming that the State took  recourse
to  this method, as it might have been apprehensive that  it
would  not get any order from the division bench, the  State
could  not be accused of mala-fides so long it proceeded  in
accordance with law.  Apart from that once it was
309
brought	 to the notice of the division bench that the  State
had  procured on ex-parte order from the learned  Judge	 who
was  requested	by the division bench to  treat	 the  matter
urgent	and  hear parties and the application was  heard  on
16th  February and the learned Judge refused to	 vacate	 the
interim order and confirmed it the entire basis of mala-fide
stood  demolised.   The learned Judge was not  justified  in
blaming the State for getting the notice returnable on	18th
February.   That  was order of the court.  In any  case	 the
opposite party having appeared on 16th yet the learned Judge
having	refused to modify his order it was too much to	hold
the State or public prosecutor responsible for it.
Sharp practice is not a court language.	 We are sorry to say
so.   Facts  did not justify it.  Legal propriety  does	 not
countenance use of such expression favourably.	The  learned
Judge,	to our discomfort, used very harsh language  without
there  being any occasion for it.  A State counsel with	 all
the  aura  of office suffers dual handicap of  being  looked
upon by the other side as the necessary devil and the courts
too  at times, find it easier to frown upon him.  The  moral
responsibility	of  a  State counsel,  to  place  the  facts
correctly,  honesty  and  fairly before	 the  court,  having
access to State records, coupled with his duty to secure  an
order it favour of his client requires him to discharge	 his
duty  responsibly and sensibly.	 Even so if a  State  lawyer
who owes a special duty and is charged with higher  standard
of  conduct in his zeal or due to pressure, not uncommon  in
the  present day, adopts a partisan approach that by  itself
is  not	 sufficient to warrant a finding of  unfairaness  or
resorting to sharp practice.  In this case too not more than
this appears to have happened.	May be the public prosecutor
may  have  exhibited  more  zeal.  But	that  could  not  be
characterised  as unfair.  May be it would have been  proper
and probably better to inform the learned single Judge about
the  earlier  order  passed  by	 the  division	bench.	 But
assuming  the public prosecutor did not inform and  remained
content with its disclosure in the body of the petition	 she
could not be held to have acted dishonestly.
We 'are constrained to observe our unhappiness on the manner
in  which  the	writ petition was summoned  by	Mr.  Justice
Saldanha  from	the office, heard and  decided.	  As  stated
earlier	 the writ petition was directed by the leaned  Judge
to  be listed before him, on a mention made by the  opposite
party  in  course  of  dictation  of  judgment	in  criminal
revision wherein he had made observations against the public
prosecutor.  A Judge
310
of the High Court may have unchallenged and unfettered power
to direct the office to list a case before him.	 But that by
itself restricts the exercise of power and calls for  strict
judicial  discipline.  We do not intend to make any  comment
but  we are of opinion that if the learned Judge would	have
avoided	 sending  for and deciding the	petition,  which  as
pointed out by the learned senior counsel for the State	 had
become infructuous, it would have been more in keeping	with
judicial culture.
For  reasons stated above by us this appeal succeeds and  is
allowed.    The	 order	dated  28-10-91	 passed	  in   civil
miscellaneous  writ petition is set aside.  It	shall  stand
dismissed  as  infructuous.   The  Intervention	 Application
No.943 of 1992 of the Public Prosecutor is allowed.  We make
it  clear that all the observations and remarks made by	 the
learned Judge against the State and Public Prosecutor  shall
stand expugned.
N.V.K.
			     Appeal allowed.
311
