
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P. Through C.B.I. ... vs R.K. Srivastava And Another on 11 August, 1989Equivalent citations: 1989 AIR 2222, 1989 SCR  (3) 834
Author: M Dutt
Bench: Dutt, M.M. (J)
           PETITIONER:
STATE OF U.P. THROUGH C.B.I. S.P.E. LUCKNOW

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
R.K. SRIVASTAVA AND ANOTHER.

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/08/1989

BENCH:
DUTT, M.M. (J)
BENCH:
DUTT, M.M. (J)
PANDIAN, S.R. (J)
THOMMEN, T.K. (J)

CITATION:
 1989 AIR 2222		  1989 SCR  (3) 834
 1989 SCC  (4)	59	  JT 1989 (3)	347
 1989 SCALE  (2)262
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1992 SC 604	 (107)
 D	    1992 SC1930	 (3,5)


ACT:
    Criminal	  Procedure	Code,	  1973:	     Section
154---F.l.R.--Allegations  contained  in FIR taken  on	face
value	and   accepted	in  entirety  do   not	  constitute
offence--Whether  criminal proceedings	could  be quashed.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 respondents, two employees of a  nationalised	Bank
and two account-holders, were charged with offences punisha-
ble under Sections 120B, 420, 468, 471 I.P.C. and 5(2)	read
with  Section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of  Corruption	Act,
1947. The F.I.R. alleged that the two Bank employees entered
into  a criminal conspiracy with the two account-holders  to
cheat  the  Bank  and, in pursuance  thereof  an  amount  of
Rs.54,600  was allowed to be withdrawn by the  account-hold-
ers,   who  had	 tendered  three  cheques   aggregating	  to
Rs.54,600,  on the basis of the false credit entries in	 the
books  of  accounts of the Bank, and  connected	 credit	 and
debit-vouchers	were also prepared. The case against one  of
the account-holders was later dropped.
    The	 High  Court quashed the  proceedings  only  against
Respondent No. 1 on the ground that the allegations made  in
the  F.I.R.  did not constitute any offence of	cheating  or
forgery.  Against  this decision, the State as well  as	 the
Bank filed appeals in this Court.
Quashing the proceedings against all the respondents,
    HELD:  1.  If the allegations made in the FIR  taken  at
their  face  value  and accepted in their  entirety  do	 not
constitute  an offence, the criminal proceedings  instituted
on the basis of such FIR should be quashed. [837C]
    In the instant case, the Respondent No. 1 and the  other
accused had accepted the three cheques in question and	sent
the  same for clearance after debiting the LOC account.	 The
cheques	 were  encashed and the money was  received  by	 the
Bank.  It may be that there was some delay in crediting	 the
LOC account or that the money against the three
835
cheques	 were credited in the accounts of the  account-hold-
ers,  but the allegations made either in the FIR or  in	 the
charge-sheet do not show that they had acted dishonestly, or
with deliberate intention to cause wrongful gain or wrongful
loss  to the Bank. When the amount was allowed to  be  with-
drawn  by the account-holders, necessary entries had  to  be
made in the accounts of the Bank and these entries cannot be
characterised as false. No document has been referred to  in
the FIR as the outcome of forgery. [837E-F, 838A]
    The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that the
allegations  made in the FIR did not constitute any  offence
of cheating or forgery and that as the criminal	 proceedings
had been started on the basis of a FIR which did not contain
any  definite  accusation  and it amounted to  an  abuse  of
process of the Court, they were liable to be quashed. [837G,
838B]
    Since  the allegations in the FIR are the  same  against
all  the accused persons, the entire proceedings as  against
all the accused persons should be quashed. Accordingly,	 the
entire criminal proceedings are quashed. [838C]



JUDGMENT:
    CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal	Appeal	Nos.
380 of 1989 and 323 of 1988.
    From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  28.1.1988  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in Crl. Misc. Appln. No. 995 of 1987.
    G.	Ramaswamy,  Additional Solicitor General,  Anil	 Dev
Singh, Miss A. Subhashini and R.P. Kapur for the Appellants.
    R.L.  Kohli,  Manoj	 Saxena and R.D.  Upadhyay  for	 the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    DUTT,  J. These two appeals by special leave,  one	pre-
ferred by the State of U .P. and the other by the State Bank
of India, are directed against the judgment of the Allahabad
High  Court whereby the High Court has quashed the  criminal
proceedings being Crime Case No. 40 of 1983 in the Court  of
Special Judge, Anti-Corruption, only as against the respond-
ent  R.K.  Srivastava. In quashing the	proceedings  in	 the
exercise of its jurisdiction under section 482 Cr. P.C., the
High Court took the view that allegations made in the  First
Information Report
836
(FIR) did not constitute any offence. In order to appreciate
the view of the High Court, it is necessary to refer to	 the
FIR which reads as follows:
	      "An  information has been received  that	Shri
	      P.C.  Saxena  and Shri  Ram  Kumar  Srivastava
	      while posted and functioning as Accountant and
	      Clerk-cum-Godown	Keeper in the State Bank  of
	      India, Agriculture Development Branch, Budaun,
	      respectively entered into a criminal conspira-
	      cy  with Shri Sarwant Singh and his wife	Smt.
	      Rajwant  Kaur,  Props. of M/s.  National	Mill
	      Store, Budaun, during the month of June,	1982
	      to cheat the State Bank of India, Budaun,	 and
	      in  pursuance of the said criminal  conspiracy
	      an.amount	 of Rs.54,600' was withdrawn on	 the
	      basis of false credit entry made in the  books
	      of  accounts of the Bank and connected  credit
	      and  debit  vouchers were	 also  prepared	 and
	      passed  by the accused employees of  the	Bank
	      and payment were made to the accused  persons,
	      namely,  Shri Sarwant Singh and  Smt.  Rajwant
	      Kaur who tendered cheque No. 348459 dated 2.5.
	      1982  for Rs.18,600 cheque No. 348482 for	 Rs.
	      19,200,  date 2.6. 1982 and cheque No.  502206
	      dated 2.6.82 for Rs. 16,800 = 54,600.
			The  above facts constitute  offence
	      punishable u/s 120-B, 420, 468,471 I.P.C.	 and
	      5(2) r/w 5(1)(d) of PC Act, 1947.
			A  regular case is therefore  regis-
	      tered  and its investigation is  entrusted  to
	      Shri  V.P. Arya, Inspector of this  establish-
	      ment."
According to the FIR, as against three cheques of the aggre-
gate  amount  of Rs.54,600, presumably	of  three  different
Banks,	a  credit  entry was made in the  accounts  of	M/s.
National Mill Stores Co., Budaun, and M/s. New Manufacturing
Co.,  Budaun, and their partners, Sardar Sarwant  Singh	 and
his  wife Smt. Rajwant Kaur, in the State Bank of India	 and
the  said  sum of Rs.54,600 was allowed to be  withdrawn  by
them by the respondent and the accused P.C. Saxena.
    The	 allegations in the FIR appear to be vague  and	 al-
though	it  is alleged that the respondent and	the  accused
P.C.  Saxena made false credit entries in the books  of	 ac-
counts	of the Bank and connected credit and debit  vouchers
were also prepared and passed by them, no
837
particulars of the same have been given. It appears from the
chargesheet  that the said Shri Sarwant Singh and  his	wife
Smt.  Rajwant  Kaur and their firms, namely,  M/s.  National
Mill  Stores  Co., Budaun, and M/s. New	 ManufaCturing	Co.,
Budaun,	 have current accounts in the State Bank  of  India,
Budaun. After the said three cheques amounting to  Rs.54,600
were  tendered, the respondent and the accused	P.C.  Saxena
sent  the  said cheques for clearance and allowed  the	said
Shri  Sarwant Singh and his wife Smt. Rajwant Kaur to  with-
draw the sum of Rs. 54,600 from their current account.
    It	is now a well settled principle of law that  if	 the
allegations  made in the FIR are taken at their	 face  value
and accepted in their entirety do not constitute an offence,
the criminal proceedings instituted on the basis of such FIR
should be quashed. In the instant case, on the basis of	 the
said  FIR the respondent and the said P.C. Saxena  and	Shri
Sarwant	 Singh were charged under sections 120-B,  420,	 468
and 471 I.P.C. and section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of
the  Prevention	 of Corruption Act, 1947. According  to	 the
appellant, as no prima facie case was made out against	Smt.
Rajwant	 Kaur,	wife  of Shri Sarwant Singh,  she  has	been
dropped from the array of the accused persons.
    The	 question is whether the facts disclosed in the	 FIR
constitute  the	 offences with which the accused  have	been
charged. It is manifestly clear from the allegations in	 the
FIR  that the respondent or the other accused had no  inten-
tion  whatsoever  to make any wrongful gain or to  make	 any
wrongful loss to the Bank. They had accepted the said  three
cheques amounting to Rs.54,600 and sent the same for  clear-
ance  after debiting the LOC account. The said cheques	have
been  encashed and the money was received by the State	Bank
of  India. It may be that there was some delay in  crediting
the LOC account or that the money against the three  cheques
were credited in the accounts of the said Shri Sarwant Singh
and his wife, but the allegations made either in the FIR  or
in the charge-sheet do not show that the respondent and	 the
said  P.C.  Saxena had acted dishonestly, that	is  to	say,
acted with a deliberate intention to cause wrongful gain  or
wrongful  loss. In our opinion, the High Court	has  rightly
held that the allegations made in the FIR do not  constitute
any offence of cheating, nor do they constitute any  offence
of  forgery.  It is true that it has been alleged  that	 the
said  sum of Rs.54,600 was withdrawn on the basis  of  false
credit entries made in the books of accounts of the Bank and
connected  credit and debit vouchers were also prepared	 and
passed	by  the respondent and the other accused.  When	 the
said sum of Rs.54,600
838
had  been allowed to be withdrawn by the said  Shri  Sarwant
Singh and his wife, necessary entries had to be made in	 the
books  of accounts, but it is not understandable  how  these
entries	 can be characterised as false entries. No  document
has been referred to in the FIR as the outcome of forgery.
    The	 High  Court has rightly held that as  the  criminal
proceedings have been started against the respondent on	 the
basis  of a FIR which does not contain any definite  accusa-
tion, it amounts to an abuse of process of the court and, as
such,  is liable to be quashed. We entirely agree  with	 the
view expressed by the High Court.
    The	 High  Court  has quashed the  proceedings  only  as
against the respondent No. 1, R.K. Srivastava. In our  opin-
ion,  when the allegations in the FIR are the  same  against
all  the accused persons, the entire proceedings as  against
all  the accused persons including the said P.C. Saxena	 and
the said Shri Satwant Singh should be quashed.
    Accordingly,  while we uphold the judgment of  the	High
Court, we quash the entire criminal proceedings being  Crime
Case No. 40 of 1983 also as against the accused P.C.  Saxena
and  Shri  Sarwant  Singh. The appeals are  disposed  of  as
above.
N.P.V.				     Appeals disposed of.
839




