
Supreme Court of India
Maniklal Jain & Ors vs State Of M.P on 14 July, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 1131 of 2010

                                            1





                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1131  OF 2010





         MANIKLAL JAIN & ORS.                    .....          APPELLANT

                                         VERSUS

         STATE OF M.P.                           .....          RESPONDENT





                                       O R D E R

       1.       Four   persons   in   all,   Sharad   Jain-the   husband   of 

       the deceased, his parents Maniklal Jain and Sheela Jain 

       and   his   sister   Paras   Jain   were   brought   to   trial   for 

       offences punishable under Sections 304B and 498A of the 

       IPC for having driven the deceased Jyoti to suicide. The 

       trial   court   on   a   consideration   of   the   evidence 

       particularly   of   P.Ws.   4   and   5   the   parents   of   the 

       deceased,   and   the   evidence   of   some   of   the   neighbours 

       including   P.W.   10   held   that   the   case   against   all   four 

       accused had been proved beyond doubt.   The trial court, 

       accordingly,   awarded   a   sentence   of   7   years   rigorous 

       imprisonment     under   Section   304B     but   no   separate 


Crl.A. No. 1131 of 2010

                                            2





       sentence   was   awarded   under   Section   498A.     The   trial 

       court   also   imposed   a   heavy   fine   on   the   accused.     The 

       accused thereupon filed an appeal in the High Court and 

       the   High   Court   vide   the   impugned   judgment   allowed   the 

       appeal   of   Paras   Jain   but   dismissed   the   appeal   of   the 

       other three.  The present appeal is, therefore, confined 

       only to Maniklal, Sheela Jain and Sharad Jain.




       2.       At the very outset Mr. Dubey, the learned Senior 

       Counsel for the appellants has pointed out that Maniklal 

       Jain and Sharad Jain had been released on the completion 

       of their sentence and as of now only Sheela Jain who had 

       undergone   about   one   year   and   eight   months   of   the 

       sentence   stood   confined   to   custody.                He   has, 

       accordingly, pleaded that in the light of the fact that 

       there was no clear evidence against Sheela Jain, she was 

       entitled  to  acquittal.    In  elaboration,  he  has  pointed 

       out that even P.W. 4 Narendra Kumar,  the father of the 

       deceased, who had lodged the complaint which had led to 

       the   investigation   and   the   prosecution   had   named   only 

       Maniklal   Jain   as   the   culprit   and   that   there   were   no 

       allegations at the initial stage against the other three 

       accused.   He has also pointed out that it appeared that 

       the   incident   had   been   precipitated   not   on   account   of 

       demands  for  dowry  but  because  the  deceased  appeared  to 


Crl.A. No. 1131 of 2010

                                            3





       have   been   sexually   harassed   by   Maniklal   Jain,   her 

       father-in-law, and that it had been so stated by P.W. 5 

       Chanda   Jain,   the   mother   of   the   deceased     who   candidly 

       admitted that she had been told by her daughter that she 

       had been subjected to harassment by her father in law.  




       3.       Ms. Vibha  Datta Makhija,  the learned  counsel for 

       the State of Madhya Pradesh has, however, supported the 

       judgments of the courts below and has pointed out that 

       serious allegations with regard to demands for dowry had 

       been made from the parents of the deceased and from her 

       as well and a young girl, who had been married for only 

       about   nine   months,   had,   in   frustration,   committed 

       suicide   by   consuming   poison.     She   had   also   submitted 

       that in addition to the statements of P.Ws. 4 and 5, a 

       statement of an independent witness P.W. 10, a neighbor 

       of P.Ws. 4 and 5  was available and he had  sworn to the 

       fact that repeated and aggressive demands for dowry had 

       been made from the parents of the deceased and as they 

       had been not able to satisfy those demands, she had been 

       subjected to harassment and cruelty.  




       4.       As   already   mentioned   above,   we   are   restricting 

       our   decision   only   to   Sheela   Jain   who   alone   stands 

       confined   to   custody   as   of   today.     P.W.   4   in   his 


Crl.A. No. 1131 of 2010

                                             4





       statement   admitted   that   at   the   initial   stage 

       allegations   of   demands   for   dowry   had   been   made   only 

       against Maniklal Jain.   He also stated that no demands 

       for   dowry   had   been   made   before   the   marriage   or   during 

       the marriage and it was sometime after the marriage that 

       demands   had   been   made.     He   also   admitted   that   he   had 

       lodged the complaint before the concerned officer about 

       five days after the death of his daughter.  We have also 

       examined  his  statement  very  carefully  and  find  that  in 

       addition   to   the   above   uncertain   evidence   only   general 

       demands   for   dowry   had   been   made   with   respect   to   the 

       other accused and (in particular) no serious allegations 

       have   been   levelled   against   the   appellant   Sheela   Jain. 

       We   have   also   gone   through   the   evidence   of   P.W.   5,   the 

       mother   of   the   deceased.     From   her   testimony,   we   find 

       that   she   too   had   made   general   statements   and   that   the 

       main allegations were against Maniklal and Sharad.  P.W. 

       5 also admitted that Maniklal Jain had been harrasssing 

       the   deceased   sexually   and   that   she   had   pacified   her 

       daughter and told her to keep quiet to keep the family 

       honour.   She also candidly admitted that no demands for 

       dowry had been made by Sheela Jain either before, during 

       or   after   the   wedding.     Likewise,   we   have   examined   the 

       statement of P.W. 10, the neighbour.  His statement does 

       not in any way advance the case against Sheela Jain any 


Crl.A. No. 1131 of 2010

                                             5





       further.  We are, therefore, of the opinion that for the 

       cumulative reasons mentioned above, there is some doubt 

       with regard to the involvement of Sheela Jain appellant.





       5.       We, accordingly,  allow this appeal, set aside the 

       judgments  of  the  courts  below  and  order  her  acquittal. 

       It   is   stated   that   Sheela   Jain   is   in   custody.     She   be 

       released forthwith if not wanted in connection with any 

       other case.


                                                  ........................J
                                                  [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                  ........................J
                                                  [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]
       NEW DELHI
       JULY 14, 2011.


Crl.A. No. 1131 of 2010

                                              6





                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1131  OF 2010



            MANIKLAL JAIN & ORS.                    .....         APPELLANT

                                          VERSUS

            STATE OF M.P.                           .....         RESPONDENT




                                         O R D E R



                 We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

       parties.

                 Vide our separate reasoned order, we have partly 

       allowed the appeal as there is some doubt with regard 

       to the involvement of Sheela Jain, the mother in law of 

       the deceased.  We order her acquittal.  

                 It   is   stated   that   appellant   Sheela   Jain   is   in 

       custody.     She   shall   be   released   forth   with   if   not 

       wanted in connection with any other case. 

                 The reasoned order shall be separately placed on 

       record.  


                                                   ........................J
                                                   [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                   ........................J
                                                   [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]


Crl.A. No. 1131 of 2010

                           7





       NEW DELHI
       JULY 14, 2011.



