
Supreme Court of India
Mohamed Arif & Ors vs The State Of Gujarat on 3 October, 1996Author: M Mukherjee
Bench: M.K. Mukherjee, S.P. Kurdukar
           PETITIONER:
MOHAMED ARIF & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF GUJARAT

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	03/10/1996

BENCH:
M.K. MUKHERJEE, S.P. KURDUKAR




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
			  W I T H
	      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 387 OF 1993
The State of Gujarat
V.
Mohamed Arif & Ors.
		      J U D G M E N T
M.K. Mukherjee, J.
     Seven persons  were tried	by the Additional Designated
Court, Ahmedabad under Sections 143, 147, 148, 302/149, 452,
395, 435,  436, 427,  323, 336	and 188	 of the Indian Penal
Code, Section  105(1) of  the Bombay  Police Act and Section
3(2) of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1987  ('TADA' for	short).	  On conclusion of the trial
the Designated	court acquitted	 three of  them of  all	 the
charges and convicted the four others under Section 307 read
with Section 149 IPC and Section 3 (2) of TADA.	 Two of them
were also  convicted under  Section 135	 (f) of	 the  Bombay
Police Act.  Against their  conviction and sentence the four
convicts (hereinafter  referred to  as the  appellants) have
filed one of these appeals (Criminal Appeal No. 103 of 1995)
while the  other (Criminal  Appeal No. 387 of 1995) has been
filed by the State of Gujarat against their acquittal of the
other offences.	  Bereft  of details the prosecution case is
as under:-
     In the  wake of  the  demolition  of  Babri  Masjid  in
Ayodhya on  December 6,	 1992 a	 mob of	 about 700  to	1000
members of  the Muslim	Community went	on a  rampage in the
city of	 Ahmedabad  on	the  following	morning	 armed	with
various deadly	weapons	 and  burning  rage.  After  forming
themselves into smell groups they went to different parts of
the city  and started  destroying and damaging the shops and
other properties  of the  members of the Hindu Community and
beating them  up.  The appellants were the members of one of
such mobs  comprising 70/80  people which  went	 to  Khamasa
Chowky under  the Police Station of Karanj and pelted stones
on the	houses occupied	 by  the  Hindus  there,  broke	 the
glasses and  ripped the	 hoods of  rickshaws parked  on	 the
roadside and attempted to kill Bharat Kanaiyalal Modi.
     The defence  of the appellants, who pleaded not guilty,
was that they were implicated on suspicion.
     Apart from examining a number of witnesses to prove the
rampage, the  prosecution examined  Dharat  Kanaiyalal	Modi
(P.W.3) and has father Kanaiyalal Modi (P.W.6) to prove that
part of it, with which we are concerned in these appeals. In
narrating the  incident Bharat	Stated that  on December  7,
1992 it or about 10 A.M. when he was engaged in cleaning his
rickshaw outside  his house  a mob consisting of about 60/70
persons and armed with various weapons and burning rags came
there and  encircled him.   One	 or them  first attacked him
with a	razor on the backside on his neck and then two other
hit him,  one with  a glass bottle and another with a knife.
When his  parents came	to his rescue his mother also got an
injury due  to a  stone hurled	at her.	  Thereafter both of
them were  taken to the hospital, where he was operated upon
and kept  as an	 indoor patient	 for in days.  He identified
the four  appellants as	 members of  the mob and stated that
Mohd. Arif  (Appellant No.  4) with  a	glass  bottle.	  As
regards the  other two	appellants he averred that they were
carrying pipes.	 He lastly stated that his rickshaw was also
broken and  damaged.   Kanaiyalal fully	 supported the above
testimony of  his son  and identified the four appellants an
some of	 the miscreants.   He stated that they used to visit
their locality.
     Having carefully gone through the evidence of the above
two witnesses  we find	no reason to disbelieve them.  There
is nothing  on record  to show that they had any enmity with
the appellants;	 and, though  they were subjected to lengthy
cross  examination  the	 appellants  could  not	 succeed  in
discrediting them.   Rather,  we find  that  their  evidence
stands amply  corroborated by  that of Dr. Anjanaben (PW 14)
who examined  Bharat on	 the same  day (December 7, 1992) at
11.30 A.M.  and found  three stab injuries on his person one
of which on the chest and another on the lumber region.	 She
stated that the injury on the lumber region was of a serious
nature and  he had  to be operated upon to explore the depth
of the	injuries.   The other  corroboration is furnished by
the evidence  of Popatji  Javanji Chavada  (PW 15),  a	Sub-
Inspector of Karanj Police Station who investigated into the
case.	He testified  that when he went to Khamasa Chowky on
December 7,  1992 in the afternoon he found 4/5 rickshaws in
a broken  condition, stones  lying scattered on the road and
signboards of nearby shops broken.
     In spite of our above discussion we do not feel it safe
to sustain  the conviction of Mohd. Arif (Appellant No.1) as
we find	 that though  Bharat identified	 him correctly,	 his
father	Kanaiyalal   identified	  another   accused   (since
acquitted) as Mohd. Arif.  He is, therefore, entitled to the
benefit of  reasonable doubt.	We,  therefor, set aside the
conviction  and	 sentence  of  Mohd.  Arif  but	 uphold	 the
conviction and	sentence of  the other	three appellants  in
Criminal Appeal	 No. 103  of 1994.    This  appeal  is	thus
disposed of.
     So far  as the  other  appeal  is	concerned  (Criminal
Appeal No.  387 of  1995) we  find from	 the record that the
activities of  the mob	of which  the  appellants  were	 the
members were  confined to  terrorising the  members  of	 the
Hindu community	 in and around Khamasa Chowky and attempting
to commit  murder of  Bharat.	In such	 circumstances	this
appeal has got to be dismissed; and we order accordingly.

