
Supreme Court of India
Suresh & Ors vs State Of Maharashtra on 30 November, 2009Author: ......................J.
Bench: Dalveer Bhandari, A.K. Patnaik
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.2265-2266 OF 2009
    (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) Nos.7144-7145 of 2009)


Suresh and Ors.                                ...Appellant(s)


                               Versus


State of Maharashtra                           ...Respondent(s)
                           O   R   D   E   R


       Leave granted.
       These appeals are directed against the judgment of
the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at Nagpur, in
Criminal Revision Application No.178 of 2003 and Criminal
Application No.481 of 2009 in Criminal Revision Application
No.178 of 2003.     The appellants were convicted by the Trial
Court under Section 324 of the Indian Penal Code and were
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of
one year and to pay fine of Rs.250/-; in default, to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for a further period of one month.      The
High Court upheld the conviction of the appellants.
       The complainant has filed an affidavit before this
Court in which it is mentioned that the parties have amicably
settled the matter with the help of elderly people of the
village and has no grievance against the appellants.       It has
been further stated in the affidavit that, in view of the
cordial relationship between the parties, the appellants be
released, as the complainant does not wish to prosecute the
appeals against them.
                                                          ....2/-
                              - 2 -
        We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
        The   appellants         have    already      served     out     more    than
seven months of actual imprisonment.                     On consideration of
totality of the facts and circumstances of the case, we deem
it   appropriate     to   release       the    appellants      in   view    of    the
compounding of offence and they are convicted only for the
period of imprisonment already undergone by them.                          We order
accordingly    and    direct      that        the    appellants     be     released
forthwith if not required in any other case.
        In    view   of    the    above,       the    criminal      appeals      are,
accordingly, disposed of.

                                                     ......................J.
                                                     [DALVEER BHANDARI]



                                                     ......................J.
                                                     [A.K. PATNAIK]
New Delhi,
November 30, 2009.

