
Supreme Court of India
Sk. Raju @ Abdul Haque @ Jagga vs The State Of West Bengal on 5 September, 2018                                                                                REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 459 OF 2017




          SK RAJU @ ABDUL HAQUE @ JAGGA                                    .....APPELLANT



                                                 Versus


          STATE OF WEST BENGAL                                            .....RESPONDENT




                                               JUDGMENT

          Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud


          1              The present appeal, by special leave, is directed against a judgment

          dated 19 February 2016 of a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court. The

          High Court upheld the conviction of the appellant by the Additional Sessions

          Judge (“ASJ”) and Special Court under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Signature Not Verified


          Substances Act 1985 (“the Act”). On 15 February 2014, the ASJ had convicted
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2018.09.05
14:51:16 IST
Reason:


          the appellant of an offence punishable under Section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the Act. The


                                                       1
appellant was sentenced to 14 years of rigorous imprisonment and directed to

pay a fine of Rs 1,40,000.



2     The facts of the case are as follows. On 15 November 2011, Sub-

Inspector Prasanta Kr. Das, Narcotics Cell, DD (PW-2) received information that

a drug dealer would be in the vicinity of Tiljala Falguni Club, 138B/1, Picnic

Garden Road, near Tiljala Police Station to supply narcotic drugs in the

afternoon. PW-2 sought permission from the Assistant Commissioner of Police,

Anti-Narcotics Department, DD to organize a raid (Exhibit-2). Permission was

granted by the superior officer on the same day and a raiding team consisting

of PW-2 and others reached the spot at about 12.50 pm. At around 1.40 pm,

the source of the information pointed out to the appellant who was coming along

Picnic Garden Road. The appellant was intercepted and detained immediately

by the raiding party in front of Falguni Club. The appellant was informed about

the reasons for his detention and the identities of the raiding party were

disclosed to him. Subsequently, the appellant also disclosed his identity to the

raiding party. PW-5 was one of the two independent witnesses who agreed to

be a witness to this search. The appellant was informed about his legal right to

be searched either in the presence of a magistrate or a gazetted officer (Exhibit-

3). The appellant opted for being searched by a gazetted officer. A gazetted

officer, Inspector Joysurja Mukherjee (“PW-4”), arrived on the scene at about

3.20 pm. He provided the appellant with a “second option”. The appellant was

asked by PW-4 whether he wished to be searched in the presence of a gazetted


                                        2
officer or a magistrate (Exhibit-4). Once again, the appellant consented to be

searched in the presence of a gazetted officer. PW-4 then inquired of the

appellant whether he wanted to search PW-2 before the latter would carry out

his search. The appellant agreed to search PW-2 before his own search was

carried out by PW-2. No narcotic substance was recovered from the person of

PW-2. PW-2 recovered nineteen “deep brown / blackish broken rectangular

sheets” from a black polythene packet which was inside a biscuit colour jute

bag, which the appellant was carrying in his right hand. The sheets were tested

by PW-2 on the spot with the help of a test kit. The substance was found to be

charas. The substance was also weighed using a weighing scale. The appellant

was found to be in possession of 1.5 kilograms of charas. Cash amounting to

Rs. 2,400/- was recovered from the trouser of the appellant.



3     Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that there was non-

compliance with Section 42 of the Act. After PW-2 was intimated about the

appellant’s arrival, he sought permission from the Assistant Commissioner of

Police, Anti-Narcotics Department. Upon receipt of the letter of permission from

the Assistant Commissioner, PW-2 proceeded to the place of the occurrence.

PW-2 admitted in his cross-examination that he was aware of the gravity of the

need for compliance with Section 42. However, apart from a letter seeking

permission to act on the information which was addressed to a superior officer,

he did not (it was urged) diarise it elsewhere. Learned counsel urged that PW-

2 had not complied with the mandatory requirements of Section 42, as a result


                                       3
of which the trial stood vitiated. He has relied on the following decisions of this

Court to buttress the submission: Abdul Rashid Ibrahim Mansuri v State of

Gujarat (“Mansuri”),1 Directorate of Revenue v Mohammed Nisar Holia

(“Holia”)2 and State of Rajasthan v Jagraj Singh (“Jagraj”).3



4       Learned counsel for the appellant also submitted that Section 50 has also

not been complied with. According to him, not only was the bag of the appellant

searched, but a search of the person of the appellant also resulted in the

recovery of cash in the amount of Rs. 2,400/- from the left pocket of his trouser.

Hence, it was urged by the learned counsel that though Section 50 was

mandatorily required to be complied with, there was a breach of observance.

Since the appellant was merely given an ‘option’ by PW-2 and PW-4 to be

searched before a gazetted officer and was not informed that it was his legal

right to be searched before a gazetted officer or a magistrate, the search was,

it was urged, vitiated. On this aspect, learned counsel for the appellant has

relied on the following judgments of this Court: Myla Venkateswarlu v State of

Andhra Pradesh (“Venkateswarlu”),4 State of Rajasthan v Parmanand

(“Parmanand”)5 and Namdi Francis Nwazor v Union of India (“Namdi”).6

On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent-

State has supported the judgment of the High Court and the legality of the



1 (2000) 2 SCC 513.
2 (2008) 2 SCC 370.
3
  (2016) 11 SCC 687.
4 (2012) 5 SCC 226.
5 (2014) 5 SCC 345.
6 (1998) 8 SCC 534.


                                        4
conviction. He argued that since the search was carried out in a public place,

this case falls solely within the ambit of Section 43 and compliance with Section

42 was not necessary. Learned counsel for the respondent-State also urged

that Section 50 is not attracted when the search involves the search of a bag or

an article belonging to a person.



5     Section 42 of the Act deals with the power of entry, search, seizure and

arrest without warrant or authorization. It reads thus:

             “42. Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest without warrant
             or authorisation.—

             (1) Any such officer (being an officer superior in rank to a peon,
             sepoy or constable) of the departments of central excise,
             narcotics, customs, revenue intelligence or any other
             department of the Central Government including para-military
             forces or armed forces as is empowered in this behalf by
             general or special order by the Central Government, or any
             such officer (being an officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy
             or constable) of the revenue, drugs control, excise, police or
             any other department of a State Government as is empowered
             in this behalf by general or special order of the State
             Government, if he has reason to believe from personal
             knowledge or information given by any person and taken down
             in writing that any narcotic drug, or psychotropic substance, or
             controlled substance in respect of which an offence punishable
             under this Act has been committed or any document or other
             article which may furnish evidence of the commission of such
             offence or any illegally acquired property or any document or
             other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally
             acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing or
             forfeiture under Chapter VA of this Act is kept or concealed in
             any building, conveyance or enclosed place, may between
             sunrise and sunset,—

             (a) enter into and search any such building, conveyance or
             place;

             (b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove any
             obstacle to such entry;
             (c) seize such drug or substance and all materials used in the
             manufacture thereof and any other article and any animal or

                                               5
            conveyance which he has reason to believe to be liable to
            confiscation under this Act and any document or other article
            which he has reason to believe may furnish evidence of the
            commission of any offence punishable under this Act or furnish
            evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is
            liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA of
            this Act; and

            (d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any
            person whom he has reason to believe to have committed any
            offence punishable under this Act:

            Provided that in respect of holder of a licence for manufacture
            of manufactured drugs or psychotropic substances or
            controlled substances granted under this Act or any rule or
            order made thereunder, such power shall be exercised by an
            officer not below the rank of sub-inspector:

            Provided further that if such officer has reason to believe that
            a search warrant or authorisation cannot be obtained without
            affording opportunity for the concealment of evidence or facility
            for the escape of an offender, he may enter and search such
            building, conveyance or enclosed place at any time between
            sunset and sunrise after recording the grounds of his belief.

            (2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing
            under sub-section (1) or records grounds for his belief under
            the proviso thereto, he shall within seventy-two hours send a
            copy thereof to his immediate official superior.”



Section 43 of the Act confers powers on the empowered officer to seize a

substance and arrest a suspect in a public place. It provides thus:

            “43. Power of seizure and arrest in public place.— Any officer
            of any of the departments mentioned in section 42 may—

            (a) seize in any public place or in transit, any narcotic drug or
            psychotropic substance or controlled substance in respect of
            which he has reason to believe an offence punishable under
            this Act has been committed, and, along with such drug or
            substance, any animal or conveyance or article liable to
            confiscation under this Act, any document or other article which
            he has reason to believe may furnish evidence of the
            commission of an offence punishable under this Act or any
            document or other article which may furnish evidence of
            holding any illegally acquired property which is liable for
            seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA of this Act;
            (b) detain and search any person whom he has reason to
            believe to have committed an offence punishable under this

                                             6
                  Act, and if such person has any narcotic drug or psychotropic
                  substance or controlled substance in his possession and such
                  possession appears to him to be unlawful, arrest him and any
                  other person in his company.

                  Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the
                  expression “public place” includes any public
                  conveyance, hotel, shop, or other place intended for use
                  by, or accessible to, the public.” [Emphasis supplied]



6         We are unable to accept the submission made by the learned counsel for

the appellant that Section 42 is attracted to the facts of the present case. In

State of Punjab v Baldev Singh (“Baldev Singh”),7 Chief Justice Dr A S

Anand speaking for a Constitution Bench of this Court, held:

                  “The material difference between the provisions of Section 43
                  and Section 42 is that whereas Section 42 requires
                  recording of reasons for belief and for taking down of
                  information received in writing with regard to the
                  commission of an offence before conducting search and
                  seizure, Section 43 does not contain any such provision and
                  as such while acting under Section 43 of the Act, the
                  empowered officer has the power of seizure of the article
                  etc. and arrest of a person who is found to be in
                  possession of any Narcotic Drug or Psychotropic
                  Substances in a public place where such possession
                  appears to him to be unlawful.” [Emphasis supplied]



In Narayanaswamy Ravishankar v Assistant Director, Directorate of

Revenue Intelligence,8 a three judge Bench of this Court considered whether

the empowered officer was bound to comply with the mandatory provisions of

Section 42 before recovering heroin from the suitcase of the appellant at the

airport and subsequently arresting him. Answering the above question in the

negative, the Court held:

7   (1999) 6 SCC 172.
8   (2002) 8 SCC 7.

                                                 7
                    “In the instant case, according to the documents on record
                    and the evidence of the witnesses, the search and seizure
                    took place at the airport which is a public place. This being so,
                    it is the provisions of Section 43 of the NDPS Act which would
                    be applicable. Further, as Section 42 of the NDPS Act was not
                    applicable in the present case, the seizure having been
                    effected in a public place, the question of non-compliance, if
                    any, of the provisions of Section 42 of the NDPS Act is wholly
                    irrelevant.”



In Krishna Kanwar (Smt) Alias Thakuraeen v State of Rajasthan,9 a two

judge Bench of this Court considered whether a police officer who had prior

information was required to comply with the provisions of Section 42 before

seizing contraband and arresting the appellant who was travelling on a

motorcycle on the highway. Answering the above question in the negative, the

Court held:

                   “Section 42 comprises of two components. One relates to the
                   basis of information i.e.: (i) from personal knowledge, and (ii)
                   information given by person and taken down in writing. The
                   second is that the information must relate to commission
                   of offence punishable under Chapter IV and/or keeping or
                   concealment of document or article in any building,
                   conveyance or enclosed place which may furnish
                   evidence of commission of such offence. Unless both the
                   components exist Section 42 has no application. Sub-
                   section (2) mandates, as was noted in Baldev Singh case that
                   where an officer takes down any information in writing under
                   sub-section (1) or records grounds for his belief under the
                   proviso thereto, he shall forthwith send a copy thereof to his
                   immediate official superior. Therefore, sub-section (2) only
                   comes into operation where the officer concerned does the
                   enumerated acts, in case any offence under Chapter IV has
                   been committed or documents etc. are concealed in any
                   building, conveyance or enclosed place. Therefore, the
                   commission of the act or concealment of document etc.
                   must be in any building, conveyance or enclosed place.”
                   [Emphasis supplied]




9   (2004) 2 SCC 608; Rajendra v State of M.P ., (2004) 1 SCC 432.

                                                        8
7     An empowered officer under Section 42(1) is obligated to reduce to

writing the information received by him, only when an offence punishable under

the Act has been committed in any building, conveyance or an enclosed place,

or when a document or an article is concealed in a building, conveyance or an

enclosed place. Compliance with Section 42, including recording of information

received by the empowered officer, is not mandatory, when an offence

punishable under the Act was not committed in a building, conveyance or an

enclosed place. Section 43 is attracted in situations where the seizure and

arrest are conducted in a public place, which includes any public conveyance,

hotel, shop, or other place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public.



8     The appellant was walking along the Picnic Garden Road. He was

intercepted and detained immediately by the raiding party in front of Falguni

Club, which was not a building, conveyance or an enclosed place. The place of

occurrence was accessible to the public and fell within the ambit of the phrase

“public place” in the explanation to Section 43. Section 42 had no application.



9     The cases relied on by the learned counsel for the appellant will also not

apply in the context of the facts before us. In Mansuri, an auto-rickshaw driver

was intercepted by police personnel. Four gunny bags of charas were

recovered from the auto-rickshaw. The police officer who had prior information

about transportation of some narcotic substance, had neither taken down the

information before carrying out the seizure and arrest, nor apprised his superior


                                        9
officer. He contended that the action taken by him was under Section 43 and

not Section 42. Rejecting the argument of the State, this Court held that

compliance with Section 42 was required as the auto-rickshaw was a private

vehicle and not a public conveyance as contemplated under Section 43.

Similarly, in Jagraj, contraband was recovered from a jeep which was

intercepted by police personnel on a public road after receiving prior

information. The police officer who had received the information, admitted to not

taking it down in writing, contending that Section 43 would be applicable.

Rejecting the argument of the State, this Court held that the jeep which was

intercepted, was not a public conveyance within the meaning of Section 43 and

compliance with Section 42(1) was therefore mandatory. In Holia, Mandrax

tablets were recovered from the hotel room of the respondent. The information

was not reduced to writing by the officer who had first received the information.

The State claimed that compliance with Section 42 was not required as the hotel

was a public place. Rejecting the submission of the State, this Court held that

while a hotel is a public place, a hotel room inside it is not a public place. This

Court held thus:

             “Section 43, on plain reading of the Act, may not attract the
             rigours of Section 42 thereof. That means that even subjective
             satisfaction on the part of the authority, as is required under
             sub-section (1) of Section 42, need not be complied with, only
             because the place whereat search is to be made is a public
             place. If Section 43 is to be treated as an exception to Section
             42, it is required to be strictly complied with … It is also
             possible to contend that where a search is required to be
             made at a public place which is open to the general public,
             Section 42 would have no application but it may be
             another thing to contend that search is being made on
             prior information and there would be enough time for
             compliance of reducing the information to writing,

                                             10
             informing the same to the superior officer and obtain his
             permission as also recording the reasons therefore
             coupled with the fact that the place which is required to be
             searched is not open to public although situated in a
             public place as, for example, room of a hotel, whereas
             hotel is a public place, a room occupied by a guest may
             not be. He is entitled to his right of privacy. Nobody, even
             the staff of the hotel, can walk into his room without his
             permission. Subject to the ordinary activities in regard to
             maintenance and/or housekeeping of the room, the guest is
             entitled to maintain his privacy.” [Emphasis supplied]



There is hence no substance in the first submission.

10    Section 50 of the Act deals with conditions under which search of persons

shall be conducted. It states:

             “50. Conditions under which search of persons shall be
             conducted.—

             (1) When any officer duly authorised under section 42 is about
             to search any person under the provisions of section 41,
             section 42 or section 43, he shall, if such person so requires,
             take such person without unnecessary delay to nearest
             Gazetted Officer of any of the departments mentioned in
             section 42 or to the nearest Magistrate.

             (2) If such requisition is made, the officer may detain the person
             until he can bring him before the Gazetted Officer or the
             Magistrate referred to in sub-section (1).

             (3) The Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate before whom any
             such person is brought shall, if he sees no reasonable ground
             for search, forthwith discharge the person but otherwise shall
             direct that search be made.

             (4) No female shall be searched by anyone excepting a female.
             (5) When an officer duly authorised under section 42 has
             reason to believe that it is not possible to take the person to be
             searched to the nearest Gazetted Officer or Magistrate without
             the possibility of the person to be searched parting with
             possession of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, or
             controlled substance or article or document, he may, instead
             of taking such person to the nearest Gazetted Officer or
             Magistrate, proceed to search the person as provided under



                                              11
                   section100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
                   1974).

                   (6) After a search is conducted under sub-section (5), the
                   officer shall record the reasons for such belief which
                   necessitated such search and within seventy-two hours send
                   a copy thereof to his immediate official superior.”



According to Section 50(1), an empowered officer should necessarily inform the

suspect about his legal right, if he so requires, to be searched in the presence

of a gazetted officer or a magistrate. In Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja v State

of Gujarat (“Vijaysinh”),10 a Constitution Bench of this Court interpreted

Section 50 thus:

                   “The mandate of Section 50 is precise and clear, viz. if the
                   person intended to be searched expresses to the authorised
                   officer his desire to be taken to the nearest gazetted officer or
                   the Magistrate, he cannot be searched till the gazetted officer
                   or the Magistrate, as the case may be, directs the authorised
                   officer to do so … In view of the foregoing discussion, we are
                   of the firm opinion that the object with which right under Section
                   50(1) of the NDPS Act, by way of a safeguard, has been
                   conferred on the suspect, viz. to check the misuse of power, to
                   avoid harm to innocent persons and to minimise the allegations
                   of planting or foisting of false cases by the law enforcement
                   agencies, it would be imperative on the part of the empowered
                   officer to apprise the person intended to be searched of his
                   right to be searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate.
                   We have no hesitation in holding that in so far as the obligation
                   of the authorised officer under Sub-section (1) of Section 50 of
                   the NDPS Act is concerned, it is mandatory and requires a
                   strict compliance. Failure to comply with the provision would
                   render the recovery of the illicit article suspect and vitiate the
                   conviction if the same is recorded only on the basis of the
                   recovery of the illicit article from the person of the accused
                   during such search. Thereafter, the suspect may or may not
                   choose to exercise the right provided to him under the said
                   provision … We are of the opinion that the concept of
                   “substantial compliance” with the requirement of Section 50 of
                   the NDPS Act introduced and read into the mandate of the said
                   Section in Joseph Fernandez (supra) and Prabha Shankar
                   Dubey (supra) is neither borne out from the language of Sub-

10   (2011) 1 SCC 609.

                                                    12
                   section (1) of Section 50 nor it is in consonance with the dictum
                   laid down in Baldev Singh's case (supra).”



The principle which emerges from Vijaysinh is that the concept of “substantial

compliance” with the requirement of Section 50 is neither in accordance with

the law laid down in Baldev Singh, nor can it be construed from its language.

[Reference may also be made to the decision of a two judge Bench of this Court

in Venkateswarlu]. Therefore, strict compliance with Section 50(1) by the

empowered officer is mandatory. Section 50, however, applies only in the case

of a search of a person. In Baldev Singh, the Court held “on its plain reading,

Section 50 would come into play only in the case of a search of a person as

distinguished from search of any premises, etc.” In State of Himachal Pradesh

v Pawan Kumar (“Pawan Kumar”),11 a three judge Bench of this Court held

that the search of an article which was being carried by a person in his hand, or

on his shoulder or head, etc., would not attract Section 50. It was held thus:

                   “In common parlance it would be said that a person is carrying
                   a particular article, specifying the manner in which it was
                   carried like hand, shoulder, back or head, etc. Therefore, it is
                   not possible to include these articles within the ambit of the
                   word “person” occurring in Section 50 of the Act …After the
                   decision in Baldev Singh, this Court has consistently held that
                   Section 50 would only apply to search of a person and not to
                   any bag, article or container, etc. being carried by him.”



In Parmanand, on a search of the person of the respondent, no substance was

found. However, subsequently, opium was recovered from the bag of the

respondent. A two judge Bench of this Court considered whether compliance



11   (2005) 4 SCC 350.

                                                    13
with Section 50(1) was required. This Court held that the empowered officer

was required to comply with the requirements of Section 50(1) as the person of

the respondent was also searched. [Reference may also be made to the

decision of a two judge Bench of this Court in Dilip v State of Madhya

Pradesh]12. It was held thus:

                   “Thus, if merely a bag carried by a person is searched without
                   there being any search of his person, Section 50 of the NDPS
                   Act will have no application. But if the bag carried by him is
                   searched and his person is also searched, Section 50 of the
                   NDPS Act will have application.”



Moreover, in the above case, the empowered officer at the time of conducting

the search informed the respondent that he could be searched before the

nearest Magistrate or before the nearest gazetted officer or before the

Superintendent, who was also a part of the raiding party. The Court held that

the search of the respondent was not in consonance with the requirements of

Section 50(1) as the empowered officer erred in giving the respondent an option

of being search before the Superintendent, who was not an independent officer.

It was held thus:

                   “We also notice that PW 10 SI Qureshi informed the
                   respondents that they could be searched before the nearest
                   Magistrate or before the nearest gazetted officer or before PW
                   5 J.S. Negi, the Superintendent, who was a part of the raiding
                   party. It is the prosecution case that the respondents informed
                   the officers that they would like to be searched before PW 5
                   J.S. Negi by PW 10 SI Qureshi. This, in our opinion, is again a
                   breach of Section 50(1) of the NDPS Act. The idea behind
                   taking an accused to the nearest Magistrate or the nearest
                   gazetted officer, if he so requires, is to give him a chance of
                   being searched in the presence of an independent officer.
                   Therefore, it was improper for PW 10 SI Qureshi to tell the

12   (2007) 1 SCC 450.

                                                   14
            respondents that a third alternative was available and that they
            could be searched before PW 5 J.S. Negi, the Superintendent,
            who was part of the raiding party. PW 5 J.S. Negi cannot be
            called an independent officer. We are not expressing any
            opinion on the question whether if the respondents had
            voluntarily expressed that they wanted to be searched before
            PW 5 J.S. Negi, the search would have been vitiated or not.
            But PW 10 SI Qureshi could not have given a third option to
            the respondents when Section 50(1) of the NDPS Act does not
            provide for it and when such option would frustrate the
            provisions of Section 50(1) of the NDPS Act. On this ground
            also, in our opinion, the search conducted by PW 10 SI Qureshi
            is vitiated.”



The question which arises before us is whether Section 50(1) was required to

be complied with when charas was recovered only from the bag of the appellant

and no charas was found on his person. Further, if the first question is answered

in the affirmative, whether the requirements of Section 50 were strictly complied

with by PW-2 and PW-4.



11    As evidenced by Exhibit-3, a first option was given to the appellant. PW-

2 informed him that it was his legal right to be searched either in the presence

of a magistrate or in the presence of a gazetted officer. The appellant was then

asked to give his option by indicating whether he wanted to be searched by a

magistrate or a gazetted officer. The appellant indicated that he wanted the

search to be carried out in the presence of a gazetted officer. When PW-4

arrived, he was introduced to the detainee as a gazetted officer. As evidenced

by Exhibit-4, PW-4 then gave the appellant a second option. He inquired of him

again, whether he wanted to be searched in the presence of a gazetted officer

or in the presence of a magistrate. The appellant reiterated his desire to be


                                            15
searched in the presence of a gazetted officer. Before the search of the

appellant commenced, the gazetted officer asked the appellant whether he

wanted to search PW-2 before his own search was carried out by PW-2. The

appellant agreed to search PW-2 before the latter carried out his search. On

conducting the search, only personal belongings of PW-2 were found by the

appellant. On the search of the appellant in the presence of the gazetted officer,

a biscuit colour jute bag was recovered from the appellant, and Rs. 2,400/- cash

in the denomination of 24 notes of Rs. 100/- each was found in the left pocket

of the appellant’s trouser. When the bag was opened, a black polythene cover

containing nineteen rectangular broken sheets of a blackish / deep brown colour

weighing 1.5 kilograms was recovered. The sheets were tested and were found

to be charas.



PW-2 conducted a search of the bag of the appellant as well as of the

appellant’s trousers. Therefore, the search conducted by PW-2 was not only of

the bag which the appellant was carrying, but also of the appellant’s person.

Since the search of the person of the appellant was also involved, Section 50

would be attracted in this case. Accordingly, PW-2 was required to comply with

the requirements of Section 50(1). As soon as the search of a person takes

place, the requirement of mandatory compliance with Section 50 is attracted,

irrespective of whether contraband is recovered from the person of the detainee

or not. It was, therefore, imperative for PW-2 to inform the appellant of his legal

right to be searched in the presence of either a gazetted officer or a magistrate.


                                        16
From Exhibit-3, it can be discerned that the appellant was informed of his legal

right to be searched in the presence of a magistrate or a gazetted officer. The

appellant opted for the latter alternative. Exhibit-4 is a record of the events after

the arrival of PW-4 on the scene. After the arrival of PW-4, the appellant was

once again asked by him, whether he wished to be searched in the presence of

a gazetted officer or a magistrate. This was the second option which was

presented to him. When he reiterated his desire to be searched before a

gazetted officer, PW-4 inquired of the appellant whether he wished to search

PW-2 before his own search was conducted by PW-2. The appellant agreed to

search PW-2. Only the personal belongings of PW-2 were found by the

appellant. It was only after this that a search of the appellant was conducted

and charas recovered. Before the appellant’s search was conducted, both PW-

2 and PW-4 on different occasions apprised the appellant of his legal right to be

searched either in the presence of a gazetted officer or a magistrate. The

options given by both PW-2 and PW-4 were unambiguous. Merely because the

appellant was given an option of searching PW-2 before the latter conducted

his search, would not vitiate the search. In Parmanand, in addition to the option

of being searched by the gazetted officer or the magistrate, the detainee was

given a ‘third’ alternative by the empowered officer which was to be searched

by an officer who was a part of the raiding team. This was found to be contrary

to the intent of Section 50(1). The option given to the appellant of searching

PW-2 in the case at hand, before the latter searched the appellant, did not vitiate

the process in which a search of the appellant was conducted. The search of


                                         17
the appellant was as a matter of fact conducted in the presence of PW-4, a

gazetted officer, in consonance with the voluntary communication made by the

appellant to both PW-2 and PW-4. There was strict compliance with the

requirements of Section 50(1) as stipulated by this Court in Vijaysinh.



12    As we have already held that Section 50 was attracted in the present

case, we do not need to decide on the applicability of Namdi to the facts of the

present case. We have held that Section 50 was complied with. Having regard

to the above position, we do not find any merit in the appeal.



13    The Criminal Appeal shall accordingly stand dismissed.




                                         ...………............................................CJI
                                           [DIPAK MISRA]




                                         ...…….…...............................................J
                                           [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                         .….……….............................................J
                                          [INDIRA BANERJEE]



New Delhi;
September 05, 2018.


                                       18

