
Supreme Court of India
Ramji Lal & Ors vs State Of M.P on 12 July, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. 112 of 2006

                                               1





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 112 OF 2006





            RAMJILAL & ORS.                         .....         APPELLANTS

                                            VERSUS

            STATE OF M.P.                           .....         RESPONDENT





                                           O R D E R

         1.           The   three   appellants   have   been   convicted   for 

         offences   punishable   under   Sections   366   and   376   of   the 

         Indian Penal Code and have been sentenced to undergo five 

         years rigorous imprisonment for the first offence and ten 

         years   rigorous   imprisonment   for   the   second   one.     The 

         allegation   is   that   they   had   committed   gang   rape   on   the 

         prosecutrix,   P.W.   1,   who   was   a   young   widow.     The   trial 

         court and the High Court have in addition relied on the 

         evidence of P.W. 3  and P.W. 6, the parents of the victim 

         P.W.   1,   who   have   categorically   stated   that   on   the 

         intervening   night   of   28th  and   29th  June,   1996,   the 

         prosecutrix  had been sleeping inside their home when the 

         appellants reached that place in a jeep armed with deadly 

         weapons and they had told  P.W. 6 to give his daughter as 


Crl.A. 112 of 2006

                                                    2





         a   wife   to   Ramjilal   appellant   and   on   his   refusal   he   had 

         been   threatened   by   the   appellants   on   which   he   had   run 

         away   from   the   spot.     As   per   the   prosecution   story   the 

         prosecutrix     was   thereafter   forced   into   the   jeep   and 

         taken to the Amarkhaua jungle and repeatedly raped over a 

         period   of   five   days   and   then   abandoned.     She   was 

         subsequently recovered by the police and produced before 

         the doctor for medical examination who found that she had 

         been   subjected   to   recent   sexual   intercourse   and   that 

         there were several other injuries on her person as well. 




         2.       We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the   parties 

         and find that the statements of P.W. 1, the prosecutrix, 

         and   her   parents   P.W.   3   and   6   along   with   the   medical 

         evidence clearly supports the story that the prosecutrix 

         had   been   abducted   and   subjected   to   gang   rape   by   the 

         appellants.   We, therefore, have absolutely no reason to 

         interfere   with   the   concurrent   findings   of   conviction 

         recorded by the courts below. 


         3.             The   facts   of   the   case   also   depict   a   sordid   and 

         shocking   state   of   affairs.     The   facts   ought   to   have 

         resulted in a deterrent sentence and the sentence of ten 

         years  was  clearly  inadequate.    However,  as  the  State  of 

         M.P. has not chosen to come in appeal on the question of 


Crl.A. 112 of 2006

                                              3





         sentence,   we   are   unable   to   interfere   on   this   aspect   at 

         this belated stage.


         5.           We, accordingly, dismiss the appeal.




                                                   ........................J
                                                   [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]



                         
                                                   ........................J
                                                   [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]
         NEW DELHI
         JULY 12, 2011.



