
Supreme Court of India
Sudarshan Kumar vs State Of Haryana on 28 July, 2011Author: .........................J.
Bench: Markandey Katju, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                           REPORTABLE

                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1201 OF 2007

Sudarshan Kumar                                       ..Appellant

                           Versus 

State of Haryana                                      ..Respondent

                           O R D E R

         Heard learned counsel for the  appellant.

         This   Appeal   has   been   filed   against   the   impugned 

judgment and order dated 12th  May, 2006 passed by the High 

Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal 

No. 71-SB of 1992.

         The facts have been set out in the impugned judgment 

and hence we are not repeating the same here except wherever 

necessary.

         The appellant was married to one Sudesh who is said 

to have committed suicide on 23rd February, 1989.  According 

to   the   prosecution   Sudesh   was   married   to   the   appellant   in 

April/May, 1980 but she could not conceive.   The appellant 

had been maltreating and beating Sudesh and saying that if 

she   dies,   he   will   be   re-married.     She   was   physically 

assaulted   and   sent   to   her   father's   house   where   she   stayed 

for one and half years but due to the intervention of the 

panchayat members and the promise of the appellant that he 

would not harass her again and his request for pardon,  she 


came back.  However, it appears that she was again harassed 

and tormented and ultimately driven to suicide.

                                     -2-
         The   appellant   was   convicted   by   the   trial   Court   for 

abetting   the   suicide   under   Section   306   IPC,   and   his 

conviction   was   upheld   by   the   High   Court   and   he   was   given 

sentence of seven years rigorous imprisonment.

         Having   heard   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant   and 

having carefully perused the record of the case, we are not 

inclined to interfere with the conviction of the appellant 

and the same is hereby confirmed.  From the facts disclosed, 

it   is   evident   that   Sudesh   was   harassed   and   beaten   because 

she could not have a child.  

         It is natural that everyone wants children, but if a 

woman   does   not   have   a   child,   that   does   not   mean   that   she 

should be insulted or harassed.   In such a situation, the 

best   course   would   be   to   take   medical   help,   and   if   that 

fails,   to   adopt   a   child.     Experience   has   shown   that   an 

adopted   child   gives   as   much   happiness   to   the   adoptive 

parents   as   any   natural   child   does.     Hence,   we   see   no 

justification   to   condone   such   an   act   of   harassing   or 

tormenting a woman just because she did not give birth to a 

child.  It may not be the fault of the wife that she did not 

have a child.   At any event, that is no justification for 

tormenting   or   beating   her,   and   this   reveals   a   feudal, 

backward mentality.

       Accordingly, we uphold the conviction of the appellant 


recorded by the courts below but keeping in view the fact 

that   the   appellant   has   already   undergone   about   five   years 

rigorous imprisonment out of seven years, as submitted by 




                                    -3-

the   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant,   we   deem   it 

appropriate   to   reduce   the   sentence   to   the   period   already 

undergone by him.

         The Appeal is disposed of accordingly.

         By   an   interim   order   of   this   Court   dated   15th  May, 

2008, the appellant was enlarged on bail.   His bail bonds 

shall   stand   discharged   since   we   have   reduce   the   period   of 

sentence to the sentence already undergone by him.




                                    .........................J.
                                    [MARKANDEY KATJU]




NEW DELHI;                          .........................J.
JULY 28, 2011                       [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]



