
Supreme Court of India
Jangir Singh vs The State Of Punjab on 31 October, 2018Author: J N.V. Ramana
Bench: M M.Shantanagoudar, N.V.Ramana
                                                                     REPORTABLE



                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 2499 OF 2009



               JANGIR SINGH                                        … APPELLANT


                                               Versus


               THE STATE OF PUNJAB                              …RESPONDENT



                                          JUDGMENT

     N.V. RAMANA, J.


     1.                      This appeal arises out of the impugned judgment dated

     07.04.2008, passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at

     Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No. 160­DBA/1994, whereby the

     High Court has reversed the judgment of acquittal passed by the

     Sessions   Judge,   Faridkot   dated   14.05.1993,   and   convicted   the

     appellant­accused under Section 302 IPC and Section 27 of the
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV


     Arms Act.
Date: 2018.11.20
17:26:33 IST
Reason:


                                                    1
2.          The   Sessions   Judge,   Faridkot  vide  Judgment   dated

14.05.1993 acquitted the appellant from the offences punishable

under Section 302 I.P.C. and Section 27 of the Arms Act on the

ground   that   the   appellant   fired   gunshot   at   the   deceased   in

exercise of his right to private defence of his body. Thus, he was

exonerated from the liability under Section 302 of IPC.  However,

on appeal, the High Court reversed the findings of the Sessions

Judge on the ground that the right to private defence at the part

of the appellant was not made out. Aggrieved by the Judgment of

the High Court, this appeal is preferred under Section 379 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

3.          Facts   of   the   case   in   a   nutshell   are   such   that   the

incident   in   question   took   place   on   05.06.1991   at   around   7.30

P.M. wherein the appellant shot down Jaswant Singh (hereinafter

referred to as “the deceased”) by his Self Loading Rifle of Bore

303.   The appellant and the deceased were working together as

Punjab   Home   Guard   Volunteers.   The   incident   took   place   when

the deceased demanded Rs.100/­ from the appellant, which was

borrowed by the appellant previously.  The appellant got enraged

due to the fact that the borrowed money was demanded in front

of the other Punjab Home Guard colleagues and it was insulting



                                          2
for   the   appellant.   The   appellant   had   an   altercation   with   the

deceased for around 15 minutes, pursuant to which the appellant

fired at him and consequently, he died.

4.          Learned counsel for the appellant­accused vehemently

contended   that   the   High   Court   has   reversed   the   well­reasoned

and   detailed   judgment   of   acquittal   of   the   trial   court   by   re­

appreciating evidence in a different manner and taking a different

view.     According   to   the   learned  counsel,  it  was   a  clear   case  of

right to private defence, thus, sentencing under Section 302 IPC

by the High Court is unwarranted.

5.          On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent­

State submitted that the present appeal by the appellant is not

based on any cogent reasons rather the same has been filed on

surmises   and   conjectures.   Further,   it   has   also   been   submitted

that   all   the   material   evidence   and   testimonies   of   relevant

witnesses  viz.,   P.W.­3   and   P.W.­4   have   been   taken   into

consideration, in the well­reasoned judgment of the High Court

and the same does not call for interference by this Court. 

6.          After perusing the material placed before this Court, we

are of the considered view, that the conviction by the High Court

is   solely   based   on   the   evidence   of   P.W.­3(ASI   Sukhdev   Singh),



                                          3
who   is   a  witness   to   the   incident.  Therefore,   evidence  of   P.W.­3

calls for the examination by this Hon’ble Court.

7.          The   evidence   of   PW­3 clarifies that  the  deceased  had

303  bore  rifle   with  him  at the time of occurrence. So also, the

accused had the rifle. PW­3 was standing at a distance of about

60 feet from the appellant and the deceased where the incident

has taken place. It is admitted by him in cross­examination that

he looked at the accused and the deceased only when he heard

the   sound   of   gunshot.     He   did   not   notice   as   to   who   was   the

aggressor and as to whether the altercation between the accused

and the deceased had taken place or not. Looking at the trend of

answers given by PW­3 in the cross­examination, it is clear that

he   did   not   see   as   to   how   the   incident   started   and   continued.

Thus, there can be no categorical deduction from the evidence of

PW­3 that the accused fired at the deceased with premeditation.

8.          On the other hand, the evidence of PW­4 specifies that

the deceased had aimed a rifle at the accused, obviously because

of an altercation between them, pursuant to which the accused

also used his gun to fire at the deceased suddenly, without any

premeditation.     The   evidence   of   PW­4   corroborates   the   defence

taken  by  the   accused  as   found in his statement under  Section



                                            4
313 of the Cr.P.C.

9.          The evidence of PWs 3 and 4 collectively would show

that though the incident has taken place because of the gunshot

fired by the accused towards the deceased and the deceased lost

his life, but the act of the accused will fall under Exception II to

Section 300 of the IPC, in as much as the fire by the accused was

due   to   the   aforementioned   fact   of   the   deceased   pointing   gun

towards   the   accused,   i.e.,   because   of   the   threat   perception

created by the deceased in the mind of the accused. 
                
10.       Before   proceeding   any   further,   it   is   essential   to   put­

forth things that are to be considered by the Courts, while giving

benefit of right to private defence to the accused, as per Exception

II to Section 300 of IPC, to determine the ‘quantum’ of this right.

This   Court   in   the   case   of  Vidhya   Singh v. State   of   Madhya

Pradesh,1 observed that­ 


          “7. …  The right of self­defence is a very valuable
          right.   It   has   a   social   purpose.   That   right   should
          not be construed narrowly.”

Further,   in   the   case   of  James   Martin v. State   of   Kerala,2
following observations were made by this Court­ 
          “18. … Situations have to be judged from the sub­
          jective point of view of the accused concerned in
1 (1971) 3 SCC 244
2 (2004) 2 SCC 203

                                          5
             the surrounding excitement and confusion of the
             moment, confronted with a situation of peril and
             not by any microscopic and pedantic scrutiny. In
             adjudging the question as to whether more force
             than was necessary was used in the prevailing cir­
             cumstances on the spot, it would be inappropriate,
             as held by this Court, to adopt tests by detached
             objectivity which would be so natural in a court­
             room, or that which would seem absolutely neces­
             sary to a perfectly cool bystander. The person fac­
             ing   a   reasonable   apprehension   of   threat   to   himself
             cannot be expected to modulate his defence step by
             step   with   any   arithmetical   exactitude   of   only   that
             much which is required in the thinking of a man in
             ordinary times or under normal circumstances.”

Similarly, in the case of Darshan Singh v. State of Punjab,3 this

Court   went   further   and   gave   few   parameters   to   adjudge   the

exercise of right to private defence in following terms­

             “56. In order to find out whether the right of private
             defence is available or not,  the injuries received by
             the   accused,   the   imminence   of   threat   to   his
             safety, the injuries caused by the accused and the
             circumstances   whether   the   accused   had   time   to
             have recourse to public authorities are all relevant
             factors to be considered.”  
                                                     (emphasis supplied)

11.            Further,  it   is   a   settled   law   that   the   right   to   private

defence   cannot   be   claimed   by   the   accused,   if   disproportionate

harm   has   been   caused,   while   defending   himself   or   any   other

3     (2010) 2 SCC 333.

                                               6
person. However, if the accused has not caused disproportionate

harm, then the benefit of Exception II to Section 300 of IPC can

be given to the accused. This proposition has been well explained

in   the   case   of  Bhanwar   Singh v. State   of   Madhya   Pradesh,4

wherein this Court made the following observations ­


          “50. The plea of private defence has been brought
          up by the appellants. For this plea to succeed in
          totality,   it   must   be   proved   that   there   existed   a
          right to private defence in favour of the accused,
          and   that   this   right   extended   to   causing   death.
          Hence, if the court were to reject this plea, there
          are two possible ways in which this may be done.
          On one hand, it may be held that there existed a
          right   to   private   defence   of   the   body.   However,
          more harm than necessary was caused or, alter­
          natively,   this   right   did   not   extend   to   causing
          death.  Such  a ruling  may result  in  the  applica­
          tion of Section 300, Exception 2, which states that
          culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, in the
          exercise in good faith of the right of private defence of
          person or property, exceeds the power given to him by
          law and causes the death of the person against whom
          he is exercising such right of defence without premedi­
          tation, and without any intention of doing more harm
          than is necessary for the purpose of such defence. The
          other situation is where, on appreciation of facts, the
          right of private defence is held not to exist at all.”    
                                                 (emphasis supplied)

12.         Now,   to   consider   the   question   as   to   whether   the

4 (2008) 16 SCC 657.

                                         7
exercise of right of private defence by the appellant­accused was

legitimate or not, it is undisputed that the fateful incident at the

hands   of   appellant   was   pursuant   to   an   altercation   with   the

deceased   for   around   15   minutes,   in   the   presence   of   other

colleagues.   Both   the   deceased   and   the   appellant­accused   were

altercating face­to­face and standing at a distance of 10 feet from

each other. This shows that they could see the facial expressions

of   each   other   clearly   and   comprehend   the   apprehending

circumstances accordingly. Taking note of the fact that owing to

the imminent danger perceived by the appellant from the aiming

of rifle at him by the deceased, he fired at the deceased and killed

him.   This,   in   our   opinion   comes   within   the   ambit   of   right   to

private defence, however, it clearly traverses beyond the legitimate

exercise of the same. The appellant­accused chose to shoot on a

vital   part   of   the   body  i.e.,   chest   to   safeguard   himself   from   the

imminent threat.   However, the accused could have avoided the

vital part of the deceased.   But, we do not find absence of good

faith   in   exercise   of   right   of   private   defence.   However,   having

regard to the situs of the injury (i.e. the chest of the deceased), it

is clear that the accused has exceeded the power given to him in

law and has caused the death of the deceased against whom he



                                             8
exercised right of private defence without premeditation.   Thus,

offence   committed   by   the   accused­appellant   will   fall   under

Section 304 Part I of the IPC.

13.         The   law   on   this   aspect   of   causing   disproportionate

harm   and   exceeding   right   to   private   defence   is   amply   clear.   In

cases of disproportionate harm leading to death of the aggressor,

sentence   under   Section  304 Part I is the appropriate  sentence.

This has been done by this Court in catena of cases.

14.         In the   case   of  Udaikumar   Pandharinath   Jadhav

Alias Munna v. State of Maharashtra,5 this Court acquitted the

accused   from   charges   under   Section  302 IPC  and  modified  the

conviction   to   Section   304   Part   I   of   IPC,   as   per   the   following

observations­


          “5. We   observe   from   the   evidence   that   the   deceased
          was not only a karate expert but also armed with a
          knife and it is not surprising that the appellant appre­
          hended injury at his hands. We are therefore of the
          opinion that the best that can be said for the prosecu­
          tion at this stage is that the appellant had exceeded
          the right of private defence.  We therefore partly al­
          low the appeal, acquit the appellant of the charge
          under Section 302 IPC and modify his conviction
          to one under Section 304(1) IPC in the background
          that the fatal injury caused on the chest had pene­
          trated   deep  into   the  body.  We also impose a sen­
          tence of 7 years' rigorous imprisonment on the appel­

5 (2008) 5 SCC 214

                                            9
          lant; the other part of the sentence to remain as it is.”


15.         Further, in the case of  Trilok Singh v. State (Delhi

Administration),6  this   Court   made   observations   regarding

modification   of   conviction  from  Section 302 IPC  to  Section  304

Part I IPC and the same is as follows­


          “6. We have gone through the entire evidence of PW
          24 and PW 25. The evidence of PW 24 is to the effect
          that he saw the accused and the deceased were quar­
          relling and he went to the house and informed PW 25.
          … But the question is whether he could go to the
          extent of causing the death. No doubt in a situa­
          tion  like  this  it  cannot  be  expected   that   the  ac­
          cused   has   to   modulate   his   right   of   self­defence.
          But   when   he   went   to   his   house   and   brought   a
          knife and caused the death it cannot be said that
          he did not exceed the right of private defence. We
          cannot   give   the   benefit   to   the   appellant   under
          Section   100   IPC   and   the   act   committed   by   him
          only attracts exception to Section 300 IPC. There­
          fore the offence committed by him could be one
          under Section 304 Part I IPC.”       

                                               (emphasis supplied)

16.         Similar   view   was   taken   by   this   Court   in  Pathubha

Govindji Rathod v. State of Gujarat,7 wherein it was ruled that

the accused exceeded his right to private defence. Thus, appeal

was partly allowed, conviction under Section 302 was set aside

6 1995 SCC (Cri) 158.

7 (2015) 4 SCC 363 at Para 15, 17­18.

                                        10
and the accused was convicted under Section 304 Part I of the

IPC. 


17.         Thus, taking into consideration all the material facts,

discussions   and   observations   made   hereinabove,   we   deem   it

proper   to   set   aside   the   conviction   under   Section   302   of   IPC

passed by the High Court and convert the same to Section 304

Part­I of the IPC. 

18.         Herein,   it  is   brought  to  our   notice  that  the  appellant

has undergone 10 years of actual imprisonment which amounts

to   18   years   of   imprisonment   as   per   the   concerned   State   Jail

Manual.   As   the   maximum   sentence   prescribed   for   the   offence

committed   under   Section   304   Part­I,   IPC   is   10   years   and   the

appellant is stated to have already undergone 10 years of actual

imprisonment, it is directed that he be released forthwith, if not

required in any other case.

19.         Thus, the appeal stands disposed of, accordingly.


                                                 .........................J.      
                                                 (N.V.RAMANA)


                                                 .........................J.
                                      (MOHAN M.SHANTANAGOUDAR)
NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 31, 2018.

                                         11
12

