
Supreme Court of India
State Of Karnataka vs Dondusa Namasa Baddi on 5 August, 2010Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           CRL.A. 123 of 1997                                                         REPORTABLE
                                                    1




                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.         123 OF 1997



                STATE OF KARNATAKA                                         Appellant (s)

                           VERSUS

         DONDUSA NAMASA BADDI                                         Respondent(s)




                                              O R D E R

           1.        We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.



          2.          This matter arises out of a search and seizure

          which took place on 3rd September, 1987.                    This appeal

          was also adjourned time and again since the year 1997

          to await the decision of the Constitution Bench.                       This

          decision has come and is reported as                   Karnail Singh V.

          State of Haryana (2009) 8 SCC 539.                   The question posed

          was        as   to   the   effect    of       non-compliance   with     the

          provisions of Section 42 and in particular 42(2) of the

          Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.

          This       matter    was   referred    to      the   Constitution     Bench

          owing to an apparent conflict between two judgments of

          this Court, Abdul Rashid Ibrahim Mansuri v. State of
CRL.A. 123 of 1997                                                             REPORTABLE
                                                   2



          Gujarat (2000) 2 SCC 513 wherein it was held by a three

          Judge Bench that compliance with Section 42(2) of the

          Act was mandatory and failure of the police officer to

          take down the information received by him in writing

          and        to    forthwith    send   a   report         to   his   immediate

          official superior would cause prejudice to the accused

          whereas in Sajan Abraham v. State of Kerala (2001) 6

          SCC 692 which had also been decided by a three Judge

          Bench it had been held that substantial compliance with

          the        provisions    of   Section        42   was    sufficient.      In

          Karnail Singh's case, however,                    the Constitution Bench

          has observed thus:


                          32. Under Section 42(2) as it stood
                          prior to the amendment such empowered
                          officer who takes down any information
                          in writing or records the grounds
                          under proviso to Section 42(1) should
                          forthwith send a copy thereof to his
                          immediate official superior. If there
                          is total non-compliance with this
                          provision the same would adversely
                          affect the prosecution case and to
                          that extent it is mandatory. But if
                          there is delay whether it was undue or
                          whether the same has been explained or
                          not, will be a question of fact in
                          each case, it is to be concluded that
                          the   mandatory  enforcement    of   the
                          provisions of Section 42 of the Act
                          non-compliance of which may vitiate a
                          trial has been restricted only to the
                          provision of sending a copy of the
                          information   written   down    by   the
                          empowered officer to immediateofficial
                          superior   and   not   to   any    other
                          condition of the Section.
CRL.A. 123 of 1997                                                      REPORTABLE
                                              3




          And again.

                       35 (d) While total non-compliance with
                       requirements of sub-sections (1) and
                       (2) of section 42 is impermissible,
                       delayed compliance with satisfactory
                       explanation about the delay will be
                       acceptable compliance with Section 42.
                       To illustrate, if any delay may result
                       in the accused escaping or the goods
                       or    evidence     being    destroyed      or
                       removed, not recording in writing the
                       information         received,          before
                       initiating action, or non-sending a
                       copy   of    such    information     to   the
                       official superior forthwith, may not
                       be treated as violation of Section 42.
                       But if the information was received
                       when the police officer was in the
                       police station with sufficient time to
                       take action, and if the police officer
                       fails    to    record    in   writing     the
                       information received, or fails to send
                       a   copy    thereof,    to   the    official
                       superior, then it will be a suspicious
                       circumstance being a clear violation
                       of section 42 of the Act. Similarly,
                       where the police officer does not
                       record the information at all, and
                       does not inform the official superior
                       at all, then also it will be a clear
                       violation of section 42 of the Act.
                       Whether      there     is   adequate       or
                       substantial compliance with section 42
                       or not is a question of fact to be
                       decided    in    each   case.    The    above
                       position got strengthened with the
                       amendment to section 42 by Act 9 of
                       2001."

          3.         Concededly in the present matter, no information

          was        taken down in writing by the police officer or

          conveyed to the immediate police officer.                 Shri A.K.

          Mishra,       the   learned    State    counsel    has,      however,
CRL.A. 123 of 1997                                                                REPORTABLE
                                                     4



          forcefully argued that there was evidence in the oral

          evidence of P.W. 10, the investigating officer, that he

          had complied the formalities enjoined by Section 42(2).



          4.         It   is    not   the     case       of   the    prosecution     that

          sufficient       time       was     not    available        to    record    the

          information          in   writing    and       send   it   to    the   superior

          officer and in the face of it, we are of the opinion

          that any oral evidence of the police officer will not

          be in compliance with the provisions of Section 42(2)

          of the Act.


               5. We, accordingly, dismiss the State appeal.




                                                      .......................J
                                                      [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                                     .........................J
                                                     [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]
        NEW DELHI
        AUGUST 05, 2010.

