
Supreme Court of India
Babulal Sahu vs State Of Chhattisgarh on 13 April, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl.A. 1523 of 2007                                                        REPORTABLE

                                                 1





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1523 of 2007




            BABULAL SAHU                                    ..... APPELLANT



                                              VERSUS

             
            STATE OF CHHATISGARH                           .....   RESPONDENT

                                         

                                             O R D E R

                       This appeal challenges the concurrent finding of 

          conviction and sentence  awarded to the appellant under 

          Section   302   IPC   for   having   murdered   his   wife   Basanti 

          Bai.     In   the   light   of   the   fact   that   leave   had   been 

          granted in this matter on the 29th  October, 2007, only 

          as to the nature of the offence, only the bare facts 

          are required to be given.  Suffice it to say  that  on 

          the intervening night of 3rd  and 4th  January, 2000, the 

          appellant   sought   to   have   sex   with   his   wife.     She, 

          however, retorted that she would not oblige him for the 

          reason   that   whenever   his   bhabhi   was   around   he   would 

          prefer   having   sex   with   her.     As   per   the   prosecution 

          story   this   infuriated   the   appellant   and   he   committed 

          the   murder   of   his   wife   by   strangulating   her.     During 

          the   course   of   the   investigation,   it   was   found   that 


Crl.A. 1523 of 2007                                                           REPORTABLE

                                                   2





          there   were   no   eye   witnesses   to   the   incident   and   the 

          entire   case   hinged   on   six   pieces   of   circumstantial 

          evidence.  The trial court and the High Court have both 

          found that the circumstances aforesaid have been proved 

          and have led to the conviction of the appellant.   Mr. 

          Vijay Panjwani, the learned Amicus Curiae taking a clue 

          from the leave granted has argued that the case would 

          fall under Exception (4) to Section 300 of the Indian 

          Penal Code and the appellant was, therefore, liable to 

          be   convicted   under   Section   304   Part   (i)   or   Part   (ii) 

          thereof   and   the   appeal   to   that   extent   should   be 

          allowed.  The learned counsel has also placed reliance 

          on   the   judgment   of   the   Bombay   High   Court   reported   as 

          Ghan Sham  v.  State of Maharashtra  (1996) 1 CRL.LJ 27. 

          We   have   gone   through   the   evidence   on   record   and 

          considered the submissions made by the learned counsel 

          for   the   parties.     It   will   be   seen   that   as   per   the 

          prosecution   story   the   incident   happened   because   the 

          deceased refused to have sex with the appellant who was 

          her legally wedded husband and this refusal apparently 

          had annoyed him, leading to the murder.  Exception 4 to 

          Section 300 of IPC reads as under:


                       "S.300 Exception 4- Culpable homicide 
                       is   not   murder   if   it   is   committed  
                       without   premeditation   in   a   sudden 
                       fight   in   the   heat   of   passion   upon   a  
                       sudden   quarrel   and   without   the 


Crl.A. 1523 of 2007                                                        REPORTABLE

                                                3





                        offender having taken undue advantage 
                        or   acted   in   a   cruel   or   unusual  
                        manner.

                        Explanation- It is immaterial in such 
                        cases   which   party   offers   the 
                        provocation   or   commits   the   first 
                        assault."
                       A bare reading of this provision would indicate 

          that   it   refers   to   certain   specific   ingredients   which 

          have   to   be   kept   in   mind   before   it   can   be   taken   as 

          applicable.  The last two points that are relevant are 

          that the offender should not have taken undue advantage 

          of his position or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. 

          We find that these conditions are not satisfied in this 

          case.   We have gone through the evidence and the post 

          mortem report and see that the appellant caused as many 

          as   14   injuries   on   the   neck   of   the   deceased   and 

          strangulated   her   with   enormous   force.   He   had, 

          therefore,   taken   undue   advantage   of   the   fact   that   he 

          was a male and was much stronger physically   and the 

          murder had also been committed in a revolting and cruel 

          manner.  It is true that the refusal of a wife to have 

          sexual   relations   with   her   husband   had   led   to   the 

          quarrel   between   the   spouses   but   we   find   that   in   the 

          circumstances all the conditions for the applicability 

          of Exception 4 have not been fulfilled. 


Crl.A. 1523 of 2007                                                            REPORTABLE

                                                    4





                       Mr.   D.K.   Sinha,   learned   counsel   for   the 

          respondent-State   of   Chhattisgarh   has   also   pointed   out 

          that the demand of the appellant for sex had apparently 

          been satisfied as was clear  from the medical evidence 

          which showed that semen  had been found on the clothes 

          of the victim as well as of the appellant, which is, 

          indicative that the murder had been committed after sex 

          between the couple.   In other words, the deceased had 

          already   obliged   her   husband   and   the   cause   for   the 

          sudden quarrel no longer existed.  We, therefore, find 

          no merit in the appeal which is dismissed accordingly.

                       The   learned   Amicus   Curiae   will   have   his   fee   of 

          `7,000/-.


                                                   .........................J
                                                   [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                   ........................J
                                                   [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

         NEW DELHI
         APRIL 13, 2011.



