
Supreme Court of India
Philomena Dhanin vs State Of Rajasthan & Ors on 11 November, 2013Bench: H.L. Gokhale, J. Chelameswar
           


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1918  OF 2013
                   (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.9968/2011)


      PHILOMENA DHANIN (DEAD) BY L.RS.           Appellant(s)
                           :VERSUS:
      STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.                  Respondent(s)






                                  O R D E R

               Heard Mr. Amit George, learned counsel  in  support  of  this
      appeal, Mr. Ram  Naresh  Yadav,  learned  counsel  for  the  State  of
      Rajasthan and Mr. Rishabh Sancheti, learned counsel appearing for  the
      contesting respondent No.3.  Leave granted.

      2.       The appellant herein has grievance  against  respondent  No.3
      who is the Sarpanch of Village Dhanin, District Rajsamand in the State
      of Rajasthan. It is the case of the appellant that her restaurant  was
      demolished by respondent No.3 and her husband  the  second  respondent
      herein. Therefore, she  initiated  necessary  proceedings  before  the
      Magistrate's Court. Respondent  Nos.2  &  3  filed  a  petition  under
      Section 482 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure  before  the  Rajasthan
      High Court being Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No.758 of  2007,  for
      quashing the proceedings  initiated  before  the  Magistrate's  Court,
      contending that as far as respondent No.3 is concerned, the demolition
      was in discharge of the official duties of respondent No.3 as a public
      servant and prior sanction of the State Government was to be  obtained
      and therefore she could not be prosecuted.  The High Court quashed the
      proceedings as against respondent No.3. The High Court, however,  held
      that the matter will  proceed  against  respondent  No.2,  husband  of
      respondent No.3.

      3.       Being aggrieved by that order passed by the High Court,  this
      appeal has been filed.  Learned counsel for the appellant pointed  out
      that protection under Section 197 of Cr.P.C. is not available  against
      illegal acts. It is available only to the public servant who cannot be
      removed from the office  except  with  prior  sanction  of  the  State
      Government. The respondent No.3 would not fall under this category.

      4.       Learned counsel appearing for respondent No.3 contended  that
      under the State Amendment to Section 21 of the Indian  Penal  Code,  a
      Sarpanch is to be considered as a public  servant.   Counsel  for  the
      appellant  on  the  other  hand,  pointed  out  that  the  removal  of
      respondent No.3 can be done by passing a resolution in  the  Panchayat
      under Section 37 of the Rajasthan Panchayats Act. That  being  so,  in
      our view, the High Court erred in passing the order.  We set aside the
      order passed by the High Court.  The proceeding  arising  out  of  FIR
      No.111 of 1997 under Sections 447, 336, 426 & 120 of the Indian  Penal
      Code initiated by  the  appellant  against  respondent  No.3  will  be
      restored and  decided  on  its  own  merits.  The  appeal  is  allowed
      accordingly.

                                                  .........................J
               (H.L. GOKHALE)








                                     ...........................J
                                     (J. CHELAMESWAR)


      New Delhi;
      November 11, 2013.

