
Supreme Court of India
Sukhpal Singh Khaira vs The State Of Punjab on 10 May, 2019Author: ...………………………….…….
                                                               NON­REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 885 OF 2019

                           (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 9063 of 2017)



          SUKHPAL SINGH KHAIRA                                    ...A PPELLANT (S)

                                             VERSUS

              THE STATE   OF   PUNJAB                             …R ESPONDENT (S)

                                              with

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 886 OF 2019

                           (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 9150 of 2017)

          JOGA SINGH AND ANOTHER                                  ….A PPELLANT (S)

                                            VERSUS

            THE STATE     OF   PUNJAB                            …R ESPONDENT (S)



                                            ORDER

1.        Leave granted.


2.        These Criminal Appeals are filed against the impugned judgment

          and order of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, dated
 Signature Not Verified


          17.11.2017, passed in Criminal Revision No. 4070 of 2017 and
 Digitally signed by
 SATISH KUMAR YADAV
 Date: 2019.05.10
 16:47:50 IST
 Reason:


          Criminal Revision No. 4113 of 2017, wherein the High Court



                                               1
     dismissed the Criminal Revision Petitions and upheld the order of

     the Trial Court summoning the accused­appellants herein, under

     Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 [hereinafter

     ‘CrPC’ for brevity].


3.   The factual narration of this case is that on 05.03.2015, a First

     Information Report was lodged in the Police Station Sadar,

     Jalalabad against eleven accused for the offence committed under

     Sections 21, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29 and 30 of the Narcotic Drugs and

     Psychotropic Substance Act, 1985, Section 25­A of the Arms Act

     and Section 66 of the Information Technology Act, 2000. Initially,

     under the 1st charge sheet dated 06.09.2015, ten accused were

     summoned and put to trial in Sessions Case No. 289 of 2015. Even

     though a second charge sheet was filed by the police, the same did

     not name the accused­appellants herein.


4.   Subsequently, on 31.07.2017, the prosecution filed an application

     under Section 311 of CrPC for recalling PW­4 and PW­5, which

     came to be allowed. On such recall the aforesaid witnesses named

     the accused­appellants herein. Thereafter, the prosecution filed an

     application under Section 319 of CrPC in Sessions Case No. 289 of

     2015 for summoning additional five accused (including the present



                                     2
     appellants herein) by placing reliance on statements of PW­4, PW­5

     (recalled witnesses) and PW­13.


5.   On 31.10.2017, the Sessions Court first pronounced the judgment

     in Sessions Case No. 289 of 2015, convicting the nine other

     accused put on trial. On the same day, by a separate order the

     Sessions Court, while allowing the application of the prosecution,

     summoned accused­appellants herein under Section 319 of CrPC.

     Aggrieved by the summoning by the Sessions Court, the accused­

     appellants, filed separate Criminal Revision Petitions, in the High

     Court of Punjab and Haryana, being Criminal Revision Nos. 4070

     and 4113 of 2017. The High Court by the common impugned

     judgment, dismissed the Criminal Revision, and upheld the

     summoning order passed by the Sessions Court.


6.   Aggrieved by the impugned judgment and order of the High Court,

     accused appellants have approached this Court through these

     Special Leave Petitions.


7.   Heard learned counsels appearing for both parties. Mr. P. S.

     Patwalia, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

     accused­appellant in SLP (Crl) No. 9063 of 2017 contended by

     relying upon the Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 3


                                       3
     SCC 92 to state that, the power under Section 319 (1) CrPC can be

     exercised at any time after the filing of the charge­sheet and before

     the pronouncement of the judgment. In the present case, the

     aforesaid summoning order passed after the order of conviction is

     in clear breach of the principles laid down in the Hardeep Singh

     Case (supra). The counsel further contended that when the

     Hardeep Singh Case (supra), has clearly prescribed the stage at

     which   an   application   under   Section   319    Cr.P.C,   can   be

     entertained, the aforesaid violation is not merely procedural but is

     rather a substantial one. Lastly, the counsel contended that the

     moment the trial is concluded and the matter is reserved for

     judgment, then the stage for exercising power under Section 319

     CrPC, ends and the court becomes functus officio.


8.   Mr. V. Giri, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

     accused­appellant (in SLP (Crl) No.9150/2017), while generally

     supporting Mr. Patwalia has submitted that the order summoning

     the appellants herein was passed simultaneous with the order of

     conviction of other accused. The counsel submitted that Section

     319 (4) Cr.P.C, has to be read along with Section 319 (1)­ which

     provides that the new person has to be tried together with the




                                        4
     accused. This principle is based on the “commonality of evidences”.

     But in the present case, allowing such application under Section

     319 Cr.P.C, goes to the root of fair trial, as the court has already

     considered such evidence and has proceeded to speak on it. It is

     the same evidence which would be reappreciated, and the inclusion

     of such evidence vitiates the principles of fair trial.


9.   Mr. Harin P. Raval, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

     the respondent State in SLP (Crl.) No. 9063 of 2017 argued that

     even if it is assumed that the summoning order was passed

     subsequent to the conviction order, the relevant consideration is

     that application of mind was within the prescribed time limit under

     Section 319 of Cr.P.C. The process of application of mind and

     pronouncement of summoning order are separate under Section

     319, Cr.P.C, and it is the time of application of mind which is

     relevant. The counsel further drew our attention to the fact that

     undisputedly, the application under Section 319 CrPC was filed

     and heard during the pendency of the trial, and the order thereon

     was reserved. In this context, the counsel submitted that, the

     application under Section 319, Cr.P.C was separated from the trial

     by the direction of the High Court so as to complete the trial

     expeditiously in a time bound manner. Now the aforesaid fact


                                         5
    cannot be used to prejudice the case of the State. Lastly, the

    counsel maintained that the summoning order under Section 319,

    CrPC was passed on the same day, simultaneously, along with the

    final judgment convicting the other accused. Therefore, there is no

    procedural irregularity committed. Moreover, he emphasized that

    the trial in this case could not be said to be completed unless a

    decision was given in respect of all the accused fully. This

    submission was based on the fact that the trial had been bifurcated

    and was pending in respect of the other absconding accused, which

    would sustain the exercise of power under Section 319.


10. Mr. Sidharth Luthra, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

    the respondent State in SLP (Crl.) No. 9150 of 2017, while

    supporting the arguments made by Senior Counsel Mr. Harin P.

    Raval, further submitted that it is settled law that procedural laws

    must be liberally construed to render justice. Moreover, assuming

    but not admitting that an irregularity in the exercise of power

    under Section 319 Cr.P.C was committed by the Trial Court, the

    same would not vitiate the proceedings. The counsel concluded his

    arguments by stating that the finding of the trial court cannot be

    reversed under Section 465 CrPC as the appellant has not made

    out a case of failure of justice.


                                        6
11. In light of the facts and arguments presented before us, the

      following questions arise for our consideration: ­


           I.   Whether the order of the Sessions Judge summoning
                the appellants herein as additional accused was in
                breach of Section 319, CrPC?

          II.   If the answer to the above question is in the
                affirmative, could the order of the courts below still be
                sustained under the Code?

12.    At the outset, it is pertinent to note that Section 319 Cr.P.C

      reflects two important objectives; firstly, the Courts duty to bring

      home the guilt of all the accused and render complete justice and

      secondly, the duty of the State to take every criminal prosecution to

      its logical end. This Court in a catena of judgments has defined

      Section 319 CrPC as an enabling provision, especially in the

      circumstances where the investigating agency had failed to array

      any person as an accused. This provision empowers the courts for

      calling such persons to face the trial. The Section stipulates that a

      ‘Court’ may summon any additional accused if it appears from the

      ‘evidence’, during the course of any inquiry or trial, that such an

      individual, not being an accused, has committed any offence for

      which such person could be tried together with the named accused.

      Sub­section 4 of Section 319 of CrPC indicates that the proceeding




                                         7
    with respect to the summoned individual, as per Clause (1) of

    Section 319 of CrPC, may be de­novo or joint trial.


13. The appellants have argued for a comprehensive reading of Section

    319 (1) CrPC, wherein the aspect of application of mind by the

    judge as well as the pronouncement of the final order are both

    bound by the prescribed time limit. They have extensively relied on

    the Hardeep Singh Case, to point out that the trial court was

    functus officio and did not have the jurisdiction to deliver the order

    of summoning.


14. The High Court while repelling the contention of the appellants that

    the trial court was functus officio when the summoning order was

    passed, placed reliance on the factual matrix explained later, in

    Shashikant Singh v. Tarkeshwar Singh, (2002)5 SCC 738, and

    noted that the decision in Shashikant Singh Case (supra) was on

    the same point rather than Hardeep Singh Case (Supra).


15. In Shashikant Singh Case (supra), this Court was concerned with

    a unique situation, the question which was before the Court therein

    was­




                                      8
          “Can a person summoned pursuant to an order
          passed by a court in exercise of power conferred by
          Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
          (the Code) be tried for the offence for which he is
          summoned after the conclusion of the trial
          wherein such an order of summoning was passed,
          is the question that falls for determination in this
          appeal?”
                                                 (emphasis supplied)

16. While answering the same, the 2 two Judge Bench in Shashikant

    Singh Case (supra) held as follows:


          9… The provision cannot be interpreted to mean that
          since the trial in respect of a person who was before
          the court has concluded with the result that the
          newly added person cannot be tried together with the
          accused who was before the court when order under
          Section 319(1) was passed, the order would become
          ineffective and inoperative, nullifying the opinion
          earlier formed by the court on the basis of the
          evidence before it that the newly added person
          appears to have committed the offence resulting in an
          order for his being brought before the court.
             …
          11. The mandate of the law of fresh trial is
          mandatory whereas the mandate that newly added
          accused could be tried together with the accused
          is directory.
                                                   (emphasis supplied)

17. The High Court has placed extensive reliance on the factual matrix

    of Shashikant Singh Case (supra), to draw parallels between the

    similarities in both cases. The summoning order in former case was

    passed before the trial had ended, whereas in this case it is passed


                                     9
   after the trial has ended viz. after passing of the judgment in

   Sessions Case No. 289 of 2015. Therefore, this Court while dealing

   with the Shashikant Singh Case (supra), interpreted the law

   based on the facts available therein, whereas the present case has a

   different context altogether.


18. In this context it is important to note that, when Hardeep Singh

   Case was heard by the two­Judge Bench [(2009) 16 SCC 785], this

   Court took note of the holdings in the Shashikant Singh Case

   (supra). The two­judge bench observed that:


         32.     In Shashikant Singh v. Tarkeshwar Singh
         [(2002)5 SCC 738: 2002 SCC (Cri) 1203], during the
         pendency of trial of an accused, another person was
         summoned by the trial court under Section 319 of
         the Code. But by the time he could be brought
         before the court, the trial against the accused was
         over. It was held by this Court that the words
         “could be tried together with the accused” in
         Section 319(1) were merely directory and if the
         trial against the other accused is over, such a
         person who was subsequently added as an
         accused, could be tried after the conclusion of
         the trial of the main accused.
                                                  (emphasis supplied)

19. Taking note of the above the two­Judge Bench in Hardeep Singh’s

   Case referred the matter to a three­Judge Bench on the following

   questions­


                                   10
         “(1) When the power under sub­section (1) of
         Section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
         1973 of addition of the accused can be exercised
         by a court? Whether application under Section
         319 of the Code is not maintainable unless the
         cross­examination of the witness is complete?

         (2) What is the test and what are the guidelines of
         exercising power under sub­section (1) of Section
         319 of the Code? Whether such power can be
         exercised only if the court is satisfied that the
         accused summoned in all likelihood would be
         convicted?”

                                              (emphasis supplied)

20. Subsequently, this Court in the aforesaid matter of Hardeep

   Singh’s Case (supra) laid down the scope and extent of the powers

   of the Court in the criminal justice system to array any person as

   an accused during the course of trial as per Section 319 Cr.P.C.

   The questions which were reformulated by the larger Bench were­


         (i) What is the stage at which power Under Section
         319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 can
         be exercised?

         (ii) Whether the word "evidence" used in Section
         319(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 could
         only mean evidence tested by cross­examination or
         the court can exercise the power under the said
         provision even on the basis of the statement made in
         the examination­ in­chief of the witness concerned?

         (iii) Whether the word "evidence" used in Section
         319(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 has
         been used in a comprehensive sense and includes the
         evidence collected during investigation or the word


                                  11
         "evidence" is limited to the evidence recorded during
         trial?

         (iv) What is the nature of the satisfaction required to
         invoke the power Under Section 319 of the Code of
         Criminal Procedure to arraign an accused? Whether
         the power Under Section 319(1) of the Code of
         Criminal Procedure, 1973 can be exercised only if the
         court is satisfied that the accused summoned will in
         all likelihood be convicted?

         (v) Does the power Under Section 319 of the Code of
         Criminal Procedure, 1973 extend to persons not
         named in the FIR or named in the FIR but not
         charged or who have been discharged?

                                          (emphasis supplied)

21. We note that the difference of formulation in the reference

   questions and the final order of the Constitution Bench with

   respect to the Question no. 1, makes a difference with regard to the

   present case. It is precisely the gap, between the restricted re­

   formulation of the ‘Question no. 1’ by the Constitution Bench and

   the ‘Question no. 1’ in the reference order of the Hardeep Singh

   Case, which these unique facts fit into. The earlier ‘Question no.1’

   in the reference Order was broader in comparison to the

   ‘Reformulated Question no. 1’ by the Constitution Bench. It is this

   marginal area which is a sub­silentio, that needs to be referred to a

   larger Bench again.


                                    12
22. In the Hardeep Singh Case (supra), the Constitution Bench set out

   to answer the questions referred above. In this part we are mostly

   concerned with the first question. The Court, while assessing the

   ambit of the term ‘trial’, was concerned with the stage during which

   the power under Section 319 of CrPC could be exercised, in this

   regard, it was held­


         “Since after the filing of the charge­sheet, the
         court reaches the stage of inquiry and as soon as
         the court frames the charges, the trial
         commences, and therefore, the power under
         Section 319(1) Code of Criminal Procedure can be
         exercised at any time after the charge­sheet is
         filed and before the pronouncement of judgment,
         except during the stage of Section 207/208 Code of
         Criminal Procedure, committal etc., which is only a
         pre­trial stage, intended to put the process into
         motion. This stage cannot be said to be a judicial step
         in the true sense for it only requires an application of
         mind rather than a judicial application of mind.”

                                                  (emphasis supplied)


23. It was contended that the question of law herein is unique to the

   present case, and the earlier judgment of Hardeep Singh (supra)

   did not have an opportunity to cast any light about the validity of

   summoning orders pronounced after the passing of the judgment.

   They further argued that, the Hardeep Singh Case (supra), treats




                                    13
Section    319    in    an     isolated        manner    without    taking    into

    consideration the spirit and the mandate of the Code.


24. To   strengthen     the      aforesaid     submission,     the     State   further

    contended that Section 465, Cr.P.C was introduced to provide for a

    balanced mechanism under the Criminal Justice System and to

    stop the Courts from getting into hyper technicalities and

    committing serious violations. This Court in Hardeep Singh Case

    (supra) has not considered the above principles or the issues which

    could possibly arise before the trial court while dealing with

    applications under Section 319, Cr.P.C. The State therefore

    submitted that, Section 319, Cr.P.C. should not be treated as an

    isolated   island      and    should      instead   be    given    a   pragmatic

    interpretation by keeping in view the entire mandate of the Code to

    render complete justice.


25. Furthermore, it needs to be determined whether the trial is said to

    be fully concluded even if the bifurcated trial in respect of the

    absconded accused is still pending consideration.


26. The appellant herein contended that, the observations made in the

    Hardeep Singh Case (supra), cannot be diluted by a Bench of this

    strength. We have considered the averments made by the counsel


                                              14
    on behalf of both parties, we feel that it would be appropriate to

    place the same for consideration before a larger Bench. However,

    we are of the considered opinion that, power under Section 319,

    Cr.P.C being extraordinary in nature, the trial courts should be

    cautious while summoning accused to avoid complexities and to

    ensure fair trial. We must remind ourselves that, timely disposal of

    the matters furthers the interest of justice.


27. After pursuing the relevant facts and circumstances, the following

    substantial questions of law arise for further consideration­


     I.     Whether the trial court has the power under Section
            319 of CrPC for summoning additional accused when
            the trial with respect to other co­accused has ended
            and the judgment of conviction rendered on the same
            date before pronouncing the summoning order?

     II.    Whether the trial court has the power under Section
            319 of the CrPC for summoning additional accused
            when the trial in respect of certain other absconding
            accused (whose presence is subsequently secured) is
            ongoing/pending, having been bifurcated from the
            main trial?

     III.   What are the guidelines that the competent court must
            follow while exercising power under Section 319
            Cr.P.C?


                                      15
28. In light of the same, we direct the Registry to place these matters

    before Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India for constitution of a Bench

    of appropriate strength for considering the aforesaid questions.




                                          ...………………………….……. J.
                                                    [N.V. Ramana]




                                          ...………………………….……. J.
                                          [Mohan M. Shantanagoudar]


      New Delhi;
      May 10, 2019




                                     16

