
Supreme Court of India
Lazer vs State Of Tamilnadu on 15 July, 2013Bench: H.L. Gokhale, Madan B. Lokur
           


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION


                  WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 62   OF 2013


      LAZER                                         Petitioner(s)
                           :VERSUS:
      STATE OF TAMIL NADU                         Respondent(s)










                                  O R D E R

               Heard Mr. Dwarakanath,  learned  counsel  appearing  for  the
      petitioner and Mr. Subramonium Prasad, learned counsel for  the  State
      of Tamil Nadu.  This petition under Article 32 of the Constitution  of
      India has been filed for release of the petitioner from  jail  on  the
      ground that the petitioner has been inside jail for more than 26 years
      in view of his conviction under Section 302 of the Indian  Penal  Code
      and other charges. He has relied upon an order passed by  a  Bench  of
      this Court in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 38 of 2011(Harpal Singh Vs.
      State of Haryana & Anr.), to which one of us (H.L. Gokhale, J)  was  a
      party.  That was also a  writ  petition  wherein  the  petitioner  had
      undergone imprisonment for more than 20 years. We may,  however,  note
      that the condition of his health was placed before the Court  and  the
      State Government did not dispute the correctness of  the  certificates
      produced by him and it was in these circumstances  that  an  order  of
      release was passed.

      2.       Now, the law in  this  behalf  has  been  clarified  and  the
      sentence for life is interpreted to mean sentence for the  whole  life
      of the convict concerned. The power, of course, remains with the State
      Government to remit the sentence as per rules if such  an  application
      is made to the State Government.

      3.       Mr. Subramonium Prasad, learned  counsel  for  the  State  of
      Tamil Nadu states that there are many other difficulties as far as the
      petitioner is concerned, inasmuch as he did not return to the jail  on
      six occasions when he was released on parole and  also  indulged  into
      criminal activities when on parole.  Be that as it  may,  it  will  be
      open to the petitioner to apply to the  appropriate  Government  under
      Section 432 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and then it is  for  the
      State Government to consider the application in accordance  with  law.
      Mr. Prasad assures us that if such an application is made, it will  be
      considered and decided expeditiously.
               The writ petition stands disposed of.

                                                  .........................J
               (H.L. GOKHALE)








                                     ..........................J
                                     (MADAN B. LOKUR)


      New Delhi;
      July 15, 2013.

