
Supreme Court of India
S.K.Jha Commodre vs State Of Kerala & Anr on 11 January, 2011Author: .................J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                                 REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF  INDIA
                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION                      

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1017  OF 2010




       S.K. JHA COMMODRE                              ..  APPELLANT(S)

                          vs.

       STATE OF KERALA AND ANR.                       ..  RESPONDENT(S)
                                                                                      O 
                                                                           R D E R





              Heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the   parties   in 

     extenso.

              It   is   clear   to   us   that   the   judgment   of   the   High 

     Court   is   in   conformity     with   the   judgment   of   the 

     Constitution   Bench   of   this   Court   in  Som   Dutt   Datta  vs. 

     Union   of   India   and   Others  reported   in   AIR   (1969)   SC   414. 

     The   Constitution   Bench   while   construing   Rule   3   of   the 


Criminal   Courts   and   Court   Martial   (Adjustment   of 

Jurisdiction) Rules 1978 read with Sec. 549 of the Cr.P.C. 

(now Section 475 of the Cr.P.C.) held that the option as to 

whether the accused be tried before the Criminal Court or 

by a Court Martial could be exercised only after the Police 

had   completed   the   investigation   and   submitted   the   charge-

sheet   and   that   the   provisions   of   the   Rule   could   not   be 

invoked   in   a   case   where   the   police   had   merely   started   an 





investigation   against   a   personnel   subject   to   Military, 

Naval   or   Air   Force   law.     The   facts   of   the   present   case 

indicate that three Naval Officers were arrested on 





                                   -2-

10th  January,   2008   for   offences   punishable   under   Sections 

143, 147, 148, 452, 307, 326, 427 read with Section 149 of 


the   I.P.C.   and   some   other   penal   laws.   They   were   produced 

before the Magistrate on the 11th January, 2008 who remanded 

them to judicial custody.  An application was filed on the 

14th  January,   2008   by   the   Commanding   Officer   of   the   Naval 

Unit to which they belonged for handing over   the accused 

for   trial   under   the   Navy   Act,   1957.   This   application   was 

rejected   by   the   Magistrate   holding   that   the   stage   of 

consideration   of   the   application   would   arise   only   on   the 





completion of the police investigation which was still at a 

preliminary   stage   and   that   the   request   of   the   Commanding 

Officer   was   premature.     The   order   of   the   Magistrate   was 

challenged   before   the   High   Court   of   Kerala   in   revision. 

This   too   has   been   dismissed   on   similar   grounds.     We   see 

from   the   facts   that   the   observations   of   the   Constitution 

Bench apply fully to the facts herein. The stage at which 

the option can be exercised by the Commanding Officer (as 


to   whether   the   accused   should   be   tried   before   a   Court 

Martial   or   a   Criminal   Court)   cannot   be   examined   at   this 

stage as the   investigation has not been   completed and a 

charge-sheet has yet to be submitted.

        The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

                                     .................J.
                                         (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)
                                              
                                                                 
                                        ....................J.





                                  (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)

New Delhi,
January 11, 2011.



