
Supreme Court of India
Ashoksinh Jayendrasinh vs The State Of Gujarat on 7 May, 2019Author: R Banumathi
                                                                  REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1123 OF 2010

                         ASHOKSINH JAYENDRASINH                             …..Appellant
                                                     VERSUS
                         STATE OF GUJARAT                          …..Respondent


                                                 JUDGMENT

                         R. BANUMATHI, J.

                              This appeal arises out of the judgment dated 05.03.2009

                         passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Criminal

                         Appeal No.10 of 2001 in and by which the High Court affirmed the

                         conviction of appellant-accused No.1 under Section 302 IPC read

                         with Section 34 IPC and the sentence of life imprisonment

                         imposed upon him. The High Court also affirmed the conviction of

                         the appellant under Section 307 IPC read with Section 34 IPC

                         and under Section 25(c) of the Arms Act and the sentence of

                         imprisonment imposed upon him. The High Court acquitted the

                         appellant for the offence under Section 3(1)(x) of the Scheduled
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2019.05.07
15:13:49 IST
Reason:

                         Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.


                                                                                         1
2.      Brief facts which led to filing of this appeal are:-

        On 23.11.1997 at about 09.00 PM, accused Nos.1 to 5

along with their servant (accused No.6) and another one accused

gathered themselves and started ploughing the disputed road

with a tractor for which a civil suit in Regular Suit No.131 of 1997

filed    by   complainant-Somabhai        Rupabhai     (PW-3)   against

appellant-accused No.1 and accused No.3 was already pending

before the Court of Civil Judge, Modasa. According to the

prosecution, the said road was used by the complainant and his

family members for going to and fro. On the date of incident i.e.

on 23.11.1997 at about 09:00 PM, when accused persons were

ploughing the road, the complainant and his family members

intervened and prevented them from carrying out the ploughing

activities on which accused started abusing the complainant and

his family members with caste remarks. Due to fear, complainant

and his family members went back to their houses which were

near to the place of incident. In the meantime, appellant/accused

No.1-Ashoksinh Jayendrasinh and accused No.2-Kalusinh @

Harpalsinh armed with guns, accused No.4-Balbadhra Singh

armed with stick and accused No.3-Gayendra Singh who was

driving the tractor came there. Thereafter, accused Nos.1 and 2

                                                                      2
fired three gun shots which hit deceased Somiben, wife of

Hirabhai (PW-5), Ramanbhai (PW-6) and Nandaben (PW-7) due

to which Somiben died on the spot and PWs 6 and 7 got injured.

Thereafter, all the accused ran away from the place of incident.

On 24.11.1997, on the basis of the complaint lodged by

complainant (PW-3), FIR was registered against all the accused

under Sections 302, 307, 120B IPC read with Section 34 IPC,

143, 147, 148, 149, 506(II), 323 and 504 IPC, under Section 25(c)

of the Arms Act and under Section 3(1)(x) of the Scheduled

Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.

3.   Upon completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed

against the appellant and other co-accused under Sections 302,

307, 120B IPC read with Section 34 IPC, 143, 147, 148, 149,

506(II), 323 and 504 IPC, under Section 25(c) of the Arms Act

and under Section 3(1)(x) of the Scheduled Castes and

Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.

4.   To bring home the guilt of the accused, the trial court

examined    four   eye-witnesses    viz.   complainant-Somabhai

Rupabhai (PW-3), Hirabhai Somabhai (PW-5) and injured eye-

witnesses-Ramanbhai      Mulabhai     Rangjibhai    (PW-6)   and

Nandaben Hirabhai (PW-7), Dr. Rohit Kumar (PW-1) who
                                                                3
conducted the post-mortem on the dead body of deceased

Somiben, Dr. Deshmukh Hiralal (PW-4) who examined the injured

eye-witnesses and other witnesses. Upon consideration of the

evidence of injured eye-witnesses (PWs 6 and 7), recovery of

weapons and other evidence on record, the trial court vide its

judgment dated 15.11.2000 convicted the appellant-accused No.1

and accused No.2 under Section 302 IPC read with Section 34

IPC and sentenced them to undergo life imprisonment along with

fine of Rs.5,000/- each. They were also convicted under Section

307 IPC read with Section 34 IPC and were sentenced to

undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years along with fine of

Rs.5,000/- each. They were also convicted under Section 25(c) of

the Arms Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

three years along with fine of Rs.500/- each and under Section

3(1)(x) of   the   Scheduled   Castes   and   Scheduled Tribes

(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 and sentenced to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for six months along with fine of Rs.500/-

each. The trial court acquitted accused No.1 and 2 under

Sections 147, 148, 149, 323, 504 and 506(II) IPC. The trial court

also acquitted accused No.3 to 7 from all the charges. Being

aggrieved, appellant-accused No.1 and accused No.2-Kalusinh

                                                                4
filed Criminal Appeal No.10 of 2001 before the High Court.

Challenging the acquittal of co-accused-No.3 to 7, respondent-

State has also filed Criminal Appeal No.127 of 2001 before the

High Court. By the common judgment dated 05.03.2009, the High

Court affirmed the conviction of appellant-accused No.1 under

Section 302 and Section 307 IPC read with Section 34 IPC and

under Section 25(c) of the Arms Act. The High Court acquitted the

appellant under Section 3(1)(x) of the Scheduled Castes and

Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 and also

acquitted accused No.2-Kalusinh from all the charges by giving

him the benefit of doubt. By the same judgment, the appeal

preferred by the respondent-State was dismissed by the High

Court.

5.   Being aggrieved by the dismissal of his appeal, appellant-

accused No.1 has preferred this appeal. Challenging the acquittal

of accused No.2-Kalusinh, respondent-State has filed Criminal

Appeal No.1125 of 2010 which we have dismissed vide order

dated 02.05.2019.

6.   Mr. Anuj Bhandari, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the appellant has submitted that the occurrence was of

23.11.1997 at 09:00 PM in the agricultural field of complainant-
                                                                5
Somabhai Rupabhai (PW-3) and there is no evidence as to the

electric light burning at the time of occurrence so as to enable the

complainant and the witnesses to identify the assailants and in

the absence of any vital evidence regarding the light, identity of

the assailants by the witnesses ought not to have been relied

upon. It was further submitted that two panch witnesses viz.

Mukeshkumar Pranlal Sheth (PW-12) and Ramanbhai Hirabhai

Panchal (PW-17) have not supported the panchnama (Ex.P-89)

and in the absence of proof of recovery of weapons from the

appellant, the fatal injuries sustained by deceased Somiben

cannot be attributed to the appellant. It was submitted that in the

post-mortem certificate (Ex.P-52), Dr. Rohit Kumar (PW-1) has

stated that there were puncture wounds but it is not clear as to

whether those wounds were caused by rifle or by gun. It was

urged that in the absence of any definite evidence as to which

weapon-whether rifle or gun had caused the injuries, the court

ought not to have convicted the appellant-accused No.1 under

Sections 302 IPC read with Section 34 IPC and Section 307 IPC

read with Section 34 IPC and under Section 25(c) of the Arms Act

and prayed for giving benefit of doubt to the appellant-accused

No.1.

                                                                   6
7.   Ms. Jesal Wahi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent-State has taken us through the judgment of the trial

court and the impugned judgment and submitted that the

evidence of injured eye-witnesses (PWs 6 and 7) and the

evidence of complainant-Somabhai Rupabhai (PW-3) and other

eye-witness Hirabhai (PW-5) are cogent and consistent and the

courts below rightly convicted the appellant-accused No.1 and the

concurrent findings warrant no interference.

8.   We have carefully considered the rival contentions and

perused the impugned judgment and the judgment of the trial

court and other materials placed on record.

9.   As per the prosecution case, the motive for the occurrence

is regarding the dispute over the enjoinment of the road in Survey

No.95   of   Dhemda     Village   belonging    to   accused   No.1.

Complainant-Somabhai Rupabhai (PW-3) filed a civil suit in

Regular Suit No.131 of 1997 for the land measuring four acres

and twenty-two guntas in the Court of Civil Judge, Modasa

against accused Nos.1 and 3. In the said suit, by the order dated

16.10.1998 (Ex.P5), the court has ordered “status quo”. Against

the said order of status quo, accused has filed appeal in CFO

No.67 of 1998 and the copy of said appeal has been marked as
                                                                  7
Ex.P-126. Regarding the enjoyment of the land bearing Survey

No.95, there was enmity between the parties and thus the

prosecution has proved the motive. Proof of motive was taken as

one of the important aspects by the trial court as well as by the

High Court. Though motive is a relevant aspect, it is to be kept in

view that motive is a double edged weapon. Proof of motive

merely adds to the value of evidence of the eye-witnesses.

10.   The occurrence was of 23.11.1997 at 09:00 PM in the

agricultural field of complainant-Somabhai Rupabhai (PW-3),

where it was dark. The panchnama of the scene of occurrence

(Ex.P-73) shows no indication of the electric light either in the

animal shed situated behind the house of complainant or that

there is any electric pole anywhere in the vicinity or that there is a

light on the well which is supplying water. Case of prosecution is

that appellant and six other co-accused surrounded the

complainant party and there were three gunshots fired. The

injured witness (PW-6) in his cross-examination has admitted that

he had not stated anything about the burning light either in the

animal shed or anywhere in the vicinity. In the absence of any

evidence as to the light aspect, the possibility of identifying the

accused in the darkness of the agricultural field of the

                                                                     8
complainant, particularly at 09:00 PM becomes doubtful. It is also

to be pointed out that there is no evidence as to whether there

was moonlight on 23.11.1997 and complainant has also not

stated that he has identified the appellant or other co-accused

with the help of moonlight. In the absence of evidence as to the

availability of sufficient light, the identification of the accused and

the overt act attributed to the appellant becomes doubtful.

11.   In the complaint filed by complainant-Somabhai Rupabhai

(PW-3), it has been stated that appellant/accused No.1-

Ashoksinh Jayendrasinh and accused No.2-Kalusinh fired three

gun shots from their guns. Whereas, in the statement before the

court, PW-3 has stated that “Kalu Sinh fired three shots which

injured Nandaben and Ramanbhai”. As per the case of

complainant as stated in the court, total three gun shots were

fired and all three were fired by accused No.2-Kalusinh. As rightly

submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant, there are

contradictions in the case of the prosecution as to who fired those

gun shots and the benefit of doubt is to be given to the appellant.




                                                                      9
12.    Dr. Rohit Kumar (PW-1) has conducted the post-mortem on

the dead body of deceased Somiben and as per post-mortem

certificate (Ex.P-52), PW-1 noted the following injuries:-

      (i)   One entry wound on left side of chest above the nipple
            of 0.5 cm diameter.

      (ii) Puncture wound, round, on left side of neck measuring
            0.5 cm.

      (iii) Injury No. (i) passed into the back forming Exit wound at
            the side of middle of spine of right scapula measuring 1
            cm in diameter. At the back at the level of 1 st Exit wound
            5th rib was broken. At the level of 2 nd Exit wound 7th rib
            was broken at the back side of left chest.

PW-1 opined that cause of death was due to rapturing of trachea,

oesophagus and difficulty in breathing. In post-mortem certificate-

Ex.P-52, PW-1 has not stated that the injury was caused either by

bullet or by pellets. PW-1 has also admitted that he has not seen

the recovered articles i.e. the recovered rifle and the double

barrel gun. In the absence of definite evidence as to which of the

fire arm caused the fatal injury, the same cannot be attributed to

the appellant from whom rifle was recovered.

13.    Case of prosecution is that as per disclosure statement of

accused Nos.1 and 2, a rifle was recovered from the house of


                                                                        10
accused No.1 which has a single barrel. Similarly, as pointed out

earlier in post-mortem certificate (Ex.P-52), a double barrel gun

was also recovered from the house of accused No.2. It is merely

stated that there were puncture wounds. The post mortem

certificate does not state as to whether those gun wounds were

caused by rifle or by gun. In the absence of any definite indication

as to whether those fatal wounds were caused either by rifle or by

double barrel gun, the courts ought not to have held appellant-

accused No.1 responsible for the fatal fire arm wounds on the

body of deceased Somiben.

14.   Yet   another   circumstance    raising    doubts   about   the

prosecution case is to be pointed out.          Mukeshkumar Pranlal

Sheth (PW-12) and Madhusudanbhai Arvindbhai Pandya (PW-13)

are the witnesses to the panchnama (Ex.P-79) for recovery of

weapons from accused Nos.1 and 2 and both of them have not

supported the prosecution case. The police officer-Investigating

Officer has spoken about the recovery of the fire arms. There is

no rule of law that the evidence of police officer has to be

discarded or that it suffers from some inherent infirmity. But in the

facts and circumstances of the present case where two fire arms

viz. rifle and gun are said to have been used by accused Nos.1
                                                                   11
and 2 respectively, prudence requires corroboration of recovery of

the weapons from independent source. When panch witnesses in

Ex.P-79 have turned hostile, the court has to seek corroboration

from other sources regarding the recovery of weapons.

15.   Learned counsel appearing for the appellant mainly

contended that fired bullet was not recovered and only empty

cartridges made of bronze were recovered near the mango tree.

Contention of the appellant is that since the fired bullet which

caused fatal injuries to the deceased was not recovered, the

ballistic expert cannot give definite opinion as to which weapon

was used to cause the fatal gun wounds to the deceased.

Learned counsel further contended that ballistic expert has stated

that he only tested the fired bullet C2 from rifle C1 and examined

only empty bullet recovered and therefore, from the evidence of

ballistic expert, it cannot be said that gun shot injury was caused

to the deceased only from the rifle recovered from the appellant.

Non-recovery of bullet cannot be said to be fatal to the

prosecution case. Since benefit of doubt is given to the accused

on other aspects like darkness in the place of occurrence and

doubts as to who caused fatal injuries, we are not inclined to



                                                                 12
consider the merits of the contention assailing the opinion of the

ballistic expert.

16.   There was darkness at the time and the place of occurrence

making it difficult for the witnesses to identify the assailants. The

evidence of eye-witnesses are contradictory to each other as to

the firing of the fatal blow. The guilt of the accused has not been

proved beyond reasonable doubt and the benefit has to be given

to the accused.

17.   We are conscious that the Supreme Court would be slow to

interfere with the concurrent findings of the courts below. In an

appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, concurrent

findings of fact cannot be interfered with unless shown to be

perverse    (vide   Mahesh    Dattatray    Thirthkar   v.   State   of

Maharashtra (2009) 11 SCC 141). Where the appreciation of

evidence is erroneous, the Supreme Court would certainly

appreciate the evidence. In our considered view, the High Court

ought to have weighed and considered the materials. When the

findings of the trial court and the High Court are shown to be

perverse and there is no proper appreciation of evidence qua the

appellant, the Supreme Court would certainly interfere with the

findings of fact recorded by the High Court and the trial court. It is
                                                                    13
to be pointed out that the High Court has not appreciated the oral

evidence, other evidence and the points raised by the appellant-

accused No.1. In our considered view, the impugned judgment

affirming the conviction of the appellant-accused No.1 cannot be

sustained and the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside.

18.   The conviction of appellant-accused No.1 under Section

302 IPC read with Section 34 IPC and Section 307 IPC read with

Section 34 IPC and under Section 25(c) of the Arms Act is set

aside and this appeal is allowed. The appellant/accused No.1-

Ashoksinh Jayendrasinh is ordered to be released forthwith

unless his presence is required in any other case.


                                            ..…………………….J.
                                              [R. BANUMATHI]


                                         ………………………….J.
                                          [S. ABDUL NAZEER]


New Delhi;
May 07, 2019.


                                                                 14

