
Supreme Court of India
Nabi Bux & Ors vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 November, 1971Equivalent citations: 1972 AIR  495, 1972 SCR  (2) 353
Author: A Ray
Bench: Ray, A.N.
           PETITIONER:
NABI BUX & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/11/1971

BENCH:
RAY, A.N.
BENCH:
RAY, A.N.
PALEKAR, D.G.

CITATION:
 1972 AIR  495		  1972 SCR  (2) 353
 1972 SCC  (1)	 7
 CITATOR INFO :
 D	    1972 SC1823	 (11)


ACT:
Sentence--Enhanced  by High Court under s. 423(1A)  Code  of
Criminal  Procedure,  1898--This Court in  appeal  will	 not
interfere unless sentence is shown to be unjust or harsh.



HEADNOTE:
For  an offence under s. 325 read with s. 34 of	 the  Indian
Penal  Code  the appellants were sentenced by  the  Sessions
Judge to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months  each,
apart from fine.  The High Court in exercise of powers under
s.  423(1A) of the Code of Criminal Procedure  enhanced	 the
sentence  to  rigorous	imprisonment for two  years  On	 the
question whether this Court should, in the circumstances  of
the  case,  interfere  with  the order	of  the	 High  Court
enhancing the sentence,
HELD  :	 It could not be said that- the High Court  was	 not
justified  in  holding that in view of the severity  of	 the
injuries caused to one of the victims the sentence passed by
the trial court was lenient.  It would be wrong to interfere
with  the sentence passed by the High Court when it was	 not
shown to be unjust or harsh. [317 E]
Surta & Ors. v. State of Haryana, C.A. No. 225/70 dt.  12-2-
1971, referred to-.



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No. 63  of
1971.
Appeal	by special leave from the judgment and	order  dated
December  10, 1970 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court,  Indore
Bench in Cr.  Appeal No. 94 of 1970.
   Nur-ud-din Ahmed and U. P. Singh, for the, appellants.
   R. P. Kapur for I. N. Shroff for the respondent.
   The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
Ray,  J. This is an appeal by special leave limited only  to
the  question  whether	the  High  Court  was  justified  in
enhancing the sentences.
The appellants Nabi Bux, Noor Mohammad and Ismail Khan	were
tried  by the Additional Sessions Judge, Rajgarh on  charges
under  section 307 read with section 34 of the Indian  Penal
Code  for  attempting  to  commit  the	murder	of  Bapu  in
furtherance of their common intention and also under section
325  read  with	 section 34 of the  Indian  Penal  Code	 for
causing	 grievous  hurt to Chunia in  furtherance  of  their
common	intention.   The appellants were  acquitted  on	 the
charge under section 307/34 of the Indian Penal Code.	They
were  convicted on two charges under section 325/34  of	 the
Indian Penal Code for causing grievous hurt to
 317
Bapu  and Chunia.  They were sentenced to undergo  imprison-
ment  for six months each and a fine of Rs. 500/- each	with
six months, rigorous imprisonment in default.
The  High Court on appeal maintained the conviction  and  in
exercise  of  powers under section 423 (1A) of the  Code  of
Criminal   Procedure  enhanced	the  sentence  to   rigorous
imprisonment  for two years.  The High Court. said that	 the
learned trial Judge had taken a lenient view in awarding the
sentences  to  the  appellants.	 Bapu who  was	one  of	 the
victims	 sustained  three  fractures on	 his  left  temporal
parietal  and occipital bones and totally lost his power  of
speech.	 The High Court said that for such serious  offences
committed by the appellants they were awarded a sentence  of
six  months rigorous imprisonment only by the learned  trial
Judge.
Counsel for the appellants submitted that by the end of	 the
month  of  October, 1971 the appellants	 would	have  served
sentence  for  10  months and this Court in  the  facts	 and
circumstances  of the case would reduce the sentence to	 the
period already undergone.
The High Court in considering the question of sentence exer-
cised  powers with reference to the facts and  circumstances
of. the case.  The exercise of this power cannot be said  to
suffer from any infirmity or lack of appreciation of  facts.
Nor can it be said that the High Court was not justified  in
observing  that the sentence passed by the trial  court	 was
lenient in the circumstances of the case.  It would be wrong
to  interfere  with the sentence passed by the	High  Court.
Any interference has to be supported by rules and principles
in the administration of justice.  The ruling of this  Court
on the question of sentence in the recent decision in  Surta
& Ors. v. State of Haryana (Criminal Appeal No. 225 of	1970
decided on 12 February, 1971) is as follows
	      "This Court interferes with sentence only when
	      it  is established that the sentence is  harsh
	      or  unjust in the facts and  circumstances  of
	      the case.	 Sometimes consideration of age	 has
	      also  occasioned	interference.	There	'are
	      instances	 of  interference  in  sentences  in
	      cases of violation of statutory offences.	  In
	      the  present case, the Sessions Court and	 the
	      High  Court  both considered the	question  of
	      sentence.	  There	 is  nothing  on  record  to
	      suggest that the sentence passed is unjust  or
	      harsh".
	      The appeal therefore fails and is dismissed.
G.C.			   Appeal dismissed.
318




