
Supreme Court of India
Ayodha Prasad vs State on 28 October, 2010Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
           Crl. A.  583 of 2004

                                                 1





                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 583 OF 2004




            AYODHYA PRASAD                            .....           APPELLANT



                                               VERSUS



            STATE                                     .....           RESPONDENT

                                                 



                                             O R D E R

          1.            This  appeal  is  by  the  father-in-law  of  the  deceased 

          who stands convicted for offences punishable under Section 

          304B   and   498A   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code   and   a   sentence   of 

          ten years and one year rigorous imprisonment respectively, 

          and   under   Section   4   of   the   Dowry   Prohibition   Act   to   a 

          sentence   of   six   months,   all   the   sentences   to   run 

          concurrently.  The facts leading to the appeal are as under:

          2.            Kamlesh   Kumari   Prasad,   the   deceased   daughter   of 

          Ayodhya Prasad P.W. 1 was married to Chandrika Prasad about 

          two   years   prior   to   the   incident   in   question.     Kamlesh 

          Kumari   died   due   to   100   per   cent   burn   injuries   on   the   4th 

          September,   1989.             A   First   Information   Report   was, 

          accordingly,   lodged   by   P.W.   1   in   which   he   spelt   out   that 

          his son-in-law i.e. Chandrika Prasad was posted in Kashmir 


Crl. A.  583 of 2004

                                                2





          and   the   appellant-Ayodhya   Prasad   and   his   wife   Sarju   Devi, 

          his   parents   were   harassing   her   by   demanding   a   Vicky   Motor 

          Cycle.     This   demand   was   repeated   several   times   in   the 

          presence of P.W. 4 Babulal, the brother  of P.W. 1 as well. 

          It   is   further   in   evidence   that   on   account   of   the   non-

          satisfaction of the demand Kamlesh Kumari was subjected to 

          cruelty   and   was   also   denied   her   food.     It   is   the 

          prosecution   story   that   on   account   of   this   situation   she 

          committed suicide on the day in question.   The trial court 

          by  its judgment  dated 6th  September,  1991, held  that there 

          was   no   categoric   evidence   against   Sarju   Devi,   the   mother-

          in-law   as   the   primary   evidence   was   against   the   appellant 

          herein.  The trial court, accordingly, acquitted Sarju Devi 

          and convicted the appellant for the aforesaid offences.  An 

          appeal   was   thereafter   taken   by   the   appellant   to   the   High 

          Court   which   has   confirmed   the   judgment   of   the   trial   court 

          and   dismissed   this   appeal.     It   is   in   this   situation   the 

          matter is before us, after the grant of special leave.

          3.            The learned counsel for the appellant has pointed out 

          that there was no categoric evidence against the appellant 

          and   the   trial   court   having   found   that   Sarju   Devi   was   not 

          involved,   there   was   no   circumstance   in   the   present   case 

          which could inculpate the appellant.  He has submitted that 

          the   defence   evidence   given   by   D.W.   1   and   D.W.   2   had   not 

          been   considered   by   the   High   Court   and   if   this   was   taken 


Crl. A.  583 of 2004

                                               3





          into   account   it   was   evident   that   no   demand   whatsoever   had 

          been   made   from   the   deceased   or   her   parents   and   that   the 

          deceased had committed suicide on account of frustration as 

          she   wanted   to   join   her   husband   in   Kashmir   which   was   not 

          possible   under   the   circumstances.     It   has   further   been 

          pointed out that the husband had left for Kashmir only two 

          days   prior   to   the   incident   which   fortified   the   submission 

          about   the   mental   state   of   the   deceased.       Mr.   Pramod 

          Swarup,   the   learned   senior   counsel   for   the   State,   has, 

          however, supported the judgment of the trial court and the 

          High Court.  

          4.            We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and 

          gone through the record.  

          5.            We have absolutely no reason to doubt the statements 

          of P.W. 1 and P.W. 4.   It has been categorically, deposed 

          that   soon   after   the   gona   ceremony   (which   had   been   held   a 

          year     before   the   incident)   the   accused   had   made   a   demand 

          for   a   Vicky   Motor   Cycle   from   the   parents   of   the   deceased 

          and on the failure of the complainant to provide the motor 

          cycle, she had been grossly maltreated which had driven her 

          to   suicide.     It   is,   therefore,   apparent   that   the   facts 

          spell   out   the   applicability   of   Section   304B   IPC   and   the 

          presumption under Section 113B of the Evidence Act has thus 

          to be drawn against the appellant.  The question is whether 

          that presumption has been rebutted  by the evidence of D.W. 


Crl. A.  583 of 2004

                                                     4





          1   and   2.     The   statement   of   D.W.   1   that   he   had   made   a 

          statement to the Daroga at the time of  the Panchnama about 

          the   frustration   of   the   deceased   is   not   borne   out   by   the 

          document.   We are of the opinion that a cumulative reading 

          of   the   defence   evidence   does   not   reveal   any   hint   with 

          regard   to   the   frustration   felt   by   the   deceased   on   account 

          of the absence of her husband.  

          6.            It   has   been   held   by   this   Court   repeatedly   that   the 

          normal period of sentence for an offence under Section 304B 

          is   seven   years.     The   award   of   a   sentence   of   ten   years   in 

          the   present   matter   is   to   our   mind   not   justified.     We, 

          accordingly,   while   dismissing   the   appeal,   reduce   the 

          sentence   imposed   on   the   appellant   from   ten   years   to   seven 

          years.     With   this   modification   in   the   sentence   the   appeal 

          is   dismissed.     The   appellant   to   be   taken   into   custody 

          forthwith to complete the remaining part of the sentence.  

          7.            Bail bonds stand cancelled.


                                                          ...........................
          J
                                                       [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                          ...........................
          J
                                                       [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]

          NEW DELHI


Crl. A.  583 of 2004

                               5





          OCTOBER 26, 2010.



