
Supreme Court of India
M.P. State vs Pradeep Kumar Gupta on 18 May, 2011Author: A Ganguly
Bench: Asok Kumar Ganguly, Deepak Verma
                                                    1


                                                                 REPORTABLE



                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                   
                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 992 OF 2007



M.P. STATE                                                  APPELLANT(S)

                                  VERSUS

PRADEEP KUMAR GUPTA                                         RESPONDENT(S)




                                   JUDGMENT 

A.K. GANGULY, J.


        This   appeal   is   filed   at   the   instance   of   the   State 

impugning   the   order   of   the   High   Court   dated   17.12.2004   whereby 

the High Court in a revision filed before it was pleased to held 

that   sanction   for   prosecution   which   was   granted   to   the 

respondent,   Sh.   Pradeep   Kumar   Gupta   was   invalid   and   High   Court 

was pleased to quash the same.  


2.      In   coming   to   the   said   finding,   the   High   Court,   inter 

alia, held that Sh. Pradeep Kumar Gupta, (hereinafter called the 

respondent), was posted as an Engineer in Municipal Corporation 

of Ujjain and was a public servant and can be removed from the 

said post by the Mayor-in-Council under the relevant provisions 

of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act and the sanction 

for   prosecution   granted   by   the   State   Government   is   invalid   and 

incompetent. 


3.      In   support   of   the   said   finding,   the   High   Court,   inter 

alia, relied on a judgment of  Ashok Baijal  Vs.  M.P. Government 

reported as 1998 Crl. L.J. 3511.  


                                          2
4.      We have heard the counsel appearing for the parties.   We 

are of the view that the conclusions reached by the High Court 

are   not   warranted   either   in   facts   or   in   law   for   the   reasons 

discussed herein-under. 


5.      From   the   order   dated   4.10.1983   of   the   Government   of 

Madhya   Pradesh   Local   Self   Government,   it   is   clear   that   the 

respondent   was   appointed   under   Section   86(1)   of   the   Madhya 

Pradesh   Municipality   Act   and   such   appointment   was   made   by   the 

State   Government   in   terms   of   Rule   17   of   the   Madhya   Pradesh 

Municipal   Service   (Executive)   Rules,   1973.     It   is   thus   clear 

that the respondent was appointed by the State Government. 



6.      The learned counsel for the appellant has also drawn the 

attention of this Court to other materials on record from which 

it   appears   that   the   respondent,   after   such   appointment,   was 

deputed by order dated 9.11.99 of M.P. Local Self Government in 

the   Municipal   Corporation,   Khandwa   in   place   of   Municipality   of 

Ujjain.  


7.      Our   attention   is   also   drawn   to   the   fact   that   in   the 

course   of   his   employment,   the   respondent   suffered   a   penalty   of 

withholding of two increments and the same was also imposed by 

the Government.   The said order of punishment was filed in the 

trial court by the respondent himself.  These are admitted facts 

of the case.  


8.      These   facts   were   also   available   before   the   High   Court, 

but   unfortunately,   the   High   Court   has   not   at   all   considered 

these facts. 


9.      Now,   coming   to   the   legal   question,   it   appears   that 

Section   86   of   the   M.P.   Municipalities   Act,   1961   (hereinafter 

referred to as the said Act) provides for constitution of State 


                                          3



Municipal   Services.     In   Section   86   it   is   also   made   clear   that 

such   services   to   be   constituted   by   the   State   Government   shall 

make   rules   in   respect   of   the   recruitment,   qualification, 

appointment,   promotion,   etc.   and   also   for   dismissal,   removal, 

conduct, departmental punishment under Section 86(2) of the Act. 

Section   86(4)   also   provides   that   the   State   Government   may 

transfer   any   member   of   the   said   municipal   service   from   one 

municipal council to another municipal council. 



10.     It   is,   therefore,   clear   that   the   respondent   having   been 

appointed under Section 86 of the said Act, has been appointed 

by   the   State   Government   and   remains   under   the   control   of   the 

State   Government   throughout   his   service.     The   relevant   rule   in 

this   connection   is   the   Madhya   Pradesh   Municipal   Service 

(Executive)   Rules,   1973.     Under   Rule   2(b)   of   the   said   Rules, 

Appointing Authority has been defined as follows:



            (b)      "Appointing   Authority"   means   State 
            Government in respect to Select Grades, Class I, 
            Class II and Class III Chief Municipal Officers


11.     Similarly,   under   Rule   2(i)   service   has   been   defined   as 

follows:


            (i)      "Service"   means   the   Municipal   Service   for 
            the   State   constituted   under   sub-section   (i)   of 
            Section 86 of the Act. 

12.     Rule 32 of the said Rule provides as follows:



            32.      Authorities who may impose penalties - (1) 
            Subject   to   the   provisions   of   the   Act   and   these 
            rules   the   penalties   mentioned   in   clauses   (I)   to 
            (ii) of Rule 31 may be imposed on a member of the 
            service by the [appointing authority or Divisional 
            Commissioner or Director].

                                            4
            (2)      Subject   to   the   provisions   of   the   Act   and 
            these   rules,   the   penalties   mentioned   in   clauses 
            (iv) to (vi) of Rule 31 shall not be imposed on a 
            member   of   the   service   except   by   the   appointing 
            authority   and   in   consultation   with   the   Public 
            Service Commission. 

13.     It   is   clear   from   the   aforesaid   Rules   that   the   State 

Government is the Appointing Authority and the State Government 

can   impose   on   the   members   of   the   State   Service   penalties 

mentioned in clause (i) to (vi) of such Rule.   Therefore, State 

Government   being   the   Appointing   Authority   and   being   the 

Authority   to   impose   punishment   on   the   employee   is   also   the 

Authority who can remove an employee from the service. 



14.     That being the position, it is clear from the provisions 

of Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 that the 

Authority   who   is   competent   to   remove   the   person   concerned   is 

competent   to   grant   sanction.     Unfortunately,   the   High   Court, 

without   considering   these   aspects   of   the   Act   and   Rules,   relied 

only   on   the   judgment   of   Ashok   Baijal   (supra)   in   coming   to   an 

erroneous finding.   Provision of Section 19(1) of Prevention of 

Corruption Act, 1988 is set out hereunder:



                     19.      Previous   sanction   necessary   for 
            prosecution  - (1)  No court  shall take  cognizance 
            of an offence punishable under sections 7, 10, 11, 
            13   and   15   alleged   to   have   been   committed   by   a 
            public servant, except with the previous sanction, 
            - 

            (a)    in   the   case   of   a   person   who   is   employed   in 
                   connection with the affairs of the Union and 
                   is not removable from his office save by or 
                   with the sanction of the Central Government, 
                   of that Government; 

            (b)    in the case of a person who is employed with 
                   the affairs of a State and is not removable 
                   from his office save by or with the sanction 
                   of the State Government, of that Government; 

                                           5
             (c)    in   the   case   of   any   other   person,   of   the 
                    authority   competent   to   remove   him   from   his 
                    office. 

15.     Similar views have been expressed in the case of State of 

Tamil   Nadu  Vs.  T.   Thulasingam  and   others   reported   in   AIR   1975 

Supreme Court 1314.


16.     We   are,   however,   not   called   upon   to   decide   the 

correctness   of   the   decision   rendered   in   Ashok   Baijal   case 

(supra).     We   further   make   it   clear   that   the   decision   is   Ashok 

Baijal   case   (supra)   is   not   attracted   to   the   facts   and 

circumstances   of   this   case.     However,   we   do   not   express   any 

opinion on the correctness of the proposition laid down in Ashok 

Baijal case (supra). 


17.     This   appeal   is   allowed,   the   order   of   the   High   Court   is 

set   aside   and   the   trial   of   the   case   of   the   respondent   may 

proceed in accordance with law.  


                                                      ......................,J
                                                      (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY)




                                                     ......................, J
                                                     (DEEPAK VERMA)

NEW DELHI
MAY 18, 2011


                                    6



ITEM NO.101               COURT NO.5             SECTION IIA



            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(s). 992 OF 2007



M.P. STATE                                        Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

PRADEEP KUMAR GUPTA                               Respondent(s)



(With office report)



Date: 18/05/2011  This Appeal was called on for hearing today.



CORAM : HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ASOK KUMAR GANGULY
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE DEEPAK VERMA
                        (VACATION BENCH)



For Appellant(s)        Mr. S.K. Dubey, Sr. Adv.
                        Mr. Vikas Bansal, Adv.
                     Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija,Adv.

For Respondent(s)       Mr. Jitendra Mohan Sharma,Adv.



           UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R 



       The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order. 




       (NAVEEN KUMAR)                       (RENU DIWAN) 
       COURT MASTER                         COURT MASTER

              (Signed order is placed on the file)



