
Supreme Court of India
Sachin Pawar & Anr vs State Of U.P.& Ors on 2 August, 2013Bench: H.L. Gokhale, J. Chelameswar
           


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                       CRIMINAL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1142   OF 2013
                   (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.6761/2012)


      SACHIN PAWAR & ANR.                      Appellant(s)


                           :VERSUS:
      STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                       Respondent(s)










                                  O R D E R

               Leave granted.
      2.       Heard Ms. Geeta Luthra, learned senior counsel in support  of
      this appeal, Mr. Irshad Ahmad, learned counsel appearing for the State
      of U.P. and the learned counsel for the complainant.

      3.       The complainant respondent No.3 is the brother  of  appellant
      No.2.  He felt aggrieved by his sister marrying to appellant No.1.  It
      is a marriage between two young persons  belonging  to  two  different
      religions, but it is a marriage to which they themselves agreed.  They
      are both adults. A complaint was filed by respondent No.3 being  Crime
      No.684/2012 at Meerut on 27th July, 2012, alleging that the  appellant
      No.1 herein has kidnapped his sister (appellant No.2 herein).

      4.       The  appellants  therefore  jointly  filed  a  writ  petition
      bearing Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No.10905  of  2012  in  the  High
      Court of Allahabad to quash the said complaint.  The High Court passed
      an order on 9.8.2012 which accepted  that  these  two  appellants  are
      adults and they are married. It  also  directed  stay  of  arrest  and
      granted  them  protection.   However,  the  High  Court  recorded  two
      conditions which are in paragraphs  4  and  7  of  the  order  on  the
      Criminal Miscellaneous Writ Petition. The appellants are aggrieved  by
      these two conditions and that is why they have filed  this  appeal  by
      special leave.

      5.       We have heard the learned counsel for the parties  concerned.
      Both the husband and wife (appellant Nos.1 & 2 herein) are present  in
      Court.  On our query, they have informed us  that  they  have  married
      voluntarily and without any coercion. They are adults. Appellant  No.2
      is a graduate in Political Science. The husband - appellant  No.1  has
      passed Engineering Examination and recently he has got a  job  earning
      Rs.7,000/- per month.  This  being  so,  counsel  for  the  appellants
      assures us that appellant No.1 will  take  good  care  of  the  second
      appellant – his wife.

      6.       In our view, therefore, there is no need for  appellant  No.1
      to arrange to deposit Rs.2,50,000/- for his wife in a bank as provided
      in paragraph 7 of the impugned order. Similarly, there is no need  for
      recording the statement of the second  appellant  under  Section   161
      Cr.P.C. before the Chief Judicial Magistrate as directed in  paragraph
      4 of the impugned order.  We, therefore, allow  this  appeal  and  set
      aside the order passed by the High Court to the  extent  mentioned  in
      these two paragraphs.

      7.       The complaint filed by respondent No.3 against appellant No.1
      also does not require to be retained  any  more.  It  is  a  complaint
      alleging the kidnapping of appellant No.2 by appellant No.1. From  the
      facts of this case, it is clear that the  second  appellant  had  gone
      over to the first appellant on her own and they are married,  and  are
      now living together happily. Under the  circumstances,  the  complaint
      filed by respondent No.3, bearing Crime No.684 of 2012 at  Meerut,  is
      hereby quashed. The consequences thereof will follow.

      8.       Counsel for respondent No.3 states that the second  appellant
      should come and meet respondent No.3 and his  relatives.  Counsel  for
      the appellants states that  both  the  appellants  will  happily  meet
      respondent No.3 and his relatives on appropriate occasions. The appeal
      is allowed accordingly.

                                                  .........................J
               (H.L. GOKHALE)








                                     .........................J
                                     (J. CHELAMESWAR)


      New Delhi;
      August 2, 2013.

