
Supreme Court of India
Asar Mohammad . vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 24 October, 2018Author: …………………………..….J.
                                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL  APPEAL NO. 1617   OF  2011

                         Asar Mohammad and Ors.                               …..Appellant(s)
                                               
                                               :Versus:

                         The State of U.P.                                   ....Respondent(s)
                                                     J U D G M E N T


                         A.M. Khanwilkar, J.

                         1.   This appeal emanates from the judgment and order passed

                         by   the   High   Court  of  Judicature at  Allahabad  dated 30 th  July,

                         2009   in   Criminal   Appeal   No.1631   of   2008,   whereby   the   High

                         Court upheld the conviction recorded against the appellants for

                         an   offence   punishable   under   Section   302   of   the   Indian   Penal

                         Code   (IPC)   but   converted   the   sentence   of   death   into

                         imprisonment   for   life   with   fine,   and   confirmed   the   conviction

                         under   Section   201   of   the   IPC   and   sentence   of   2   years’

                         imprisonment  and  fine, as awarded by the Additional Sessions

                         Judge/Special Judge, J.P. Nagar in Sessions Trial No.155/2004. 

                         2.   Briefly stated, one Shababul (PW­7) gave information to the
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2018.10.25
                         Police Station, Dedoli on 24th  January, 2004 about one Zahida
10:41:45 IST
Reason:


                         Begum, the second wife of appellant No.3, Akhtar Mohammad,

                         son of Munshi, and their son Ishlam (aged about 11 years) who
had   gone   missing   from   the   village   for   the   last   two   months,

despite which their family members had not reported the matter

to the police. The appellant Nos.1 and 2, Asar Mohammad and

Asraf Mohammad respectively, are the two sons of appellant No.3

Akhtar  Mohammad,  from his first wife. Thus, deceased Zahida

Begum   is   the   step   mother   of   appellant   Nos.1   &   2,   Asar

Mohammad   and   Asraf   Mohammad.   On   the   basis   of   the

aforementioned report, the Head Constable Surendra Singh (PW­

10), who was  posted as Head Moharrar, made an entry in GD

No.32 (Ext. Ka­17).  Acting on that report, PW­9 Virendra Kumar

Tyagi, Station House Officer of Police Station, Dedoli, visited the

village along with SI Doonger Singh Verma (PW­6), Mangey Ram

Tomar,   Nath   Prakash   Gupta,   Constable   Asqar   Ali   and   SSI

Harendra   Singh   (PW­4).     On   enquiries   with   Asar   Mohammad

(appellant No.1/accused No.1), he disclosed that Zahida was his

step   mother   and   her   son   Ishlam   was   his   step   brother.   He

confessed that he, along with the other two appellants committed

the murder of both Zahida and Ishlam and thereafter, dumped

their dead bodies into the septic tank in the backyard of their

house.   He   then   led   the   police   party   to   the   septic   tank   and

removed the lid with the help of Mangat and Jagadish Valmiki

(PW­8),   wherefrom   the   dead   bodies   were   taken   out.   The   dead
bodies   were   highly   decomposed   and   virtually   reduced   to

skeletons. The body of Zahida Begum was found tied with nylon

cord (Ext. Ka­18). Thereafter, the memo of recovery of the dead

bodies   was   prepared   by   Harendra   Singh   (PW­4).   SI   Doongar

Singh Verma (PW­6) conducted the inquest and gave the inquest

report.   He   also   prepared   the   necessary   papers   concerning   the

dead   bodies   and   drew   a   site   plan   of   the   place   of   recovery

(Ext.Ka­19).   The   dead   bodies   were   then   dispatched   for   post­

mortem   examination   on   the   next   day,   i.e.   25 th  January,   2004.

The   Investigating   Officer   then   recorded   the   statement   of   the

inquest   witnesses   and   proceeded   to   arrest   Asraf   Mohammad

(appellant No.2/accused No.2), whose statement was recorded on

the same day. The statements of Begum Banu (PW­1) and Akram

were       recorded   on   26th  January,   2004.   The   appellant   No.3

Akhtar  came   to  be   arrested on 10th  February, 2004. The post­

mortem of the dead bodies was conducted by Dr. Kuldeep Singh

(PW­5) who noted that the body of Zahida Begum  inter alia  had

fracture of Hyoid bone and Hyoid Cartilage which, in his opinion,

was the cause of death due to asphyxia (fracture of Hyoid bone

and   Thyroid   Cartilage)   and   that   the   death   had   occurred   more

than one month back. With regard to the dead body of Ishlam, he

inter   alia  noted   that   the   cause   of   death   was   due   to   asphyxia
(fracture   of   Hyoid   bone).   After   completion   of   the   investigation,

charge­sheet (Ext. Ka­21) was submitted before the jurisdictional

Court on 11th February, 2004. The said Court committed the case

to the Sessions Court at J.P. Nagar where it was registered as

Sessions Trial No.155/2004. The Sessions Court on 5 th  August,

2004 framed charges against the appellants as under:

      “Charges
             I,   Mushaffey   Ahmad,   Addl.   Sess.   Judge,   hereby   charge
      you, Asar Mohammad, Asraf and Akhtar as follows:­
             That   you   on   two   months   ago   from   24.1.2004   (date   of
      information to the PS) at 1 am in the village of Panyati within
      the limits of PS Didopli Distt. J.P. Nagar committed murder by
      intentionally   or   knowingly   causing   the   death   of   Smt.   Zahida
      and Ishlam and thereby committed an offence punishable under
      Section­302   IPC   and   within   the   cognizance   of   this   court   of
      session. 
             That you on above date, time and place having the reason
      to believe that certain offence to with murder punishable with
      death has been committed, did cause certain evidence of, the
      said   offence,   to   disappear,   to   with   threw   the   dead   bodies   of
      victims, into gutter with the intention of screening the said Asar
      Mohammad,   Asraf   and   Akhtar   from   legal   punishment,   and
      thereby committed an offence punishable u/s 201 of the Indian
      Penal Code and within the cognizance of this court of Sessions.
             And I hereby direct that you be tried on the said charge of
      this court of session.”

3.    The   prosecution   examined   10   witnesses,   namely,   PW­1

Begum Bano, PW­2 Haji Iqbal, PW­3 Nawab Jan, PW­4 Harendra

Singh,   PW­5   Dr.   Kuldeep   Singh,   PW­6   Doonger   Singh   Verma,

PW­7   Shababul,   PW­8   Jagdish,   PW­9   V.K.   Tyagi   and   PW­10

Surendra Singh.  The defence of the accused was of total denial.

They   did   not   produce   any   evidence.   The   Sessions   Court,   after

evaluating the entire evidence on record, eventually found that
even   though   it   was   a   case   of   circumstantial   evidence,   the

prosecution   had   succeeded   in   establishing   the   guilt   of   the

accused beyond all reasonable doubt and found them guilty of

offences under Sections 302 and 201 of the IPC. As aforesaid, the

Sessions Court  vide  judgment and order dated 1st  March, 2008

awarded the death sentence with fine, for having committed the

offence under Section 302 of IPC, and 2 years of imprisonment

with fine in respect of offence under Section 201 of IPC to each of

the appellants. 

4.   All the three appellants carried the matter in appeal before

the High Court, being Criminal Appeal No.1631 of 2008, which

was heard along with the death reference received by the High

Court,   being   Reference   No.3   of   2008.   The   High   Court

reappreciated the evidence on record and affirmed the view taken

by the Trial Court, after referring to the relevant decisions cited

before it.  In conclusion, the High Court observed as follows:­
      “27. We have scrutinized the submission of learned Counsel for
      the appellants and also decision of the Apex Court in the case of
      Aloke Nath Dutta (supra) in all its ramifications. Having gone
      through the decision, we must say that the said decision has
      been   rendered  in   different   facts  and   circumstances   and   flows
      from different perspective. In the said case, the Apex Court had
      rendered   verdict   acquitting   other   accused   persons   holding
      quintessentially that there was no direct evidence from which it
      could   be   deduced   that   other  appellants  also  were  part   of  the
      said conspiracy and that their presence had not been noticed by
      any of the witnesses and further that nobody saw them together
      in the house and also that no body saw Mrinal Dutta coming to
      the   house   even   once.   In   the   said   decision   accused   were
      acquitted under section 120B I.P.C.  In the present case the
      accused persons were residing in the same house and they
     were very proximate relation of the deceased. Therefore, the
     facts of the said case cannot be imported for application to the
     facts of the present case. 
     28.  We have carefully scanned the evidence on record. In the
     facts and  circumstances and evidence on record, it brooks
     no   dispute   that   the   prosecution   has   proved   beyond
     reasonable  doubt that  the  deceased  died  homicidal  death.
     The doctor has clearly held that cause of death of Zahida
     Begum   was   due   to   Asphyxia   (fracture   of   Hyoid   bone   and
     Thyroid cartilage) and  the death of  Islam  was also  due  to
     Asphyxia   (fracture   of   Hyoid   bone).   The   prosecution   has
     proved   its   case   beyond   reasonable   doubt.   Another
     circumstance   unerringly   pointing   to   the   guilt   of   the
     accused  is that, the  dead  bodies  were  recovered from the
     septic tank situated inside the house of appellant that too,
     on   the   pointing   out   of   Asar  Mohammad.   PW­3  Nawab  Jan
     and PW­8 Jagdish minced no words to say that dead bodies
     were   recovered   on   the   pointing   of   Asar   Mohammad   from
     septic tank, There is no dispute about the identity of the
     deceased. Yet another circumstance pointing accused finger
     at the appellants is that the appellants did not lodge any
     report   about   the   missing   of   the   deceased   for   about   two
     months   nor   offered   any   explanation   about   their   death   in
     their statement under section 313 Cr.P.C….”

                                             (emphasis supplied)

The High Court, however, noted that the facts and circumstances

of the present case would not come within the purview of a rarest

of rare case, for which reason it did not confirm the sentence of

death   awarded   to   the   appellants.   The   High   Court,   instead,

commuted   the   sentence  to   life  imprisonment   for  offence   under

Section 302 of the IPC. Thus, the appeal filed by the appellants

was partly allowed to that extent and the reference came to be

rejected  vide  the impugned judgment and order dated 30 th July,

2009.
 
5.  Feeling   aggrieved,   the   appellants   have   filed   the   present
appeal. The principal argument of the appellants is that although

it is   a case of   concurrent finding of facts recorded by the two

Courts   below,   the   same   is   replete   with   manifest   errors   and

cannot stand the test of judicial scrutiny. It is submitted that the

evidence produced by the prosecution falls short of the quality

evidence   required   for   recording   a   finding   of   guilt   against   the

accused in a case of circumstantial evidence.  In that, the motive

behind the commission of crime has not been established at all.

No evidence is forthcoming in respect of identification of the two

dead bodies, much less to establish the fact that it was of none

other than the second wife of appellant No.3 and son of appellant

No.3 respectively. It is vehemently contended that the police has

set up PW­7 as the informant, who was an obliging informant of

the police.   If his evidence is to be discarded, the genesis of the

prosecution case must collapse and, in which case, the rest of

the   circumstances   or   the   evidence   would   be   of   no   avail.   It   is

submitted   that   even   the   other   reports   prepared   by   the   police

purportedly during the investigation of the crime, were tailored to

suit   the   prosecution   case.   That   ought   to   be   discarded.   It   is

submitted that the evidence produced by the prosecution, taken

as   a   whole   or   even   in   part,   by   no   stretch   of   imagination

establishes the complicity of the appellants in the commission of
crime.   The   hypothesis   on   which   the   prosecution   case   rests   is

unsubstantiated. Further, the statement of the accused allegedly

made to the police, which is the fulcrum of the prosecution case,

is   inadmissible   in   evidence   and,   at   any   rate,   cannot   be   used

against the co­accused. For all these reasons, the finding of guilt

recorded   against   the   appellants   cannot   be   sustained   either   on

facts or in law. 

6.    The learned counsel for the State, however, supported the

judgment under appeal and would submit that no interference is

warranted   against   the   concurrent   findings   of   fact.   He   submits

that the prosecution has established the circumstances and the

chain   is   complete   in   all   respects,   pointing   towards   the

involvement   of   the   appellants   in   commission   of   the   crime   and

ruling   out   any   other   possibility.   He   submits   that   the   appeals

deserve to be dismissed.

7.    We have heard Mr. S. K. Bhattacharya, learned counsel for

the appellants and Mr. Rajesh K. Singh, learned counsel for the

respondent.   We   have   perused   the   entire   record,   including   the

original record.

8.    Before   proceeding  to  consider  the  rival  submissions,  be  it

noted   that   in   the   present   case,   no   direct   evidence   has   been

produced   by   the   prosecution   regarding   the   involvement   of   the
     appellants in the commission of the crime.  The prosecution rests

     its case solely on circumstantial evidence.  The legal position as

     to how such matter should be examined has been expounded in

     Padala Veera Reddy Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. 1

     in the following words:­

           “10. ….. This Court in a series of decisions has consistently held
           that   when   a   case   rests   upon   circumstantial   evidence   such
           evidence must satisfy the following tests:
                  (1)    the circumstances from which an inference of guilt
                         is sought to be drawn, must be cogently and firmly
                         established;
                  (2)    those   circumstances   should   be   of   a   definite
                         tendency   unerringly   pointing   towards   guilt   of   the
                         accused;
                  (3)    the   circumstances,   taken   cumulatively,   should
                         form  a  chain so  complete  that  there is no  escape
                         from   the   conclusion   that   within   all   human
                         probability the crime was committed by the accused
                         and none else; and
                  (4)    the   circumstantial   evidence   in   order   to   sustain
                         conviction   must   be   complete   and   incapable   of
                         explanation of any other hypothesis than that of the
                         guilt of the accused and such evidence should not
                         only be consistent with the guilt of the accused but
                         should   be   inconsistent   with   his   innocence.   (See
                         Gambhir v. State of Maharashtra2.)

                 11.  See also  Rama Nand  v.  State of Himachal Pradesh3,
           Prem   Thakur  v.  State   of   Punjab4,  Earabhadrapa   alias
           Krishnappa  v.  State   of   Karnataka5,  Gian   Singh  v.  State   of
           Punjab6, Balwinder Singh v. State of Punjab.7”

     9.    In  Mulakh   Raj   &   Ors.   Vs.   Satish   Kumar   &   Ors.8,   the

     Court   succinctly   restated   the   legal   position   in   paragraph   4   as
1
    (1989) Supp. (2) SCC 706
2
    (1982) 2 SCC 351 ; AIR 1982 SC 1157
3
   (1981) 1 SCC 511 ; AIR 1981 SC 738
4
   (1982) 3 SCC 462 ; (1983) 1 SCR 822 ; AIR 1983 SC 61
5
   (1983)Cri LJ 846 ; (1983) 2 SCC 330
6
   1986 Supp (1) SCC 676 ; AIR 1987 SC 1921
7
   (1987) 1 SCC 1 ; AIR 1987 SC 350
8
   (1992) 3 SCC 43
under: 
      “4.   ……Undoubtedly   this   case   hinges   upon   circumstantial
      evidence. It is trite to reiterate that in a case founded on
      circumstantial evidence, the prosecution must prove all the
      circumstances connecting unbroken chain of links leading
      to   only   one   inference   that   the   accused   committed   the
      crime. If any other reasonable hypothesis of the innocence
      of   the   accused   can   be   inferred   from   the   proved
      circumstances,   the   accused   would   be   entitled   to   the
      benefit.   What   is   required   is   not   the   quantitative   but
      qualitative,   reliable   and   probable   circumstances   to
      complete the chain connecting the accused with the crime.
      If   the   conduct   of   the   accused   in   relation   to   the   crime
      comes into question the previous and subsequent conduct
      are also relevant facts. Therefore, the absence of ordinary
      course of conduct of the accused and human probabilities
      of the case also would  be relevant. The court must weigh
      the evidence of the cumulative effect of the circumstances
      and   if   it   reaches   the   conclusion   that   the   accused
      committed the crime, the charge must be held proved and
      the conviction and sentence would follow.”

                                                     (emphasis supplied)

       
10.   Let us revert to the circumstances which commended to the

trial   court   and   also   the   High   Court   to   take   the   view   that   the

chain of proved circumstances left no manner of doubt that the

accused alone were involved in the commission of the offence in

question.     Those   proved   circumstances   can   be   delineated   as

follows :
      (i)    Information   regarding   the   missing   persons   (Zahida

             and Ishlam) was given by the village watchman, viz.,

             Shababul (P.W.7).
      (ii)   The fact that the two named persons had gone missing

             for about two months was reinforced after the police

             visited the village to verify the same and in particular
        the   “admission   of   accused   ­   Asar   Mohammed

        (appellant   No.1)”   that   the   two   missing   persons   have

        been murdered by him and the other two accused, viz.,

        Asraf Mohammed and Akhtar   (appellant Nos.2 and 3

        respectively) and “their dead bodies were dumped by

        him in the septic tank in the backyard of their house.”
(iii)   No   ‘missing   report’   was   lodged   by   the   appellants   in

        respect of Zahida and Ishlam, for reasons best known

        to them.
(iv)    Appellant No.1 told the police that he would show the

        place where the dead bodies were dumped and he led

        the   police   party   to   that   spot   in   the   backyard   of   the

        house   of   the   appellants,   which   was   within   his

        exclusive knowledge and opened the lid of the septic

        tank   himself   to   facilitate   taking   out   the   two   dead

        bodies   which   he   admitted   as   that   of   Zahida   and

        Ishlam.
(v)     One of the two dead bodies recovered from the septic

        tank   in   the   backyard   of   the   house   of   the   appellants

        was of a full grown­up female around 32 years of age

        and another of a male child of about 11 years of age

        which corresponded with the age of Zahida and Ishlam

        respectively.
(vi)    The dead bodies were dumped more than one month
       before the same were removed from the septic tank in

      a highly decomposed condition.
(vii) Ante­mortem injuries were noticed on the vital part of

       the neck on both the dead bodies which, according to

       the medical evidence, was the cause of death due to

       asphyxia and a case of homicidal death.
(viii) The  accused neither disputed the identity of the two

       dead   bodies   being   that   of   Zahida   and   Ishlam   nor

       offered   any   explanation,   even   though   they   were

       confronted with the incriminatory evidence.
(ix)   No   evidence  has   been  produced  nor   any   explanation

       has been offered by the accused regarding the reason

       as   to   why   they   did   not   lodge   a   ‘missing

       complaint/report’   in   respect   of   Zahida   and   Ishlam,

       who were closely related to them and were staying in

       the same house; nor have they produced any evidence

       that   both   of   them   were   still   alive   and   were   residing

       elsewhere.  Similarly, no explanation has been offered

       by them regarding the cause of death of Zahida and

       Ishlam, or for that matter, the circumstances in which

       their dead bodies were found in the septic tank in the

       backyard   of   their   house   and   also   about   the   ante­

       mortem injuries noticed on the vital part of the dead

       bodies   which,   as   per   the   medical   evidence,   was   the
            cause of death due to asphyxia. 

11.   The trial court as well as the High Court, after analysing the

evidence on record including the evidence of PWs 4 to 10, had

discerned   the   above   circumstances   pointing   towards   the

involvement of the accused in the commission of the crime.  Both

the courts have taken note of the fact that Begum Bano (PW­1);

Haji Iqbal (PW­2); and Nawab Jan (PW­3) were declared hostile,

as a result of which the factum of motive behind the murder of

Zahida and Ishlam could not be established by the prosecution.

Notably,   even   these   hostile   witnesses   (PWs   1   to   3)   have   not

disputed the relationship of Zahida and Ishlam with the accused

and the fact that they were residing with the accused in the same

house   before   they   went   missing.   Be   that   as   it   may,   both   the

courts   have   ruled   that   other   proved   circumstances   emanating

from the evidence produced by the prosecution, coupled with the

abject silence of the accused including having failed to offer any

explanation   with   regard   to   the   incriminatory   circumstances

referred to above, was sufficient to bring home the guilt against

them and no other conclusion could be deduced except that the

accused were responsible for the murder of Zahida and Ishlam.

They   were   closely   related   to   the   deceased   (as   Zahida   was   the

second wife of accused Akhtar (appellant No.3) and Ishlam was
      the son born in wedlock between them; and appellant nos.1 and

      2 were the step sons of Zahida and step brothers of Ishlam).  All

      of   them   were   residing   in   the   same   house   before   Zahida   and

      Ishlam   went   missing   for   about   two   months.   That   fact   was

      reported   by   Shababul   (PW­7)   to   the   police.     The   fact   that

      Shababul is on the payroll of the police cannot be the basis to

      disregard   the   proved   fact   that   Zahida   and   Ishlam   had   gone

      missing for about two months before it was so reported to the

      police.     None   of   the   appellants   have   either   disowned   their

      relationship with Zahida and Ishlam or bothered to produce any

      tittle of evidence in defence to show that Zahida and Ashlam were

      still alive and residing elsewhere.   This Court in  Nika Ram Vs.

      State   of   Himachal   Pradesh9,   noted   that   the   accused   and

      deceased (his wife) resided together and as the accused failed to

      offer any cogent explanation about the circumstances in which

      his   wife  died,   it  pointed towards his guilt and thus, the Court

      deduced such inference. Suffice it to observe that the fact that

      PW­1, PW­2 and PW­3 became hostile and the prosecution could

      not establish the factum of motive cannot be the basis to doubt

      the correctness of the finding of guilt recorded by the two courts

      against the accused on the basis of other proved circumstances


9
   (1972) 2 SCC 80
        including the confession of the accused No.1 about the murder of

        Zahida   Begum   and   Ishlam   and   more   importantly,   having

        dumped the  dead bodies in the septic tank in the backyard of

        their house and to have led the police to that place from where

        the two dead bodies, whose identity also has not been disputed,

        came to be recovered, coupled with the medical evidence that the

        cause   of   death   of   the   two   dead   persons   was   due   to   the   ante­

        mortem injury caused on the neck resulting in their death due to

        asphyxia and is a homicidal death.

        12.   After perusing the entire evidence and taking the totality of

        the proved circumstances into account, we are in agreement with

        the   conclusion   reached   by   the   trial   court,   which   came   to   be

        affirmed   by   the   High   Court,   regarding   finding   of   guilt   against

        appellant   No.1   –   Asar   Mohammed,   who   had   confessed   to   the

        police and also led the police party to the place where the dead

        bodies were dumped. In  Trimukh Moroti Kirkan Vs. State of

        Maharashtra10,   the   Court   explicated   that   if   an   offence   takes

        place inside the privacy of a house where the accused have all

        the opportunity to plan and commit the offence at the time and

        in circumstances of their choice, it will be extremely difficult for

        the   prosecution   to   lead   evidence   to   establish   the   guilt   of   the


10
     (2006) 10 SCC 681
         accused   if   the   strict   principle   of   circumstantial   evidence,   is

         insisted upon. The Court expounded thus:
               “14. If an offence takes place inside the privacy of a house and
               in   such   circumstances   where   the   assailants   have   all   the
               opportunity to plan and commit the offence at the time and in
               circumstances of their choice, it will be extremely difficult for
               the   prosecution   to   lead   evidence   to   establish   the   guilt   of   the
               accused   if   the   strict   principle   of   circumstantial   evidence,   as
               noticed above, is insisted upon by the Courts.  A Judge does
               not   preside   over   a   criminal   trial   merely   to   see   that   no
               innocent man is punished. A Judge also presides to see that
               a guilty man does not escape. Both are public duties. (See
               Stirland   v.   Director   of   Public   Prosecution 11  ­  quoted   with
               approval by Arijit Pasayat, J. in State of Punjab v. Karnail
               Singh12). The law does not enjoin a duty on the prosecution
               to   lead   evidence   of   such   character   which   is   almost
               impossible to be led or at any rate extremely difficult to be
               led. The duty on the prosecution is to lead such evidence
               which   it   is   capable   of   leading,   having   regard   to   the   facts
               and circumstances of the case. Here it is necessary to keep
               in mind Section 106 of the Evidence Act which says that
               when   any   fact   is   especially   within   the   knowledge   of   any
               person,   the   burden   of   proving   that   fact   is   upon   him.
               Illustration (b) appended to this section throws some light
               on the content and scope of this provision and it reads:
                       ‘(b) A is charged with traveling on a railway without
               ticket.   The   burden   of   proving   that   he   had   a   ticket   is   on
               him.’

               15.  Where an offence like murder is committed in secrecy
               inside   a   house,   the   initial   burden   to   establish   the   case
               would undoubtedly be upon the prosecution, but the nature
               and   amount   of   evidence   to   be   led   by   it   to   establish   the
               charge cannot be of the same degree as is required in other
               cases of circumstantial evidence. The burden would be of a
               comparatively lighter character. In view of Section 106 of
               the Evidence Act there will be a corresponding burden on
               the inmates of the house to give a cogent explanation as to
               how  the  crime  was committed.   The  inmates  of  the  house
               cannot   get   away   by   simply   keeping   quiet   and   offering   no
               explanation   on   the   supposed   premise   that   the   burden   to
               establish   its   case   lies   entirely   upon   the   prosecution   and
               there   is   no   duty   at   all   on   an   accused   to   offer   any
               explanation.

11
      1994 AC 315 ; (1994) 2 AII ER 13 (HL) 
12
       (2003) 11 SCC 271 
           xxx                          xxx                                 xxx

           21.  In   a   case   based   on   circumstantial   evidence   where   no
           eye­ witness account is available, there is another principle
           of  law which  must  be  kept  in  mind.  The principle is that
           when an incriminating circumstance is put to the accused
           and the said accused either offers no explanation or offers
           an explanation which is found to be untrue, then the same
           becomes an additional link in the chain of circumstances to
           make   it   complete.  This   view   has   been   taken   in   a   catena   of
           decisions of this Court. [See State of Tamil Nadu v. Rajendran13
           (SCC para 6); State of U.P. v. Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal14 (SCC
           para 39 : AIR para 40);  State of Maharashtra v. Suresh15  (SCC
           para 27); Ganesh Lal v. State of Rajasthan16 (SCC para 15) and
           Gulab Chand v. State of M.P.17 (SCC para 4).]


           22. Where an accused is alleged to have committed the murder
           of his wife and the prosecution succeeds in leading evidence to
           show   that   shortly   before   the   commission   of   crime   they   were
           seen together or the offence takes placed in the dwelling home
           where   the   husband   also   normally   resided,   it   has   been
           consistently   held   that   if   the   accused   does   not   offer   any
           explanation   how   the   wife   received   injuries   or   offers   an
           explanation   which   is   found   to   be   false,   it   is   a   strong
           circumstance   which   indicates   that   he   is   responsible   for
           commission   of   the   crime.   In  Nika   Ram   v.   State   of   Himachal
           Pradesh18  it was observed that the fact that the accused alone
           was with his wife in the house when she was murdered there
           with 'khokhri' and the fact that the relations of the accused with
           her   were   strained   would,   in   the   absence   of   any   cogent
           explanation by him, point to his guilt. In  Ganeshlal v. State of
           Maharashtra19  the appellant was prosecuted for the murder of
           his wife which took place inside his house. It was observed that
           when the death had occurred in his custody, the appellant is
           under an obligation to give a plausible explanation for the cause
           of her death in his statement under  Section 313 Cr.P.C.  The
           mere denial of the prosecution case coupled with absence of
           any   explanation   were   held   to   be   inconsistent   with   the
           innocence   of   the   accused,   but   consistent   with   the
           hypothesis   that   the   appellant   is   a   prime   accused   in   the

13
     (1999) 8 SCC 679 
14
    (1992) 3 SCC 300 ; AIR 1992 SC 2045
15
    (2000) 1 SCC 471 
16
    (2002) 1 SCC 731 
17
    (1995) 3 SCC 574 
18
     Supra @ Footnote 9 
19
     (1992) 3 SCC 106
            commission   of   murder   of   his   wife.  In  State   of   U.P.   v.   Dr.
            Ravindra   Prakash   Mittal20  the   medical  evidence  disclosed   that
            the wife died of strangulation during late night hours or early
            morning and her body was set on fire after sprinkling kerosene.
            The   defence   of   the   husband   was   that   wife   had   committed
            suicide by burning herself and that he was not at home at that
            time. The letters written by the wife to her relatives showed that
            the   husband   ill­treated   her   and   their   relations   were   strained
            and further the evidence showed that both of them were in one
            room in the night. It was held that the chain of circumstances
            was   complete   and   it   was   the   husband   who   committed   the
            murder of his wife by strangulation and accordingly this Court
            reversed the judgment of the High Court acquitting the accused
            and   convicted   him   under   Section   302   IPC.   In  State   of   Tamil
            Nadu v. Rajendran21  the wife was found dead in a hut  which
            had caught fire. The evidence showed that the accused and his
            wife were seen together in the hut at about 9.00 p.m. and the
            accused  came  out  in  the  morning  through  the  roof  when  the
            hut had caught fire. His explanation was that it was a case of
            accidental   fire   which   resulted   in   the   death   of   his   wife   and   a
            daughter. The medical evidence showed that the wife died due
            to asphyxia as a result of strangulation and not on account of
            burn injuries. It was held that there cannot be any hesitation to
            come to the conclusion that it was the accused (husband) who
            was the perpetrator of the crime.”

                                                                 (emphasis supplied)


      13.   It is a settled legal position that the facts need not be self­

      probatory and the word “fact” as contemplated in Section 27 of

      the   Evidence   Act   is   not   limited   to   “actual   physical   material

      object”. The discovery of fact arises by reason of the fact that the

      information given by the accused exhibited the knowledge or the

      mental   awareness   of   the   informant   as   to   its   existence   at   a

      particular place. It includes a discovery of an object, the place

      from which it is produced and the knowledge of the accused as to

      its existence. It will be useful to advert to the exposition in the
20
    Supra @ Footnote 14
21
   Supra @ Footnote 13 
      case of Vasanta Sampat Dupare v. State of Maharashtra22, in

      particular, paragraphs 23 to 29 thereof.  The same read thus :

            “23. While accepting or rejecting the factors of discovery, certain
            principles are to be kept in mind. The Privy Council in Pulukuri
            Kotayya v. King Emperor23 has held thus: (IA p. 77)
               “…  it   is   fallacious   to   treat   the   ‘fact   discovered’   within
               the section as equivalent to the object produced; the fact
               discovered embraces the place from which the object is
               produced and the knowledge of the accused as to this,
               and the information given must relate distinctly to this
               fact. Information as to past user, or the past history, of the
               object produced is not related to its discovery in the setting
               in which it is discovered. Information supplied by a person in
               custody that ‘I will produce a knife concealed in the roof of
               my house’ does not lead to the discovery of a knife; knives
               were discovered many years ago.  It leads to the discovery
               of the fact that a knife is concealed in the house of the
               informant to his knowledge, and if the knife is proved to
               have   been   used   in   the   commission   of   the   offence,   the
               fact discovered is very relevant. But if to the statement the
               words   be  added   ‘with  which  I  stabbed  A’,  these  words  are
               inadmissible since they do not relate to the discovery of the
               knife in the house of the informant.”
               24.  In  Mohd.   Inayatullah  v.  State   of   Maharashtra24,   while
            dealing with the ambit and scope of Section 27 of the Evidence
            Act, the Court held that: (SCC pp. 831­32, paras 11­13)
               “11. Although the interpretation and scope of Section 27 has
               been the subject of several authoritative pronouncements, its
               application   to   concrete   cases   is   not   always   free   from
               difficulty.   It   will   therefore   be   worthwhile   at   the   outset,   to
               have a short and swift glance at the section and be reminded
               of its requirements. The section says:
                   ‘27. How much of information received from accused
                may be proved.—Provided that, when any fact is deposed
                to   as   discovered   in   consequence   of   information   received
                from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a
                police   officer,   so   much   of   such   information,   whether   it
                amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the
                fact thereby discovered, may be proved.’
                   12.   The   expression   ‘provided   that’   together   with   the
               phrase ‘whether it amounts to a confession or not’ show that
               the section is in the nature of an exception to the preceding
               provisions   particularly   Sections   25   and   26.   It   is   not
               necessary in this case to consider if this section qualifies, to
22
    (2015) 1 SCC 253
23
    AIR 1947 PC 67
24
    (1976) 1 SCC 828 ; (1976) 1 SCR 715
               any extent, Section 24, also.  It will be seen that the  first
               condition   necessary   for   bringing   this   section   into
               operation   is   the  discovery   of   a   fact,   albeit   a   relevant
               fact, in consequence of the information received from a
               person   accused   of   an   offence.   The  second  is   that   the
               discovery of such fact must be deposed to. The  third  is
               that   at   the   time   of   the   receipt   of   the   information   the
               accused must be in police custody. The last but the most
               important   condition   is   that   only   ‘so   much   of   the
               information’   as   relates  distinctly  to   the   fact  thereby
               discovered is admissible. The rest of the information has
               to   be   excluded.  The   word   ‘distinctly’   means   ‘directly’,
               ‘indubitably’,   ‘strictly’,   ‘unmistakably’.   The   word   has   been
               advisedly used to limit and define the scope of the provable
               information. The phrase ‘distinctly relates to the fact thereby
               discovered’   is   the   linchpin   of   the   provision.   This   phrase
               refers to that part of the information supplied by the accused
               which is the direct and immediate cause of the discovery. The
               reason   behind   this   partial   lifting   of   the   ban   against
               confessions and statements made to the police, is that if a
               fact   is   actually   discovered   in   consequence   of   information
               given by the accused, it affords some guarantee of truth of
               that part, and that part only, of the information which was
               the clear, immediate and proximate cause of the discovery.
               No such guarantee or assurance attaches to the rest of the
               statement which may be indirectly or remotely related to the
               fact discovered.
                   13.   At   one   time   it   was   held   that   the   expression   ‘fact
               discovered’   in   the   section   is   restricted   to   a   physical   or
               material fact which can be perceived by the senses, and that
               it does not include a mental fact (see  Sukhan  v.  Emperor25;
 Ganu Chandra Kashid v. Emperor26). Now it is fairly settled
               that   the   expression   ‘fact   discovered’   includes   not   only
               the   physical   object   produced,   but   also   the   place   from
               which it is produced and the knowledge of the accused
               as   to   this  (see  Pulukuri   Kotayya  v.  King   Emperor27;  Udai
               Bhan v. State of U.P.28).” 
               (emphasis in original)
               25.  In  Aftab   Ahmad   Anasari  v.  State   of   Uttaranchal29  after
            referring   to   the   decision   in  Pulukuri   Kotayya30,   the   Court
            adverted   to   seizure   of   clothes   of   the   deceased   which   were
            concealed   by   the   accused.   In   that   context,   the   Court   opined
            that (Aftab Ahmad Anasari case, SCC p. 596, para 40) 

25
     AIR 1929 Lah 344
26
    AIR 1932 Bom 286
27
    Supra @ Footnote 23
28
    AIR 1962 SC 1116 ; (1962) 2 Cri LJ 251 ; 1962 Supp (2) SCR 830
29
    (2010) 2 SCC 583 
30
     Supra @ Footnote 23
                 “40. … the part of the disclosure statement, namely, that the
                 appellant   was   ready   to   show   the   place   where   he   had
                 concealed the clothes of the deceased is clearly  admissible
                 under   Section   27   of   the   Evidence   Act   because   the   same
                 relates   distinctly   to   the   discovery   of   the   clothes   of   the
                 deceased from that very place. The contention that even if it
                 is assumed for the sake of argument that the clothes of the
                 deceased were recovered from the house of the sister of the
                 appellant   pursuant   to   the   voluntary   disclosure   statement
                 made by the appellant, the prosecution has failed to prove
                 that the clothes so recovered belonged to the deceased and
                 therefore, the recovery of the clothes should not be treated
                 as an incriminating circumstance, is devoid of merits.”
            26.  In  State   of   Maharashtra  v.  Damu31  it   has   been   held   as
            follows: (SCC p.283, para 35)
                 “35. … It is now well settled that recovery of an object is not
                 discovery   of   a   fact   as   envisaged   in   [Section   27   of   the
                 Evidence   Act,   1872].   The   decision   of   the   Privy   Council   in
                 Pulukuri   Kotayya  v.  King   Emperor32  is   the   most   quoted
                 authority   for   supporting   the   interpretation   that   the   ‘fact
                 discovered’ envisaged in the section embraces the place from
                 which   the   object   was   produced,   the   knowledge   of   the
                 accused   as   to   it,   but   the   information   given   must   relate
                 distinctly to that effect.”
            The   similar   principle   has   been   laid   down   in  State   of
            Maharashtra  v.  Suresh33,  State   of   Punjab  v.  Gurnam   Kaur34,
            Aftab Ahmad Anasari v. State of Uttaranchal35, Bhagwan Dass v.
            State (NCT of Delhi)36, Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi)37 and
            Rumi Bora Dutta v. State of Assam38.
                    27. In the case at hand, as is perceptible, the recovery
            had   taken   place   when   the   appellant   was   accused   of   an
            offence, he was in custody of a police officer, the recovery
            had taken place in consequence of information furnished by
            him   and   the   panch   witnesses   have   supported   the   seizure
            and nothing has been brought on record to discredit their
            testimony.
                    28. Additionally, another aspect can also be taken note of.
            The fact that the appellant had led the police officer to find out
            the spot where the crime was committed, and the tap where he
            washed the clothes eloquently speak of his conduct as the same
            is   admissible   in   evidence   to   establish   his   conduct.   In   this
            context   we   may   refer   with   profit   to   the   authority   in  Prakash
31
    (2000) 6 SCC 269 
32
    Supra @ Footnote 23
33
    (2000) 1 SCC 471 
34
    (2009) 11 SCC 225 
35
    (2010) 2 SCC 583 
36
     (2011) 6 SCC 396 
37
     (2010) 6 SCC 1 
38
     (2013) 7 SCC 417 
            Chand v. State (Delhi Admn.)39 wherein the Court after referring
            to   the   decision   in  H.P.   Admn.  v.  Om   Prakash40  held   thus:
            (Prakash Chand case, SCC p.95, para 8)
                “8. … There is a clear distinction between the conduct of
                a   person   against   whom   an   offence   is   alleged,   which   is
                admissible under Section 8 of the Evidence Act, if such
                conduct   is   influenced   by   any   fact   in   issue   or   relevant
                fact  and  the   statement  made  to a  police  officer in   the
                course of an investigation which is hit by Section 162 of
                the Criminal Procedure Code. What is excluded by Section
                162 of the Criminal Procedure Code is the statement made to
                a   police   officer   in   the   course   of   investigation   and   not   the
                evidence relating to the conduct of an accused person (not
                amounting to a statement) when confronted or questioned by
                a   police   officer   during   the   course   of   an   investigation.   For
                example, the evidence of the circumstance, simpliciter, that
                an accused person led a police officer and pointed out the
                place   where   stolen   articles   or   weapons   which   might   have
                been   used   in   the   commission   of   the   offence   were   found
                hidden, would be admissible as conduct, under Section 8 of
                the Evidence Act, irrespective of whether any statement by
                the accused contemporaneously with or antecedent to such
                conduct   falls   within   the   purview   of   Section   27   of   the
                Evidence Act.”
            29. In A.N. Venkatesh v. State of Karnataka41 it has been ruled
            that: (SCC p.721, para9)
                “9. By virtue of Section 8 of the Evidence Act, the conduct of
                the accused person is relevant, if such conduct influences or
                is   influenced   by   any   fact   in   issue   or   relevant   fact.  The
                evidence   of   the   circumstance,   simpliciter,   that   the
                accused   pointed   out   to   the   police   officer,   the   place
                where the dead body of the kidnapped boy was found and
                on their pointing out the body was exhumed, would be
                admissible   as   conduct   under   Section   8   irrespective   of
                the   fact   whether   the   statement   made   by   the   accused
                contemporaneously with or antecedent to such conduct
                falls within the purview of Section 27 or not as held by
                this   Court   in  Prakash   Chand  v.  State   (Delhi   Admn.).
                Even if we hold that the disclosure statement made by
                the   appellants­accused   (Exts.   P­15   and   P­16)   is   not
                admissible under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, still it
                is   relevant   under   Section   8.  The   evidence   of   the
                investigating   officer   and   PWs   1,   2,   7   and   PW   4   the   spot
                mahazar   witness   that   the   accused   had   taken   them   to   the
                spot   and   pointed   out   the   place   where   the   dead   body   was
                buried, is an admissible piece of evidence under Section 8 as
39
     (1979) 3 SCC 90 
40
     (1972) 1 SCC 249 
41
     (2005) 7 SCC 714 
                the conduct of the accused.  Presence of A­1 and A­2 at a
                place where ransom demand was to be fulfilled and their
                action   of   fleeing   on   spotting   the   police   party   is   a
                relevant circumstance and are admissible under Section
                8 of the Evidence Act.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)

      14.   Applying the principle expounded by this Court, we have no

      hesitation   in   affirming   the   finding   of   guilt   recorded   against

      appellant No.1 – Asar Mohammed.

      15.   The   question   is   whether   the   same   evidence   or   proved

      circumstances   can   be   used   against   the   other   two   appellants,

      namely,   Asraf   Mohammed   and   Akhtar   Mohammad.

      Indisputably,   except   the   confession   of   the   co­accused   –   Asar

      Mohammed (appellant No.1), the prosecution has not produced

      any independent substantive evidence to even remotely suggest

      that   appellant   Nos.2   and   3   were   involved   in   committing   the

      murder   of   Zahida   and   Ishlam.     By   now,   it   is   well   settled   that

      confession   of   the   co­accused   by   itself   cannot   be   the   basis   to

      proceed   against   the   other   accused   unless   something   more   is

      produced to indicate their involvement in the commission of the

      crime.     This   Court   in  Kashmira   Singh   v.   State   of   Madhya

      Pradesh42,  relying   upon   the   decision   of   the   Privy   Council   in

      Bhuboni Sahu v. R.43, Periaswami Moopan, In re44 as well as

42
    1952 SCR 526
43
    (1948­49) 76 IA 147
44
    ILR (1931) 54 Mad 75
      in Emperor v. Lalit Mohan Chuckerbutty45, has explicated the

      efficacy of confession of an accused person and whether it can be

      used against the co­accused. The exposition in Kashmira Singh

      has   been approved by the Constitution Bench of this Court in

      Haricharan Kurmi v. State of Bihar46, in particular paragraph

      12 which reads thus :
            “12.  As   we   have   already   indicated,   this   question   has   been
            considered on several occasions by judicial decisions and it has
            been consistently held that a confession cannot be treated as
            evidence   which   is   substantive   evidence   against   a   co­accused
            person.    In   dealing   with   a   criminal   case   where   the
            prosecution   relies   upon   the   confession   of   one   accused
            person   against   another   accused   person,   the   proper
            approach to adopt is to consider the other evidence against
            such an accused person, and if the said evidence appears to
            be   satisfactory  and   the   court   is  inclined   to   hold   that  the
            said   evidence   may   sustain   the   charge   framed   against   the
            said accused person, the court  turns to the confession with
            a   view   to   assure   itself   that   the   conclusion   which   it   is
            inclined to draw from the other evidence is right.   As was
            observed   by   Sir   Lawrence   Jenkins   in  Emperor   v.   Lalit   Mohan
            Chuckerbutty a confession can only be used to ‘lend assurance
            to other evidence against a co­accused’.  In Periaswami Moopan,
            In re  Reilly, J., observed that the provision of Section 30 goes
            not further than this : 
                ‘…where   there   is   evidence   against   the   co­accused
                sufficient,   if   believed,   to   support   his   conviction,   then
                the kind of confession described in Section 30  may be
                thrown   into   the   scale   as   an   additional   reason   for
                believing that evidence.’

            In Bhuboni Sahu v. R. the Privy Council has expressed the same
            view.   Sir John Beaumont who spoke for the Board, observed
            that: 

               ‘…A   confession   of   a   co­accused   is   obviously   evidence   of   a
               very weak type.  It does not indeed come within the definition
               of ‘evidence’ contained in Section 3 of the Evidence Act.  It is
               not required to be given on oath, nor in the presence of the
               accused, and it cannot be tested by cross­examination.  It is

45
   ILR (1911) 38 Cal 559
46
   (1964) 6 SCR 623 ; AIR 1964 SC 1184
          a   much   weaker   type   of   evidence   than   the   evidence   of   an
          approver,   which   is   not   subject   to   any   of   those   infirmities.
          Section   30,   however,   provides   that   the   court   may   act;
          but   the   section   does   not   say   that   the   confession   is   to
          amount to proof.  Clearly there must be other evidence.
          The confession is only one element in the consideration
          of all the facts proved in the case; it can be put into the
          scale and weighed with the other evidence.’

      It would be noticed that as a result of the provisions contained
      in Section 30, the confession has no doubt to be regarded as
      amounting to evidence in a general way, because whatever  is
      considered by  the court is evidence; circumstances which are
      considered by the court as well as probabilities do amount to
      evidence in that generic sense.   Thus, though confession may
      be  regarded  as evidence  in  that  generic  sense  because  of  the
      provisions of Section 30, the fact remains that it is not evidence
      as defined by Section 3 of the Act.   The result, therefore, is
      that in dealing with a case against an accused person, the
      court cannot start with the confession of a co­accused after
      it   has   formed   its   opinion   with   regard   to   the   quality   and
      effect of the said evidence, then it is permissible to turn to
      the   confession   in   order   to   receive   assurance   to   the
      conclusion   of   guilt   which   the   judicial   mind   is   about   to
      reach on the said other evidence.  That, briefly stated, is the
      effect of the provisions contained in Section 30.  The same view
      has been expressed by this Court in Kashmira Singh v. State of
      M.P.  where the decision of the Privy Council in  Bhuboni Sahu
      case has been cited with approval.”

                                                                 (emphasis supplied)

16.   In view of the above, it is not permissible to proceed against

appellant   nos.2   and   3   solely   on   the   basis   of   the   confession   of

appellant No.1 made before the police, even if the relevant part of

the confession is admissible and has been duly proved.   As no

substantive evidence is forthcoming to show the involvement of

appellant nos.2 and 3 for having caused the murder of Zahida

and Ishlam, it is not open to convict them for offence punishable

under Section 302, IPC.  This is also because the charge, as has
been framed, is simpliciter for offence under Section 302 and not

for offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of

IPC or Section 302 read with Section 120­B of IPC. No evidence

has   been   produced   by   the   prosecution   in   this   regard.

Resultantly, the finding of guilt albeit concurrently recorded by

the   two   courts   against   appellant   nos.2   and   3   for   offence

punishable under Section 302 IPC cannot be sustained on facts

or in law.   These appellants, therefore, will have to be acquitted

in connection with offence punishable under Section 302 IPC.

17.   The next question is whether appellant Nos.2 and 3 can be

held guilty for offence punishable under Section 201 IPC.   The

fact that appellant nos.2 and 3 cannot be convicted for offence

punishable under Section 302 IPC does not extricate them from

the   offence   under   Section   201   IPC.     We   say   so   because   the

proved circumstances discerned from the record leave no manner

of   doubt   that   Zahida  and   Ishlam   were   residing   along   with   the

appellants in the same house.   Further, Zahida was the second

wife of appellant No.3 and Ishlam was none other than the son of

appellant   No.3   born   in   wedlock   with   Zahida.     Zahida   was   the

step mother of appellant Nos.1 and 2 and Ishlam was their step

brother.   This relationship has not been disputed.   It is also an

established   fact   that   Zahida   and   Ishlam   had   suddenly   gone
missing for over two months. Obviously, no efforts were made by

appellant nos.2 and 3 to trace Zahida and Ishlam nor did they

think   it   necessary   to  report  that  fact  to  the   local  police.   This

indeed   cannot   be   a   natural   behavior   or   conduct   of   appellant

No.3,   the   husband   of   Zahida   and   father   of   minor   son   Ishlam.

Further, appellant nos.2 and 3 have not challenged the identity

of two dead bodies found from the septic tank in the backyard of

their house at the instance of appellant No.1 – Asar Mohammed.

No explanation whatsoever has been offered by them as to why

they  did  not report  about the sudden disappearance of Zahida

and   Ishlam   (until   their   bodies   were   recovered   from   the   septic

tank   in   the   backyard   of   their   house   after   two   months).   The

concomitant is that appellant Nos.2 and 3 had knowledge that

Zahida   and   Ishlam   had   been   murdered   and   their   dead   bodies

were dumped in the septic tank in the backyard of their house

and   yet,   they   did   not   disclose   that   fact   with   an   intention   to

screen appellant No.1 – Asar Mohammed, the offender, from legal

punishment.  In other words, even though they cannot be made

liable   for   the   murder   of   Zahida   and   Ishlam   for   want   of   legal

evidence in that regard, they would certainly be guilty of having

committed offence under Section 201 IPC as established from the

proved   circumstances   coupled   with   their   abject   failure   to   offer
any   explanation,   much   less   cogent   explanation,   about   their

conduct. The inevitable and legitimate conclusion to be deduced

is that they are guilty of offence punishable under Section 201

IPC for which they have been rightly convicted and sentenced by

the   trial   court   and   which   opinion   of   the   trial   court   has   been

affirmed   by   the   High   Court.     As   a   result,   the   appeal   filed   by

appellant nos.2 and 3 would partly succeed only to the extent of

acquitting them for offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. 

18.   In view  of  the  above, the appeal filed by appellant No.1 –

Asar   Mohammed   is   dismissed.   Whereas,   the   appeal   filed   by

appellant   Nos.2   and   3   –   Asraf   Mohammed   and   Akhtar,

respectively, is partly allowed by setting aside the conviction and

sentence   recorded   against   them   for   offence   punishable   under

Section   302   IPC   but   the   conviction   and   sentence   for   offence

punishable   under   Section   201   IPC   against   them   is   upheld.

Ordered accordingly.   

                                                  …………………………..….J.
                                                   (A.M. Khanwilkar)


                                                  …………………………..….J.
                                                   (L. Nageswara Rao)
New Delhi;
October 24, 2018.

