
Supreme Court of India
Thakur Das (Dead) By L. Rs vs State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 October, 1977Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR, 1		  1978 SCR  (1) 732
Author: D Desai
Bench: Desai, D.A.
           PETITIONER:
THAKUR DAS (DEAD) BY L. Rs

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/10/1977

BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
BENCH:
DESAI, D.A.
GOSWAMI, P.K.
UNTWALIA, N.L.

CITATION:
 1978 AIR    1		  1978 SCR  (1) 732
 1978 SCC  (1)	27


ACT:
Essential Commodities Act, 1955-S.6C-Scope of Sessions Judge
appointed  as  an appellate authority Sessions Court  if  an
inferior  criminal court in relation to the High Court-If  a
revision application would lie to the High Court against  an
order made under s.6C-Revisional jurisdiction of High  Court Scope of.



HEADNOTE:
Section	 6A of the Essential Commodities Act,  1955  confers
power  on  the Collector of the District to  confiscate	 any
essential commodity seized under s.3. Under s. 6C the  State
Government  is required to appoint a judicial  authority  to
entertain   and	  bear	 appeals  against   the	  order	  of
confiscation.	 The   appellate  against   the	  order	  of
confiscation.	The  appellate	authority  is  empowered  to
modify or annul the order of confiscation.
On  the ground that the licensee had committed a  number  of
irregularities	in  contravention  of  the  Madhya   Pradesh
Foodgrains  Dealers  Licensing Order,  1965,  the  licensing
authority,  in addition to cancelling the licence issued  to
him   and   forfeiting	the   security	 deposit,   directed
confiscation  of  the foodgrains seized from  the  licensee.
Against that part of the order by which the foodgrains	were
confiscated, the licensee appealed to the Sessions Judge who
was  the judicial authority constituted under s. 6C  of	 the
Act.  Holding that it was not just to confiscate the  grains
the judicial authority directed sale of the seized grains at
controlled  rates  and	refund	of the	sale  price  to	 the
licensee.   On	revision application by the state  the	High
Court  held  that  confiscation	 was  just  and	 proper	 and
restored the Collector's order.
On  further appeal to this Court it was contended on  behalf
of the licensee that (i) the judicial authority	 constituted
under s. 6C is not an inferior criminal court subordinate to
the  High  Court  and, therefore, is  not  amenable  to	 its
revisional  jurisdiction under s. 435 read with s.  439	 Cr.
P. C., 1898 and (ii) that the High Court, in exercise of its
revisional  jurisdiction, was not justified  in	 interfering
with the order of the appellate authority merely because it
was of opinion that the confiscation was justified.
Allowing the appeal,
HELD : (1) (a) Though the Sessions Judge was appointed as an
appellate  authority  what the State Government did  was  to
constitute an appellate authority in the Sessions Court over
which  the Sessions Judge presides.  The Sessions  Court  is
constituted  under  the	 Code  of  Criminal  Procedure	 and
indisputably it is an inferior criminal court in relation to
the  High Court.  Therefore, against an order made under  s.
6C,  a revision application would lie to the High Court	 and
the   High  Court  would  be  entitled	to  entertain	that
application under ss. 435 and 439. (fr.	 P. C. [739 A-B]
(a)  When  the	Sessions  Judge	 was  appointed	 a  judicial
authority it could be said that he was persona designate and
was not functioning as a Court. [737 E]
(b)  The   expression	'Judicial'   qualifying	  the	word
'authority'  clearly indicates that authority alone  can  be
appointed to entertain and hear appeals under s. 6C on which
was  conferred	the  judicial  power  of  the  State.	 The
expression  "judicial power of the State" has to  be  under-
stood  in contradistinction to executive power.	  Under	 the
Constitution courts are the repository of judicial power  of
the State.  By using the expression "judicial authority"  in
s. 6C it was clearly indicated that the appellate  authority
must be one such preexisting authority which was  exercising
judicial power of  the State. If   any	other authority	 was
to be constituted as persona designata there was no    purpose
in qualifying the word "authority" by the specific adjective
"judicial [736 D-F]
733
(c)  Secondly  the concept of appeal inheres  hierarchy	 and
the  appellate authority, broadly speaking, would be  higher
than  the  authority against whose order the appeal  can  be
entertained.  Sessions Judge is the highest judicial officer
in  the District and this situation would  provide  material
for determining appellate authority. [736 G-H]
 (d) A look at the legislative history of the Act shows that
under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 an appeal against  an
order  of seizure of essential commodities lay to the  State
Government.  Amending Act 25 of 1966 (by which ss. 6A to  6D
were  added)  introduced a basic change which  was  that  an
order  of confiscation being penal in character a person  on
whom   penalty	is  imposed  is	 given	an  opportunity	  of
approaching   a	 judicial  authority.	While	before	 the
amendment  an appeal lay to the executive forum,  after	 the
amendment  an  appeal lies to the judicial  authority  which
clearly envisages that a pre-existing judicial authority has
to be appointed appellate authority under s. 6C. [737 A-C]
(e)  A	seizure of an essential commodity on the  allegation
that  the relevant licensing order is violated	would  incur
three	penalties  :  (1)  cancellation	 of   licence;	 (2)
forfeiture  of	security deposit; and  (3)  confiscation  of
seized commodity.  In respect of the first two penalties  an
appeal	lies to the State Government but in respect  of	 the
third,	though prior to the introduction of s. 6C an  appeal
lay to the State Government a distinct departure is made  in
providing  an  appellate forum which must  qualify  for	 the
description and satisfy the test of judicial authority. [737
C-D]
 (f) Even if the judicial authority appointed under s. 6C is
the  Sessions Judge it would only mean the  Judge  presiding
over  the  Sessions Court and discharging the  functions  of
that  Court.   If by the Sessions Judge is meant  the  Judge
presiding over the Sessions Court and that is the  appointed
appellate  authority, the conclusion is inescapable that  he
was not persona designata which expression is understood  to
mean  a person pointed out or described as an individual  as
opposed to a person ascertained as a member of a class or as
filling a particular character. [737 F-G]
Central	 Talkies Ltd. v. Dwarka Prasad AIR 1961 SC  606	 and
Ram Chandra v. State of U.P. AIR 1966 SC 1888, referred to.
Public	Prosecutor (A.P.) v. L. Ramayya (1975) Criminal	 Law
Journal 144, approved.
State,	of Gujarat v. C. M. Shah 1974 Criminal	Law  Journal
716, State of Madhya Pradesh v. Vasent Kumar (1972) Jabalpur
Law  Journal  80, and State of Mysore v. Pandurang  P.	Naik
[1971] 1 Mysore Law Journal 401 not approved.
(2)  The  High Court was not justified in  interfering	with
the order of confiscation.    [741 E]
(a)  The  High Court could not have lightly interfered	with
the   order  of	 the  Sessions	Judge  setting	 aside	 the
confiscation  especially  in  exercise	of  the	  revisional
jurisdiction  under  s. 439 without marking out any  of	 the
well  recognised grounds for interfering in exercise of	 its
revisional jurisdiction. [741 C-D]
(b)  For  the  purposes	 of  satisfying	 itself	 as  to	 the
correctness, legality or propriety of the finding,  sentence
or  order passed or recorded etc., by an  interior  criminal
court  the High Court, under s. 435 Cr.	 P. C. can call	 for
and examine the record of any proceeding.  While  exercising
revisional jurisdiction under s. 439 the High Court has	 the
same power as is conferred on it as a court of appeal  under
s. 423, subject to certain exceptions. [740 B-C]
(c)  The revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under  s.
439   appears	to  be	co-extensive  with   the   appellate
jurisdiction.  In a number of cases this Court held that the
revisional jurisdiction conferred upon the High Court  under
s.  439 is not lightly to be exercised but can be  exercised
only  in  exceptional  cases where the	interest  of  public
justice	 requires interference or where there is  a  glaring
defect	in  the procedure or there is a	 manifest  error  on
point  of  law and consequently there has  been	 a  flagrant
miscarriage of justice. [740 D-E]
734
Dr. Stephens v. Nosibolla (1951) SCR 284; Jagendra Nath	 Jha
v.  Polai Lal Biswas [1951] SCR 676; K Chinnaswamy Reddy  v.
State  of  Andhra Pradesh [1963] 3 SCR 412  and	 Amar  Chand
Agarwalla  v. Shanti Bose & Another etc. [1973] 3  SCR	179,
followed.
(d)  In	 the instant case the Sessions Judge, in  exercising
appellate jurisdiction, examined the penal character of	 the
confiscation order and held that in the circumstances of the
case  confiscation was not just and proper.   The  appellate
authority  had	power and jurisdiction to decide  the  same.
The  High  Court,  on the other	 hand,	took  an  altogether
different  view and held that these defaults should  not  be
lightly viewed,. [741 A-B]



JUDGMENT:
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Criminal Appeal No. 109 of
1974.
Appeal	by Special Leave from the Judgment and	Order  dated
26-7-73	 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court at Indore in	Crl.
Revision No. 90/73.
S.   K. Gambhir and Miss S. Ramakhini for the Appellants.
I.   N. Shroff and H. S.  Parihar for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the court was delivered by
DESAI,	J.-This appeal by special leave is directed  against
the order made by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur
in Criminal Revision No. 90 of 1973 setting aside the  order
made  by the Sessions Judge, Mandsaur Division	in  Criminal
Appeal	No.  104  of  1972 against the	order  made  by	 the
Collector  of  Mandsaur confiscating the foodgrains  in	 the
quantity of 484 quintals 74 kg. of wheat and 135 quintals 36
kg.  of rice under section 6A of the  Essential	 Commodities
Act, 1955.
The  petitioner Thakur Das son of Lila Ram Sindhi  who	died
pending	 the petition, was a licensed dealer  in  foodgrains
having	 obtained  a  licence  under  the   Madhya   Pradesh
Foodgrains  Dealers  Licensing Order, 1965 (for	 short	'the
order') issued under section 3 of the Essential	 Commodities
Act,  1955  ('Act' for short).	The licence enabled  him  to
store for sale and sell foodgrains set out in Schedule I  to
the  Order.   By the terms of the licence the  licensee	 was
obligated  to maintain a register of daily accounts  in	 the
prescribed  form  for each of the foodgrains for  which	 the
licence	 was  issued and there was a further  obligation  to
complete the accounts for each day on the day to which	they
relate	unless prevented by reasonable cause, the burden  of
proving	 which	would  be upon him.   The  licensee  had  to
deposit	 at  the  commencement of  licence,  the  amount  of
security  deposit  as provided by clause (6) of	 the  Order.
Clauses (8) and (9) conferred power on the licensing  autho-
rity-Collector	of the District in this case--to cancel	 the
licence	 and  to  forfeit  the	security  in  the  event  of
contravention of any condition of licence.
The  Food Inspector on a visit to the licensed	premises  on
13th  August  1972  found  certain  irregularities  in	 the
accounts  and submitted a report on the basis of  which	 the
licensing authority issued notice dated 21st August 1972  to
the licensee calling upon him to show cause within 24  hours
why  the  licence  should not  be  cancelled,  the  security
deposit	 may not be forfeited and the seized foodgrains	 may
not  be	 confiscated.  Ultimately  the	licensing  authority
directed confiscation of the seized
735
foodgrains,  cancelled the licence issued in favour  of	 the
licensee and forfeited the security. deposit.  The  licensee
appealed to the judicial authority constituted under s.	 6C
of the Act, being the Sessions Judge, Mandsaur, against that
part  of  the  Order by which  the  seized  foodgrains	were
ordered	 to be confiscated.  The judicial authority  was  of
the  opinion that : 'in the facts and circumstances  of	 the
case  cancellation of the licence and the forfeiture of	 the
security  deposit is quite sufficient and it is not just  to
confiscate  the	 grains worth Rs. 50,000/- for	the  alleged
contravention'	and directed that the seized  foodgrains  be
sold  to  some licensed dealer at controlled price  and	 the
price so realisee be refunded to the licensee.	The State of
Madhya	Pradesh	 and  the Licensing  Authority	preferred  a
revision application to the High Court against the order  of
the  judicial authority.  The High Court disagreed with	 the
opinion of the Sessions Judge and held that in the facts and
circumstances ,of the case confiscation was just and  proper
and  accordingly  set  aside  the  order  of  the  appellate
authority and restored the order of the Collector.
Two  contentions were raised before the High Court  and	 the
same  were canvassed before us.	 It was contended : (1)	 the
judicial authority constituted by the State Government under
s.  6C	of  the Act to hear appeals  against  the  order  of
confiscation  that  may be made by the	licensing  authority
under  S. 6A not an inferior criminal court  subordinate  to
the  High Court and amenable to the revisional	jurisdiction
of the High Court under s. 435 read-with s. 439 of the	Code
of Criminal Procedure; (2) in the facts and circumstances of
this  case, the High Court was not justified in	 interfering
with the order of the appellate authority who had  exercised
its discretion one way merely because the High Court took  a
different view of the matter,
Section	 6A  of the Act confers power on  the  Collector  to
confiscate  any	 essential  commodity  which  is  seized  in
pursuance  of an order made under S. 3 in relation  thereto.
Clause	II of the Order enables the licensing  authority  to
seize	stocks	of  foodgrains	etc.  which  are   held	  in
contravention  of  the	provisions of the order	 or  of	 the
conditions    of   licence   issued   thereunder.     Before
confiscating such seized essential commodity, s. 6B  confers
a duty on the licensing authority to give a notice informing
the  person to whose detriment the action is proposed to  be
taken,	the grounds on which it is proposed  to	 confiscate
the essential commodity and further give him an	 opportunity
to make a representation within a reasonable time as may  be
specified   in	the  notice  and  also	give  a	  reasonable
opportunity  of	 being	heard in  the  matter.	 Section  6C
provides  for an appeal against the order  of  confiscation.
The  State  Government	is required to	appoint	 a  judicial
authority to entertain and bear appeals against the order of
confiscation.	The appellate authority so  constituted	 has
power to modify or annul the order of confiscation.
Madhya	Pradesh	 State Government has appointed	 a  judicial
authority  for	the purposes of s. 6C but  the	notification
constituting  the authority was not placed on  record.	 The
licensee preferred an appeal in the Court of Sessions Judge,
Mandsaur Division, Mandsaur, and no one questioned that	 the
Sessions Judge presiding over the Sessions Court at Mandsaur
was competent judicial authority for the purposes of S. 6C.
736
While  rejecting  the  contention  of  lack  of	  revisional
jurisdiction,  the High Court observed that "all  the  State
Governments obviously following the model notification given
by the Centre, have appointed the Sessions Judge as judicial
authority  within  the	areas of  that	(sic)  jurisdiction.
Accordingly  the  Sessions  Judge  of  Mandsaur	 heard	 the
appeal."  It  therefore,  appears that	the  Sessions  Judge
presiding  over the Sessions Court set up for  the  Sessions
Division  was appointed judicial authority for the  purposes
of S. 6C.
If  the Sessions Judge presiding over the Sessions Court  is
the  judicial  authority, the question is : would it  be  an
inferior  criminal courts subordinate to the High Court	 for
the  purposes of ss. 435 and 439 of the	 Criminal  Procedure
Code  ?	  At the one and of the spectrum the  submission  is
that  the judicial authority appointed under s. 6C would  be
person a designata and that if by a fortuitous	circumstance
the appointed judicial authority happens to be the  Sessions
Judge, while entertaining and heating an appeal under s.  6C
it  would not be an inferior criminal court  subordinate  to
the  High Court and, therefore, no revision application	 can
be  entertained against his order by the High Court.   While
conferring   power  on	the  State  Government	to   appoint
appellate  forum  the  Parliament  clearly  manifested	 its
intention as to who should be such appellate authority.
The expression	"judicial"  qualifying	the   'authority'
clearly indicates that that authority alone can be appointed
to  entertain  and  heat appeals under s. 6C  on  which	 was
conferred the judicial power of the State.  The expression "
judicial  power	 of  the  State" has  to  be  understood  in
contradistinction  to executive power.	The framers  of	 the
Constitution  clearly envisaged courts to be the  repository
of  the;  judicial  power  of  the  State.   The   appellate
authority  under  s. 6A must be a  judicial  authority.	  By
using  the  expression "judicial authority" it	was  clearly
indicated that the appellate authority must be one such pre-
existing  authority which was exercising judicial  power  of
the State.  If any other authority as persona designata	 was
to  be	constituted there was no purpose In  qualifying	 the
word authority" by the specific adjective "judicial".
A judicial authority exercising judicial power of the  State
is  an	authority having its own hierarchy of  superior	 and
inferior  court, the law of procedure according to which  it
would  dispose of matters coming before it  depending  up-on
the-  nature  of  jurisdiction exercised  by  it  acting  in
judicial manner.  In using the compact expression  "judicial
authority"  the legislative intention is clearly  manifested
that   from   amongst	several	  pre-existing	 authorities
exercising  judicial  powers of the  State  and	 discharging
judicial  functions, one such may be appointed as  would  be
competent to discharge the appellate functions as  envisaged
by  s. 6C.  There is one in built suggestion indicating	 who
could be appointed.  The concept of appeal inheres hierarchy
and the appellate authority broadly speaking would be higher
than  the  authority against whose order the appeal  can  be
entertained.   Here the appellate authority would  entertain
appeal	against the order of Collector, the highest  revenue
officer in a district.	Sessions Judge
737
is  the	 highest judicial officer in the District  and	this
situation would provide material for deter-mining  appellate
authority.   In this connection the legislative history	 may
throw  some light oh what the legislature intended by  using
the  expression "judicial authority".  The Defence of  India
Rules, 1962, conferred power on certain authorities to seize
essential commodities under certain circumstances.   Against
the  seizure an appeal was provided to the State  Government
whose  order was made final.  By the amending Act No. 25  of
1966  Sections	6A to 6D were introduced in the	 Act.	This
introduced  a basic change in one respect, namely,  that  an
order  of confiscation being penal in character, the  person
on  whom  penalty  is imposed is  given	 an  opportunity  of
approaching  a	judicial  authority.   Earlier	appeal	from
executive officer would lie to another executive forum.	 The
change	is  appeal to judicial	authority.   Therefore,	 the
expression   clearly  envisages	 a   pre-existing   judicial
authority  his to be appointed appellate authority under  s.
6C.   When the provision contained in s. 6C is	examined  in
the background of another provision made in the order itself
it  would become further distinctly clear that	pre-existing
judicial  authority  was  to  be  designated  as   appellate
authority under s. 6C.	A seizure of essential commodity  on
the  allegation	 that  the- relevant  licensing	 order	is
violated, would incur three penalties : (1) cancellation  of
licence;  (2)  forfeiture  of  security	 deposit;  and	 (3)
confiscation  of seized essential commodity, apart from	 any
prosecution  that may be launched under s. 7. In respect  of
the  first  two	 penalties  an	appeal	lies  to  the  State
Government  but in respect of the third though prior to	 the
introduction  of  s.  6C an appeal would lie  to  the  State
Government,  a	distinct departure is made in  providing  an
appellate forum which must qualify for the description-	 and
satisfy the test of judicial authority.	 Therefore, when the
Sessions  Judge was appointed a judicial authority it  could
not  be	 said  that he was persona  designata  and  was	 not
functioning as a Court.
Sections  7 and 9 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure,  1898,
envisage  division  of	the  State  into  various   Sessions
Divisions  and	setting up of Sessions Court for  each	such
division, and further provides for appointment of a Judge to
preside	 over  that  court.  The  Sessions  Judge  gets	 his
designation  as	 Sessions  Judge as  he	 presides-,over	 the
Sessions  Court and thereby enjoys the powers and discharges
thefunctions conferred by the Code. Therefore, even if the
judicialauthority  appointed under s. 6C is  the  Sessions
Judge it would onlymean	  the  Judge  presiding	 over	the
Sessions Court and discharging thefunctions of that  Court.
If by the Sessions Judge is meant the Judgepresiding  over
the  Sessions  Court  and  that	 is  the  appoint  appellate
authority,  the	 conclusion is inescapable that he  was	 not
Persona	 designata which expression is understood to mean  a
person pointed out or described as an individual as  opposed
to a person ascertained as a member of a class or as filling
a particular character (vide Central Talkies Ltd. v.  Dwarka
Prasad,(1) and Ram Chandra v. State of U.P.(2)
Our  attention	was drawn to a cleavage of  opinion  amongst
High Courts on the construction of the expression  "judicial
authority" used
(1)  A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 606.
(2)  A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 1888.
738
in s.6C.  In State of Mysore v. Pandurang  P.  Naik,(1)
the Mysore High	    Court  was of the opinion that though  a
District  and  Sessions Judge was appointed  as	 a  judicial
authority by the State Government in exercise of the  powers
conferred by s. 6C of the Act in that capacity it would	 not
be an inferior criminal court within the meaning of s.	435.
Same  view was taken by the Gujarat High Court in  State  of
Gujarat	 v. C. M. Shah (2) . The exact specification of	 the
appellate  authority constituted by the	 notification  could
not  be gathered from the judgment but it appears  that	 the
appeal	was  heard by the Additional  Sessions	Judge  which
would indicate that even if a District & Sessions Judge	 was
appointed  as  "judicial authority"  that  expression  would
comprehend  the	 Additional  Sessions  Judge  also  or	 the
Sessions Judge could transfer such appeal pending before him
to Additional Sessions Judge which was a pointer that he was
not  a	persona	 designata.   After  referring	to   certain
sections of the Code of Criminal Procedure it has been	held
that  the Additional Sessions Judge hearing an appeal  under
s.  6C is not an inferior criminal court within the  meaning
of  s.	  435(1).  Our attention was also drawn to State  of
Madhya Pradesh v.   Vasant  Kumar. (3) Only a short note  on
this judgment appears in 1972 Jabalpur Law Journal 80 but it
clearly	 transpires that the point under discussion has	 not
been dealt with by the Court.
As  against this, this very question was examined by a	Full
Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Public  Prosecutor
(A.P.)	v. L. Ramayya. (4). Two questions were	referred  to
the  Full  Bench.  The first was : whether  the	 District  &
Sessions  Judge	 who  is appointed  judicial  authority	 for
hearing	 appeals  under s. 6C is a persona designata  or  an
inferior  criminal court, and the second was : whether	even
if it is an inferior criminal court, a revision	 application
against	 the order of the appellate authority would  lie  to
the High Court ? The Full Bench answered the first  question
in  the affirmative.  While summing up its conclusions,	 the
Court  held that when a judicial authority like	 an  officer
who  presides  over  a court is	 appointed  to	perform	 the
functions, to judge and decide in accordance with law and as
nothing	 has been mentioned about the finality or  otherwise
of the decisions made by that authority, it is an indication
that the authority is to act as a court in which case it  is
not  necessary to mention whether they are final or  not  as
all  the  incidents of exercising jurisdiction	as  a  Court
would  necessarily follow.  We are in broad  agreement	with
this conclusion.
We are accordingly of the opinion that even though the State
Government is authorised to appoint all appellate  authority
under  S.  6C, the legislature clearly indicated  that	such
appellate   authority  must  of	 necessity  be	a   judicial
authority.   Since under the Constitution the  courts  being
the  repository of the judicial power and the officer pre  I
siding	over  the  court derives his  designation  from	 the
nomenclature  of the Court, even if the appointment is	made
by the
(1)  (1971) 1 Mysore Law Journal 401.
(2)  1974.  Criminal Law Journal 716.
(3)  1972 Jabalpur Law Journal 80.
(4)  (1975) Criminal Law Journal 144.
739
designation of the judicial officer the appellate  authority
indicated  is the Court over which he  presides	 discharging
functions  under  the  relevant	 Code  and  placed  in	 the
hierarchy of courts for the purposes of appeal and revision.
Viewed from this angle, the Sessions Judge, though appointed
an  appellate authority by the notification, what the  State
Government  did was to constitute an appellate authority  in
the Secessions Court over which the Sessions Judge presides.
The Sessions Court is constituted under the Code of Criminal
Procedure and indisputably it is an inferior criminal  court
in  relation to High Court.  There fore, against  the  order
made  in  exercise of powers conferred by s. 6C	 a  revision
application  would lie to the High Court and the High  Court
would be entitled to entertain a revision application  under
ss. 435 and 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 which
was  in	 force	at  the	 relevant  time	 and  such  revision
application would be competent.
It was next contended that in the facts and circumstances of
this case the High Court should not have interfered with the
order  made,  by  the  Sessions	 Judge	setting	 aside	 the
confiscation of the seized foodgrains.	Section 6A confers a
discretionary  power on the Collector to  confiscate  seized
essential  commodity  if  the  seizure	is  on	account	  of
contravention  or violation of an order made under s.  3  in
relation   to	the  commodity.	  The  Act   envisages	 two
independent  proceedings  against  a  person  charged	with
contravention  or violation of an order made under s.  3  in
relation  to  an  essential  commodity.	  Under	 s.  6A	 the
Collector  can confiscate the seized commodity.	 Under S.  7
'such  contravention is made punishable.  As s. 7  stood  at
the  relevant time, even where a prosecution is launched  it
was not absolutely obligatory upon the court to forfeit	 the
property  in  respect of which the relevant order  had	been
contravened.  It was left to the discretion of the Court  to
direct	forfeiture  of the whole or part  of  the  commodity
brought	 before	 the Court in respect of  which	 an  offence
appeared  to  have  been committed.   Since  the  subsequent
amendment in 1974 the discretion of the Court in this behalf
is  taken away and it is made obligatory upon the  Court  to
forfeit the property in respect of which an offence  appears
to  have  been committed under s. 7. Therefore,	 either	 the
Collector  can order the confiscation and yet s. 6D  permits
infliction  of any punishment to which the person  convicted
thereby	 is  liable under the Act irrespective of  the	fact
that  the  Collector has ordered confiscation under  s.	 6A.
The  dichotomy	is that Collector can proceed to  seize	 the
essential  commodity and cancel the licence and forfeit	 the
security  deposit.   A prosecution can be launched  and	 the
Court  will  halve  to	deal  both  with  the  question	  of
punishment  and	 forfeiture of the property  in	 respect  of
which  an offence appears to have been committed.   Further,
even if the Collect for confiscated the property it would be
still open to the competent authority to launch	 prosecution
and  the  Court would have to deal with the  person  who  is
charged with the offence but in such a situation of question
of  forfeiture of the property would not arise	because	 the
Collector has already confiscated the same.
In the case before us the prosecution is not launched.	 The
Collector  directed confiscation of the	 seized	 foodgrains.
The  Sessions  Judge  set aside the  order  of	confiscation
holding that in view of the penalty &cancellation of licence
which would deny the licensee an opportunity to. carry
740
on  a business of foodgrains and the forfeiture of  security
deposit,  it would be unjust to inflict further	 penalty  in
the  form of confiscation of foodgrains worth Rs.  50,000/-.
It  appears  from the judgment of the High  Court  that	 the
price  so  worked  out was the price  on  which	 confiscated
foodgains were sold at the controlled rate.
The contention is that if the appellate authority which	 had
power,	to annul or modify the order has annulled the  order
of  confiscation,  would  the High  Court  be  justified  in
interfering  with such order in exercise of  its  revisional
jurisdiction  merely  because  it was of  the  opinion	that
confiscation was justified.
Section	 435  which confers revisional jurisdiction  on	 the
High  Court  enables the Court to call for and	examine	 the
record of any proceedings before any inferior criminal court
for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the correctness,
legality  or  propriety of the finding, sentence,  or  order
recorded or passed, etc.  Under s. 439 the High Court, while
exercising revisional jurisdiction, has the same power as is
conferred  on  the  High Court as a Court  of  appeal  under
s.423, except that in exercise of revisional jurisdiction it
cannot	convict	 the  person and impose sentence  if  he  is
acquitted  by  the subordinate criminal court.	 As  s.	 439
stands	subject	 to  the  exception  mentioned	herein,	 the
revisional jurisdiction of the High Court appears to be	 co-
extensive with its appellate jurisdiction but the extent and
ambit  of that jurisdiction has been more often examined  by
this  Court  it	 is  clearly  demarcated.   The	  revisional
jurisdiction  conferred upon the High Court under s. 439  is
not  lightly to be exercised.  It can be exercised  only  in
exceptional  cases  where  the interest	 of  public  justice
requires  interference	for  the correction  of	 a  manifest
illegality  or	the  prevention of a  gross  miscarriage  of
justice.  The jurisdiction is not ordinarily invoked or used
merely because the lower Court has taken a wrong view of the
law or misapprehension the evidence on the record. (Vide  D.
Stephens  v.  Nosibolla,(1) Jogendra Nath Jha v.  Polai	 Lal
Biswas,(2)  and	 K.  Chinnaswamy Reddy v.  State  of  Andhra
Pradesh.  (3)  It  must, however, be  confessed	 that  these
observations  were  in the context of  a  revision  petition
filed  by  a private party against the	order  of  acquittal
recorded by the trial Court.  The, question again figured in
a different context in Amar Chand Agarwalla v. Shanti Bose &
Another	 etc.,	(4) wherein the High  Court  exercising	 the
revisional jurisdiction under s. 439 quashed the charges and
proceeding on the ground that the complainant had suppressed
material  facts.  This power was exercised after  the  trial
had  proceeded,	 witnesses were examined  and  charges	were
framed and the further trial was in progress.  Setting aside
the judgment of the High Court, this Court observed that the
jurisdiction  under  s.	 439  is to  be	 exercised  only  in
exceptional  cases  where there is a glaring defect  in	 the
procedure  or there is a manifest error of point of law	 and
consequently  there  has  been	a  flagrant-miscarriage	  of
justice.
(1)  [1951] S.C.R. 284.
(2)  [1951] S.C.R. 676.
(3)  [1962] 3 S.C.R. 412.
(4)  [1973] 3 S.C.R. 179.
741
In the case before us the Sessions Judge after examining the
relevant  factors bearing on the, question  of	confiscation
exercising    the,   appellate	 jurisdiction	held	that
confiscation in the facts and circumstances of this case was
not justified.	The High Court was of a different opinion as
in  the view of the High Court these defaults should not  be
lightly viewed because the orders regulating the production,
supply and distribution of essential commodities are  issued
in  public interest and the regulations are made for  proper
enforcement of such orders.  The High Court was also of	 the
opinion that when there is a breach committed with a view to
obtaining monetary profit, the punishment in terms of money
should	be equivalent of a stiff and deterrent	multiple  of
the  improper  profit the offender is likely or	 intends  to
make  by the breach.  Confiscation of property is  penal  in
character.   The Session Judge examined the penal  character
of confiscation order and held that in the circumstances  of
the  case  it  was  not	 just  and  proper.   The  appellate
authority  had power and jurisdiction to decide.  the  same.
The  High Court could not have lightly interfered  with	 the
order of the Sessions Judge setting aside the,	confiscation
especially in exercise of the revisional jurisdiction  under
s. 439 without making out any of the well recognised grounds
for  interfering in exercise of its revisional	jurisdiction
and  straightaway proceed to interfere with the order  which
would	not   be  correct  exercise   of,   its	  revisional
jurisdiction.
The  facts  are that the licensee is dead and  he  has	left
behind minor children and a widow.  The, licence having been
cancelled, the business cannot be carried on.  The  security
deposit is forfeited, though that by itself would not  have,
been a material consideration for our decision.	 But keeping
in  view all the factors, in our opinion the High Court	 was
not justified in interfering with the order of confiscation.
Accordingly,  this appeal is allowed and the order  made  by
the High Court is set aside and the one made by the Sessions
Judge is restored.
P.B.R.			  Appeal  allowed
742




