
Supreme Court of India
State Of U.P vs Garibuddi @ Garibuddin & Ors on 25 August, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 1522 of 2007

                                                 1





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1522 OF 2007




            STATE OF U.P.                    .....                  APPELLANT



                                              VERSUS



            GARIBUDDI @ GARIBUDDIN & ORS.              .....        RESPONDENTS





                                            O R D E R

         1.          This   appeal   by   way   of   special   leave   has   been 

         filed   by   the   State   of   U.P.   impugning   the   judgment   of 

         acquittal   rendered   by   the   High   Court   reversing   the 

         judgment of conviction of the Additional Sessions Judge, 

         Allahabad   dated   30th  November,   1981,   whereby   the   three 

         accused respondents had been convicted under Section 302 

         of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to imprisonment 

         for life.   It is by now well-settled that interference 

         by this Court in an order of acquittal should be minimal 

         and   only   in   the   circumstance   that   the   judgment   of   the 

         High Court was completely perverse and did not arise out 

         of the evidence.


Crl.A. No. 1522 of 2007

                                                  2
         2.          We   have   perused   the   judgment   of   the   High   Court 

         very carefully.  Several reasons have been given by the 

         High Court for its decision.  They are:




         (i)   that   the   identity   of   the   assailants   could   not   be 

         established as the incident had taken place at night and 

         though   the   oral   evidence   did   indicate   the   presence   of 

         lantern in the premises but the said lantern had neither 

         been shown in the site plan nor seized by the police, 

         and   though   the   P.Ws.   had   deposed   in   their   evidence   in 

         Court   that   the   accused   had   covered   their   heads   only 

         whereafter   they   had   been   confronted   with   their 

         statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. that the full faces 

         had been muffled;


         (ii) that the incident had been seen by a large number 

         of persons and that too from a distance of 20 paces and 

         as   P.W.   2   Ram   Niwas   was   living   at   some   distance   e   he 

         could not have reached the place of incident to become 

         an   eye   witness   as   the   incident   had   lasted   for   only   2 

         minutes; 


         (iii) that there was a gross enmity between the parties 

         as Garibuddin had lodged a report under Section 354 of 

         the IPC   against the two eye witnesses viz. P.W. 1 Ram 


Crl.A. No. 1522 of 2007

                                                 3





         Shankar and P.W. 2 Ram Niwas; and 




         (iv)   that   the   medical   evidence   did   not   support   the 

         ocular version as pointed out by Dr. M.A. Haq who had 

         conducted the post mortem examination on the dead body. 




         3.          We  are,   therefore,  of   the  opinion   that  the   High 

         Court's   opinion   that   the   accused   were   entitled   to   the 

         benefit of doubt cannot be faulted in the circumstances. 

         We, accordingly, dismiss the appeal.  





                                                      .....................J
                                                      [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]





                                                      ......................J
                                                      [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]



         NEW DELHI
         AUGUST 25, 2011.



