
Supreme Court of India
Mahendra Singh vs State Of Uttaranchal on 9 August, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 889 of 2006                                                     REPORTABLE

                                                 1





                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 889 OF 2006





            MAHENDRA SINGH                            .....          APPELLANT

                                              VERSUS

            STATE OF UTTARANCHAL                      .....          RESPONDENT





                                            O R D E R

         1.          This appeal arises out of the following facts:
         1.1         Janardhan   Pathak,   the   deceased,   was   a   Gate   Keeper 

         with the Peepal Parao Forest Range which fell within the 

         jurisdiction of Police Station Lal Kuan.  As the deceased 

         was   coming   out   from   his   hut   and   proceeding   towards   the 

         tea shop, the appellant, Mahendra Singh, who was a Police 

         Constable,   fired   a   shot   at   him   with   his   service   rifle 

         killing   him   instantaneously.     The   murder   was   apparently 

         committed because the deceased had complained to the Head 

         Constable at Police Station Lal Kuan about the nefarious 

         activities of the appellant.  The appellant then ran away 

         from the spot and got a case registered at Police Station 

         Rudrapur   against   the   deceased   for   offences   punishable 


Crl.A. No. 889 of 2006                                                     REPORTABLE

                                                 2





         under   Sections   342,   353,   332   of   the   Indian   Penal   Code 

         and   also   deposited   his   rifle   in   Police   Station   Rudrapur 

         vide   Exhibit   Ka   5   instead   of   P.S.   Lal   Kuan   where   the 

         incident   had   happened.     The   post   mortem   revealed   the 

         presence   of   two   gun   shot   injuries   on   the   person   of   the 

         deceased - one of entry and the other of exit, with the 

         wound of entry having tattooing marks around it.  

         1.2         The trial court relying on the prosecution evidence 

         convicted the appellant on a charge of murder and under 

         the Arms Act and sentenced him accordingly.     The matter 

         was then taken in appeal to the High Court and the High 

         Court has confirmed the judgment of the trial court and 

         dismissed the appeal.

         2.          Before   us,   Mr.   P.S.   Narasimha,   the   learned   Senior 

         Counsel   for   the   appellant,   has   not   seriously   challenged 

         the conviction of the appellant and has pointed out that 

         in   the   light   of   the   prosecution   evidence   itself   it   was 

         apparent   that   the   appellant   had   first   been   attacked   and 

         had   also   suffered   several   injuries   and   that   during   the 

         course   of   a   scuffle   which   followed   the   rifle   had 

         accidentally gone off and that the appellant was at the 

         most   guilty   of   having   exceeded   the   right   of   private 

         defence and was, therefore, liable to be punished for an 

         offence   of   culpable   homicide   not   amounting   to   murder. 

         The learned counsel has focused on the fact that the gun 


Crl.A. No. 889 of 2006                                                     REPORTABLE

                                                 3





         shot injury had been caused to the deceased from a very 

         close range and not from  a distance of 12 or 15 feet as 

         was the case of the eye witnesses and the prosecution.

         3.          Mr.   S.S.   Shamshery,   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

         State of Uttaranchal has, however, supported the judgment 

         of   the   trial   court   as   well   as   the   High   Court   and   has 

         pointed out that the appellant, being a police official, 

         was conscious of the fact that in order to get away from 

         a case of murder he had to create a defence and for that 

         reason   had   self-suffered   some   injuries   and   lodged     a 

         report   in   Police   Station,   Rudrapur   instead   of   Police 

         Station Lal Kuan. 

         4.          We   have   considered   the   arguments   advanced   by   the 

         learned counsel for the parties.  

         5.          It has to be borne in mind that the obligation to 

         prove   an   exception   lies   on   an   accused   but   at   the   same 

         time the onus of proof which the accused has to discharge 

         is not as strict as in the case of the prosecution which 

         had to prove its case beyond doubt.   It has also to be 

         borne   in   the   mind   that   it   is   very   difficult,   and   often 

         suicidal,   for   an   accused   to   raise   a   plea   whereby   he 

         admits   his   presence   but   if   the   prosecution   evidence 

         itself shows that the defence taken by him   is probable, 

         the   accused   is   entitled   to   claim   the   benefit   of   that 

         evidence as well.   It will be seen that the case of the 


Crl.A. No. 889 of 2006                                                        REPORTABLE

                                                  4





         appellant,   as   projected   by   Mr.   Narasimha,   during   the 

         course of the arguments, is that the appellants had first 

         been attacked and some injuries had first been caused to 

         him   and   in   the   scuffle   that   followed   one   shot   had   been 

         fired.       He   has   also   pointed   out   that   the   presence   of 

         tattooing   around   the   wound   was   clearly   indicative   that 

         the prosecution story that the gun shots had been fired 

         from a distance of 12 to 14 feet was obviously wrong and 

         it   was,   therefore,   plausible   to   suggest   that   shot   had 

         been fired from a much closer range.  We notice from the 

         evidence of P.Ws. 2,5 and 8, as also from the site plan, 

         that   the   shot   had   been   fired   from   15   to   18   feet.     The 

         injuries   found   on   the   dead   body   are   produced   herein 

         below:

                            "1.  Lacerated wound 1cm X .5cm X .5cm 
                     on   dorsum   of   right   thumb   bleeding.   Margins 
                     irregular.
                            2.     Contusion   4cm   X   2cm   over   bed   of 
                     right shoulder.  Colour was reddish.
                            3.      Complaint   of   pain   on   back   of 
                     neck  but  no  external  mark  of  injury  and  no 
                     tenderness was there.
                            4.      Complaint   of   pain   on   right   leg 
                     below   knee   joint.     No   external   mark   of 
                     injury.  Shows tenderness."
         6.          Dr.   Modi   in   his   book,   "A   Text   Book   of   Medical 

         Jurisprudence and Toxicology" (24th Edition, page 543) has 

         referred to the fact that signs of tattooing in the case 

         of   a   rifle   shot   would   NORMALLY   be   upto   75   cms. 

         Obviously,   in   this   situation   the   rifle   could   not   have 


Crl.A. No. 889 of 2006                                                          REPORTABLE

                                                    5





         been fired from 15 to 18 feet.  It is also clear that the 

         appellant   has   sustained   some   injuries   though   simple   in 

         nature and they too are reproduced below:

                             "(i) Abraded contusion just below the 
                     right eye (maxillary prominence) size 2cm X 
                     2cm.  Fresh oozing present.
                             (ii)    Transverse   incised   wound   lower 
                     part   of   right   deltoid   muscle   4cm   X   <   cm   X 
                     skin deep.  Oozing present.
                             (iii)   Vertical   lacerated   wound   left 
                     chest between right nipple and sternum 7cm X 
                     < cm skin deep.  Oozing present.
                             (iv)     Lacerated   wound   left   deltoid 
                     muscle (transversely oblique) 4 cm X 1/3 cm 
                     X skin deep.  Oozing present."

         7.          It   is,   therefore,   possible   in   the   light   of   the 

         aforesaid   evidence,   that   the   appellant   had   indeed   been 

         attacked   and   that   he   had   caused   one   injury   in   self-

         defence from a short distance.  We are, therefore, of the 

         opinion   that   the   appellant's   involvement   in   a   case   of 

         murder is not spelt out but as he has used a rifle from a 

         very   close   range,   his   obvious   intention   was   to   cause 

         death.     He   is,   accordingly,   convicted   for   an   offence 

         punishable under Section 304 Part I of the IPC.  

         8.          We,   accordingly,   allow   the   appeal   in   the   above 

         limited terms acquit him of the offence under Section 302 

         of the IPC and award him a sentence of ten years rigorous 

         imprisonment under Section 304(I) of the IPC.




                                                               ..................J
                                                               [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]


Crl.A. No. 889 of 2006                               REPORTABLE

                             6





                                        ..................J
                                        [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]

         NEW DELHI
         AUGUST 09, 2011.





                                                        



