
Supreme Court of India
Uttam Kumar vs State Of M.P. (Now Chhattisgarh) on 13 July, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. No. 550 of 2007

                                               1





                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 550 OF 2007




            UTTAM KUMAR                             .....           APPELLANT

                                            VERSUS

            STATE OF M.P. (NOW CHHATTISGARH).....                   RESPONDENT





                                          O R D E R

         1.          The   solitary   accused   stands   convicted   for   an 

         offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal 

         Code with a sentence of imprisonment for life and fine 

         for having murdered his wife Meena Bai on the 5th  July, 

         1998   at   about   12   noon   in   the   family   home.     It   appears 

         that   the   relations   between   the   appellant   and   his   wife 

         was   strained   as   he   suspected   that   she   was   not   of   good 

         character.     On   the   intervention   of   the   family   members, 

         however, Meena Bai who had left the matrimonial home and 

         gone   to   her   parents,   was   persuaded   to   return.     The 

         appellant nevertheless assaulted Meena Bai on the day in 

         question   with   a   tangia   (an   agricultural   weapon   easily 

         available   in   all   farming   families)   on   which   she   cried 

         out   in   pain   whereupon   her   sister-in-law   P.W.   7   Sulesan 


Crl.A. No. 550 of 2007

                                              2





         Bai who was preparing the food close by came running to 

         the  spot.    She saw  Meena Bai  lying in  a pool  of blood 

         and the appellant standing by carrying a tangia in his 

         hand.   The appellant also told Sulesan Bai that he had 

         caused injuries to his wife and that he would go to the 

         police   station   to   lodge   a   report.     Suleshan   Bai 

         thereupon conveyed the information to Derhin Bai P.W. 9, 

         the   step   mother   of   the   appellant,   and   Derhin   Bai   also 

         saw the appellant leaving the house carrying his tangia. 

         On enquiry from him he told her that he was going to the 

         police station.   A short while later Dauwa Ram P.W. 10, 

         the father of the appellant, also reached the place and 

         was   told   by   Sulesan   Bai   and   Derhin   Bai   that   the 

         appellant had killed his wife Meena Bai and had left for 

         police   station,   Kasdol   at   about   6:10p.m.   24   kms.   away 

         from   the   village.     It   is   admitted   position   that   the 

         appellant   never   reached   the   police   station.     He   was, 

         however, arrested and was ultimately brought to trial.  




         2.          During the course of the evidence P.W. 7 and P.W. 

         9 supported their statements to the extent of the extra 

         judicial   confessions   having   been   made   to   them   and   that 

         they had conveyed the information to P.W. 10, but they 

         resiled   on   some   insignificant   matters.     P.W.   10, 

         however, deposed that his wife and daughter had conveyed 


Crl.A. No. 550 of 2007

                                                 3





         the   information   about   the   incident   and   the   details 

         thereof   to   him   after   he   had   returned   from   the   fields. 

         The   trial   court   accordingly,   found   that   the   statements 

         of P.W. 7, 9 and 10 clearly proved the case against the 

         appellant.


         3.          The matter was thereafter taken in appeal to the 

         High   Court   and   the   High   Court   has,   by   the   impugned 

         judgment,   confirmed   the   judgment   of   the   trial   court. 

         This   matter   is   before   us   after   the   grant   of   special 

         leave.


         4.          Ms.   Aishwarya   Bhati,   the   learned   counsel   for   the 

         appellant   has   raised   primarily   one   argument   before   us 

         during the course of the hearing.   She has pointed out 

         that as the two primary witnesses, P.W. 7 and P.W. 9 had 

         been   declared   hostile,   no   reliance   could   be   placed   on 

         their   testimony.     We,   however,   find   no   merit   in   this 

         submission   as   the   factum   of   the   extra   judicial 

         confession   made   to   them   had   been   affirmed   by   them     in 

         their evidence.  In any case, the evidence of P.W. 10 to 

         whom P.W. 7 and P.W. 9 had conveyed the information has 

         not been in any manner whittled down.   P.W. 10 owned up 

         his   statement   made   under   Section   161   of   the   Code   of 

         Criminal   Procedure   and   reiterated   the   fact   that   the 


Crl.A. No. 550 of 2007

                                             4





         information   with   regard   to   the   murder   committed   by   the 

         appellant had been conveyed to him by P.Ws. 7 and 9.  We 

         also   see   that   the   medical   evidence   fully   supports   the 

         prosecution   story.     Dr.   K.L.   Banjare   who   had   performed 

         the post mortem found five injuries on the person of the 

         deceased which could have been caused with a tangia.  We 

         must also emphasise that as the incident happened while 

         the appellant and the victim were together in the family 

         home,   some   obligation   lay   on   the   appellant   to   explain 

         the   circumstances   which   had   led   to   the   death   of   his 

         wife.  There is however, a bare denial by him and he has 

         not given any explanation as to how and why his wife met 

         her   death;   a   matter   which   should   have   been   in   his 

         special knowledge.  

         5.          The appeal is dismissed for the aforesaid reasons. 

         6.          Fee of the Amicus is fixed at `7,000/-.  





                                             .........................J
                                             [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]




                                             .........................J
                                             [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]



         NEW DELHI
         JULY 13, 2011.



