
Supreme Court of India
Manthuri Laxmi Narsaiah vs State Of A.P on 18 August, 2011Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Gyan Sudha Misra
           Crl.A. Nos. 2111-2112 of 2008

                                                   1





                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 2111-2112 OF 2008




           MANTHURI LAXMI NARSAIAH                      .....          APPELLANT



                                                 VERSUS



           STATE OF A.P.                                .....          RESPONDENT





                                               O R D E R

        1.          The   deceased,   Venkatram   Reddy,   owned   some 

        agricultural   land   bearing   Survey   No.   678   in   Village 

        Pedched.     The   paddy   crop   that   had   been   sown   on   this 

        land   had   been   harvested   four   or   five   days   earlier   to 

        the date of the incident and the deceased would sleep 

        in the fields at night to keep a watch on the   paddy 

        and the deceased as per routine, went to the fields on 

        the evening of the 1st of May, 2004.  At about 6:30A.M. 

        the   next   morning   P.W.   6,   the   servant   of   the   family, 

        informed   the   family   members   that   Venkatram   Reddy   had 

        been murdered and the injuries had been caused with an 

        axe.   P.W. 1, the son of the deceased, rushed to the 

        field and found that his father was lying dead on which 

        he   registered   a   First   Information   Report   against 


Crl.A. Nos. 2111-2112 of 2008

                                              2





        unknown   persons.           During   the   course   of   the 

        investigation it transpired that P.W. 2, another son of 

        the   deceased,   had   seen   the   wife   of   A1   requesting   the 

        deceased   to  go   to  the   fields  the   next  morning   as  the 

        paddy had to be thrashed and that P.W. 9 had seen A1, 

        his   wife   and   son   returning   on   a   bullock   cart   at   mid 

        night   on   the   1st  of   April,   2004   and   when   he   had 

        questioned them they told him that they were going to 

        the   field     to   thrash   the   paddy   crop.     P.W.   9   also 

        stated that he had also asked A9 to supply water from 

        his   cart   for   the   marriage   of   his   daughter   which   was 

        scheduled to take place the next morning.   The police 

        also recorded the statement of P.W. 10 to whom the two 

        accused   had   made   an   extra   judicial   confession   about 

        20/25 days after the murder and had sought his help in 

        dealing with the police and that he had advised them to 

        surrender  to  custody.    The  accused  were,  accordingly, 

        arrested soon after the extra-judicial confessions had 

        been made and on the statements made by both of them, 

        the weapons of offence i.e. axe etc. were recovered in 

        the   presence  of   P.W.  12.     The   trial  court   relying  on 

        the aforesaid evidence convicted the two accused under 

        Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced 

        them   to   imprisonment   for   life.     In   appeal,   the   High 

        Court observed that there were four piece of evidences 


Crl.A. Nos. 2111-2112 of 2008

                                                   3





        against the appellant viz:

                                 "a) A-1 cultivated the lands of the 
                  deceased   on   crop   sharing   basis,   there 
                  arose   differences   in   the   context   of   the 
                  demand made by A1 to give the other lands 
                  of the deceased also on lease to him;

                                 b)  PW-9 had seen A-1, his wife and 
                  son coming on a bullock cart towards the 
                  same field, late in the night on the date 
                  of occurrence.

                                 c) That A-1 and A-2 have confessed 
                  before PW-11 that they have committed the 
                  murder of Venkatram Reddy and

                                 d) the recovery of material objects 
                  at   the   instance   of   A-1   and   A-2   was 
                  evidenced by PW-12."

        and   on   an   analysis   of   the   evidence   concluded   that   no 

        case was made out against A2 and as such his appeal was 

        allowed whereas the appeal of A1 was dismissed.   It is 

        in   this   situation   that   the   matter   is   before   us   after 

        the grant of special leave.

        2.          We   have   heard   Mr.   Niroop,   the   learned   counsel 

        for   the   appellant,   and   Mr.   R.   Sundaravardhan,   the 

        learned Senior Counsel for the State of Andhra Pradesh. 

        We notice that there are four circumstances which the 

        High Court has made out against the appellant.  We deal 

        with them ad seriatim:

        (a) It is the prosecution story that A1 had cultivated 

        the land of the deceased on crop sharing basis for some 

        time and that the two had later fallen out on account 


Crl.A. Nos. 2111-2112 of 2008

                                                4





        of the refusal of the deceased to give some more land 

        to A1 for cultivation purposes.  We see from the record 

        that   the   facts   relating   to   the   difference   of   opinion 

        between the accused and the deceased did not figure in 

        the   statements   given   by   any   of   the   prosecution 

        witnesses   given   under   Section   161   of   the   Code   of 

        Criminal  Procedure  and  was  an  improvement  made  during 

        the course of the evidence.  In that eventuality, this 

        evidence by itself has virtually no value.

        (b)         This point has been taken to be the evidence of 

        last seen.   This is a wrong perception for the reason 

        that when P.W. 9 had seen A1 and his son returning from 

        the   fields   late   at   night,   the   deceased   was   not   with 

        them.  To our mind, therefore, this evidence too is of 

        no importance and merely because the accused had been 

        seen   coming   from   the   field   in   which   the   murder   had 

        apparently   been   committed   could   not   be   taken   as 

        evidence of last seen as it is the admitted case that 

        A1 was also cultivating part of the land in which the 

        murder had been committed.

        (c) This is the primary evidence which the prosecution 

        has relied upon against the appellant.   First of all, 

        we find that the extra-judicial confession was jointly 

        made     by   the   accused   to   P.W.   10.     We   have   also   gone 

        through the evidence of P.W. 10 and find from a reading 


Crl.A. Nos. 2111-2112 of 2008

                                             5





        thereof that he was a convenient witness for the police 

        as he admitted that he had stood bail in a large number 

        of excise cases and that he was running a toddy shop. 

        He also admitted in his cross examination that he was 

        associated   in   some   kind   of   business   with   P.W.   1   the 

        first   informant  and   the  son   of  the   deceased.    In  the 

        face   of   the   above,   we   are   of   the   opinion   that   the 

        recovery of the axe and other incriminating articles do 

        not   constitute   a   material   chain   of   circumstances 

        against the appellant.  It is by now well-settled that 

        in a case relating to circumstantial evidence the chain 

        of circumstances has to be spelt out by the prosecution 

        and if even one link in the chain is broken the accused 

        must   get  the   benefit  thereof.     We   are  of   the  opinion 

        that the present is in fact a case of no evidence.  We, 

        accordingly, allow the appeals, set aside the judgment 

        of the High Court insofar as the appellant is concerned 

        and order his acquittal.  He is directed to be released 

        forthwith if not required in connection with any other 

        case.


                                                      ..................J
                                                      [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]


Crl.A. Nos. 2111-2112 of 2008

                                 6





                                            ..................J
                                          [GYAN SUDHA MISRA]

        NEW DELHI
        AUGUST 18, 2011.



