
Supreme Court of India
Kamleshwar Paswan vs State Of U.T.Chandigarh on 11 January, 2011Author: .................J.
Bench: Harjit Singh Bedi, Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
                                                            REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF  INDIA
                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION                 

                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 739-740  OF 2009




       KAMLESHWAR PASWAN                         ..  APPELLANT(S)

                        vs.

       STATE OF U.T. CHANDIGARH                  ..  RESPONDENT(S)
                                                                               O 
                                                                      R D E R





             This is indeed a very unfortunate case.

             On 15th  January, Gurnam Singh (PW.3), a resident of 

     House No.1 in village Kishangarh in the Union Territory of 

     Chandigarh, had gone to meet a servant of one Milkha Singh 

     for some personal work.  As he reached the house of Pritam 

     Singh,  he   found  a   woman  standing   outside  shouting   "killed 

     them-killed   them".     PW.3,   Gurnam   Singh,   also   heard   the 


voice of a screaming child from inside the house of Pritam 

Singh.        PW.3   forced   open   the   door   and   saw   the 

accused/appellant   Kamleshwar   Paswan   beating   his   three 

children with a wooden stick and Yashoda, the daughter of 

the appellant, lying on one side with serious injuries.  He 

also   noticed   that   the   appellant's   sons   Sunil   Paswan   and 

Suraj   Paswan   (aged   one   and   three   years   respectively)   had 

also   suffered   injuries   and   were   unconscious.   Gurnam   Singh 





PW   accompanied   by   Sunaina   (DW.2),   the   wife   of   the 

accused/appellant, took the children to Sharma Clinic in 





                                  -2-

village   Kishangarh.     The   Doctor   told   them   that   as   the 


children were in a serious condition they should be taken 

to the PGI, Chandigarh.  In the meantime a vehicle from the 

Police Control Room reached Sharma Clinic and PW.3 and DW.2 

along   with   the   three   injured   children   were   taken   to   the 

General Hospital, Sector 16, Chandigarh which referred them 

further to the PGI, for treatment.  In the PGI PW.3 made a 

statement   to PW.14 SI Sunehara Singh narrating the above 

facts   on   which   a   First   Information   Report   was   registered 





under Section 307 of the IPC at Police Station, Manimajra 

in   the   Union   Territory   of   Chandigarh.     The   two   boys 

thereafter died and case under Section 302 of the IPC was 

added on.   PW.14 also visited the place of occurrence and 

made   the       necessary   investigations.     A   challan   was 

ultimately filed under Sections 302 and 308 of the IPC and 

the   appellant   was   committed   to   stand   trial.     The   Trial 

Court relying on the eye witnesses account of PW.1 Vinod, 


PW.2-Anil Kumar, the immediate neighbours of the appellant 

and   his   family   and   PW.3   Gurnam   Singh   held   that   the   case 

against the appellant stood proved beyond doubt.   Sunaina, 

the wife of   the appellant, however, appeared as a defence 

witness   and   gave   a   statement   that   the   three   children   had 

received injuries accidently and that the appellant had no 

role to play.   The Trial Court relying on evidence of the 

three prosecution witnesses mentioned above 





                                   -3-




as   supported   by   the   medical   evidence   given   by   PW.4-Dr. 


Dlbar Singh, who had conducted the post-mortem examination 

on   the   dead   bodies   and   had   also   examined   the   injuries   on 

Yashoda, convicted the appellant under Section 302 and 307 

of the IPC and sentenced him to death for the murder of his 

two sons. No separate sentence was awarded for the offence 

under   Section   307   of   the   IPC.     The   matter   was   thereafter 

referred   to   the   High   Court   for   the   confirmation   of   the 

death sentence and the appellant also filed an appeal.  The 





High   Court   has,   by   the   impugned   judgment,   confirmed   the 

death   sentence   and   dismissed   the   appeal.       The   matter   is 

before us in these circumstances.

         We   have   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the   parties 

very carefully. We see that the case of the prosecution is 

clearly spelt out from the evidence.  No fault can be found 

with the eye-witness account of  PWs. 1, 2 and 3 and their 

statements   are   clearly   supported   by   the   evidence   of   the 


Doctor PW.4.  The defence story projected by DW.2, the wife 

of   the   appellant,   is   on   the   face   is   unacceptable   as   the 

Doctor   opined   that   the   injuries   suffered     by   the   three 

victims could not have been caused in the manner suggested 

by   her.     The   very   nature   of   the   injuries   clearly   reveal 

that they were   the result of a direct attack in a brutal 

and violent fashion with a lathi.


                                   -4-
         Mrs.   S.Usha   Reddy,   the   Legal   Aid   Counsel   for   the 

appellant,   has   however   pointed   out   that   the   present   case 


did not fall under the category of  the rarest of the rare 

cases  in   the   light   of   the   fact   that   the   appellant   was   a 

young man of 28 years on the date of the incident and that 

the   offence   had   been   committed   by   him   (as   per   the 

prosecution story) while he was in an inebriated condition 

and  after a quarrel with his wife.  We cannot also ignore 

the   fact   that   he   was   a   rickshaw   puller   and   a   migrant   in 

Chandigarh   with   the   attendant   psychological   and   economic 





pressures   that   so   often   overtake   and   overwhelm   such 

persons.     Village   Kishangarh   is   a   part   of   the   Union 

Territory   of   Chandigarh   and   a   stone   throw   from   its   elite 

Sectors that house the Governors of Punjab and Haryana, the 

Golf   Club,   and   some   of   the   cities   most   important   and 

opulent   citizens.     It   goes   without   saying   that   most   such 

neighbourhoods   are   often   the   most   unfriendly   and 

indifferent   to   each   others   needs.     Little   wonder   his 


frustrations   apparently     came   to   the   fore   leading   to   the 

horrendous   incident.     Nevertheless   keeping   in   view   the 

overall picture and in the light of what has been mentioned 

above, we feel that the ends of justice would be met if the 





                                  -5-




appeal is allowed to the extent that the death sentence is 

substituted by a term of life imprisonment.


          We   accordingly  dismiss   the  appeals   but  commute   the 

sentence from death to life. 


                                         .................J.
                                         (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)

                                                               
                                                               
                                        ....................J.
                                  (CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD)



                                                                       New 





Delhi,
January 11, 2011.



