
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Hansraj @ Hansu on 12 September, 2018Author: R Banumathi
                                                        1



                                                                              NON-REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.997 OF 2009



     THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                                                   ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS


      HANSRAJ @ HANSU                                                             .….RESPONDENT(S)

                                             J U D G M E N T

     R. BANUMATHI,J.


                      1.         This    appeal     arises     out    of    the   judgment   dated

                      13.12.2005 in Criminal Appeal No. 3651 of 2002 passed by the

                      High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in and by which the High

                      Court has set aside the conviction of the respondent-accused

                      for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii) of N.D.P.S. Act and

                      also the conviction under Section 60 of Excise Act and also

                      sentence of imprisonment imposed upon the respondent-accused.

                      2.     On 17.07.1998 wee hours at about 1.25 a.m. when PW-1 (Ram

                      Chandra Misra) and PW-2 (P.C. Sharma) were on patrolling duty,

                      they had received an information that the respondent-accused

                      along with another person were about to transport country-
Signature Not Verified


                      made   liquor   for   sale.   When     PW-1    and   PW-2   apprehended   the
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.09.14
17:18:24 IST
Reason:


                      respondent-accused and his companion, the respondent-accused

                      was found to be in possession of 2700 pouches of country made
                                        2

liquor kept in 18 plastic bags and he was also found to be in

possession of 300 grams of charas in his pocket. After the

formal    search       and    after    completion      of     the   investigation,

charge-sheet was filed against the respondent-accused under

Section 20 of the N.D.P.S. Act and under Section 60 of the

Excise Act.

3.      Upon consideration of evidence, the Trial Court convicted

the respondent-accused for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)

of N.D.P.S Act and sentenced him to undergo R.I. for 10 years

along    with    fine    of    Rs.     1,00,000/-      (Rupees      one   lakh)   for

default.        The respondent-accused was also convicted for the

offence under Section 60 of the Excise Act and was sentenced

to undergo R.I. for one year. In appeal, the High Court has

set   aside     the    verdict    of    conviction      and    also   sentence    of

imprisonment imposed upon the respondent-accused as aforesaid

in para 1.

4.      We have heard Mr. Garvesh Kabra, learned counsel for the

appellant-State         as    well     as     Ms.     Nidhi,     learned    counsel

appearing for the respondent-accused and perused the impugned

judgment and the materials on record.

5.      The High Court acquitted the respondent-accused primarily

on the ground that there was delay in sending the sample to

the laboratory and that there was no evidence to show how and

in what condition the recovered contraband and the samples

were kept in the meanwhile. The recovery of the charas was on

17.07.1998       and    the    sample       packets    were    received     in    the

laboratory only on 22.08.1998. Learned counsel appearing for
                                         3

the State has drawn our attention to the evidence of PW-1,

Sub-inspector (Ram Chandra Misra) and PW-2 (P.C. Sharma) who

in     their     evidence      stated        that    the    substance      which       was

recovered      and sealed       were deposited             in the      Police Station

Godown     and    later     produced         before     the      Court.   Though       the

witnesses have stated that the substance was deposited in the

Police Station Godown and later produced before the Court as

pointed out by the High Court that there is no evidence to

show that as to how and at what time and date the samples were

taken    by    the     carriers    for       analysis.      It   has    also    come   on

evidence that constables viz.                   Asharam and Karam Chand have

taken the sample of charas and liquor packets respectively to

the laboratory, were also not examined by the prosecution.

6.             The High Court has also pointed out that it was

incumbent on the part of the prosecution to lead the evidence

to show as to how and in what conditions the articles were

preserved at the Police Station and how safely they were taken

from     there    to    the    respective           chemical     examiners      by     its

carriers. Learned counsel for the State has submitted that the

investigating officer in this particular case has passed away

and, therefore, the prosecution was handicapped in adducing

the    necessary       evidence.    Notwithstanding              the   death    of     the

Investigating Officer, nothing prevented the prosecution from

examining      any     other    witness        who    was     associated       with    the

investigation and adducing necessary evidence to prove as to

how and in what conditions the articles were preserved at the

Police Station/Police Station Godown.
                                          4
    7.           Upon appreciation of evidence, the High Court has

    taken   a    view    that     guilt       of    the   accused    has   not   been

    established and the same cannot be said to be unreasonable one

    or suffering from perversity warranting our interference in

    the order of acquittal.

    8.           In     the     result,       the     appeal   is,     accordingly,

    dismissed.


                                                    ….......................J.
                                                    [ R. BANUMATHI]


                                                    …......................J.
                                                    [INDIRA BANERJEE]
NEW DELHI
12TH SEPTEMBER, 2018

