
Supreme Court of India
National Investigation Agency vs Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali on 2 April, 2019Author: A Khanwilkar
                                                    1

                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 578 OF 2019
                                   (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.7857 of 2018)

                         National Investigation Agency               …..Appellant(s)

                                                  :Versus:

                         Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali                    ....Respondent(s)




                                               JUDGMENT

                         A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
                         1.   Leave granted.
                         2.   The respondent is named as Accused No.10 in the First

                         Information Report dated 30th May, 2017, registered by the

                         Officer­in­charge of Police Station, NIA, Delhi, for offences

                         punishable under Sections 120B, 121 and 121A of the Indian

                         Penal Code (“IPC”) and Sections 13,16,17,18,20,38,39 and 40

Signature Not Verified
                         of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, (for short
Digitally signed by
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2019.04.02
15:27:21 IST
Reason:                  “the 1967 Act”). The respondent (Accused No.10) filed an

                         application for bail before the District and Sessions Judge,
                             2

Special Court (NIA), New Delhi, which came to be rejected on

8th June, 2018. That order has been reversed by the High

Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Criminal Appeal No.768/2018

vide order dated 13th September, 2018. The High Court

directed release of the respondent on bail subject to certain

conditions. That decision is the subject matter of this appeal

filed by the prosecuting agency ­ the appellant herein.

3.   The Designated Court opined that there are serious

allegations against the respondent Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali

(Accused No.10) of being involved in unlawful acts and terror

funding in conspiracy with other accused persons; he had

acted as a conduit for transfer of funds received from terrorist

Accused No.1 Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, ISI, Pakistan High

Commission, New Delhi and also from a source in Dubai, to

Hurriyat leaders/secessionists/terrorists; and had helped

them in waging war        against the Government of India by

repeated   attacks   on    security   forces   and   Government

establishments and by damaging public property including by

burning schools etc. It then noted that the accusation against
                                             3

         the respondent (Accused No.10) was of being a part of a larger

         conspiracy to systematically upturn the establishment to

         cause secession of J & K from the Union of India. Keeping in

         mind the special provisions in Section 43D of the 1967 Act

         and the exposition in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur and Ors. Vs.

         State of Maharashtra and Ors.,1 Niranjan Singh Karam

         Singh Punjabi, Advocate Vs. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya and

         Ors.2,       Manohar Lal Sharma Vs. Union of India3 and

         Jayanta Kumar Ghosh and Ors. Vs. State of Assam and

         Anr.4, it proceeded to analyse the material on record and

         observed thus:

                  “7.5 Let me now see whether on the basis of the material
                  on record, allegations against the accused are prima facie
                  made out or not. Mindful of the fact that this is not the stage
                  to examine and analyze the evidence placed on record in
                  detail, let me refer to the same. Allegation against the
                  accused that certain businesses of his, were just a front/
                  sham for routing of funds received from abroad/ terrorist A­
                  1/ High Commission, Pakistan/ Dubai/other sources and
                  that there were, unaccounted financial transactions, is
                  prima facie borne out from statement of the witnesses PW1,

1
    (1994)   4 SCC 602
2
    (1990)   4 SCC 76
3
    (2017)   11 SCC 783
4
    (2010)   6 Gauhati Law Reports 727
                                4

     PW28 and PW29 and documents including D­202 & D­214.
     It has also come in the statements of PW38 & PW39, who
     prepared balance sheets of accused’s firms/companies
     namely Trison Farms and Constructions Pvt. Limited, M/s
     Trison International, M/s Yasir Enterprises, M/s 3Y, M/s
     Kashmir Veneer Industries & M/s Three Star, that the
     accused never produced any supporting documents with
     respect to remittances received from NZ­International Dubai­
     FZC, owned by him; and that he did not even inform about
     the actual execution of business despite asking of PW39. The
     fact that the balance sheets of M/s Trison International, M/s
     3Y were forcefully got signed from the protected witness
     PW43 without providing him any document, has come in his
     statement. It has also come in the statement of PW44 that
     the audit report of the aforesaid companies were got signed
     from him without producing books for verification.”



Again in paragraph 7.8 to 7.10 the Court observed:

     “7.8 The fact that the accused received money from
     abroad /A­1, chief of proscribed (terrorist) organization, HCP
     (High Commission, Pakistan) and others and was passing on
     the said funds to Hurriyat leaders, is prima facie borne out
     from D­152 read with statement of PW29 and D­154
     (Expert’s Report), as per which the signatures of the accused
     on D­152 were compared with his admitted handwriting and
     were verified and found to be similar. In view of the same,
     the Ld. Defence counsel’s argument that the said document/
     D­152 cannot be looked into at all even to form prima facie
     opinion, cannot be accepted. Thus, the judgment of Hon’ble
     Supreme court in Manohar Lal Sharma’s Case (Supra),
     relied upon Ld. Defence counsel is also of no assistance to
     the accused.

     7.9 Further, the association/proximity of Altaf Ahmad
     Shah @ Fantoosh (A­4), Farooq Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate
                               5

     (A­6) with accused, is also prima facie borne out from the
     statement of protected witness PW48. Accused’s links with
     people who have role in governance of Pakistan and with
     Hurriyat leaders has also prima facie come on record vide
     statement of PW52, documents D­3, D­4 (e) etc. and other
     material on record.
     7.10 In view of the above facts and circumstances, the
     statements of witnesses/material/documents and other
     material placed on record by NIA, offences as alleged against
     the accused are prima facie made out. Therefore, in view of
     the bar under proviso to Section 43D(5) UA(P) Act, the
     accused’s prayer for bail cannot be granted.”


Further the Court observed:

     “8.1.1    Ld. Special PP, NIA also submitted that the
     applicant/accused is an influential person/ business man
     and has a great clout in the valley, as has come in the
     statement of PW48. All the witnesses are known to the
     applicant/ accused. There is every likelihood of the
     applicant/accused influencing/ intimidating witnesses/
     tempering with evidence, in the event of his release even on
     interim bail.”



4.   The respondent had also prayed for grant of bail on

health grounds, which plea was duly considered and rejected

in the following words:

     “8.2 I have duly considered the submissions made by both
     the sides. Perusal of the record reveals that as and when
     requested by the accused, he was provided medical
     treatment from time to time. Pursuant to the directions of
     this court, the accused was taken to the premier medical
     institute of India/AIIMS for necessary medical examination.
                          6
This was besides being provided appropriate medical
attention to Jail hospital and in­patient treatment at Dr.
RML hospital from 01.09.2017 to 05.09.2017. As per
medical status report dated 26.09.2017, the accused was
extensively evaluated at Dr. RML Hospital for chest pain and
cause of cardiac disease was ruled out. Even subsequently,
the accused was reviewed at Central Jail Hospital and
detailed blood investigation was carried out and medication
was provided. On his complaint of anxiety, severe low back
pain and bleeding per­rectum on 24.09.2017, the accused
was admitted to M.I. Room, Dispensary, Central Jail No. 8/9
from 24.09.2017 to 26.09.2017. Vide subsequent report
dated 11.10.2017, Medical Officer I/c, Central Jail Tihar,
Dispensary 8/9, reported that the accused was getting
treatement under regular follow up of Medicine Specialist,
jail visiting SR surgery. It may further be mentioned that
accused was constantly reviewed at short intervals and was
provided all advised medication.

8.3 It has also come in order sheet dated 03.01.2018 that
as per medical report of accused received from AIIMS New
Delhi, the accused was evaluated in seven speciality/
superspeciality OPDs but was not found to be suffering from
any specific ailment except for his known history of Type 2
diabetes mellitus, hypertension & hypothyroidism for which
requisite medications to be taken regularly, were already
prescribed. The Colonoscopy test of the accused was
scheduled for 15.01.2018. Medical status report of accused
Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali received from the Medical Officer
Incharge, Central Jail Dispensary, Tihar, New Delhi,
mentioned that the accused despite being counseled several
times to continue his treatment at AIIMS Hospital, refused to
visit AIIMS for treatment/further management.

9.0 From the above, it is evident that the applicant/
accused is being provided necessary medical attention/
treatment as and when prayed for, not only inside the jail
but also at AIIMS and other Govt. Hospitals. Thus, taking
into account the law as laid down in Redual Hussain
Khan’s case (Supra), no ground for grant of interim bail
on health grounds is made out.

9.1 However, Jail Superintendent is directed to
provide proper medical care and treatment to the
applicant/ accused, as requested/ called for.”
                               7
5.   The respondent carried the matter before the High Court

by way of Criminal Appeal No.768 of 2018 under Section 21(1)

read with Section 21(4) of the National Investigation Agency

Act, 2008. The High Court noticed that after filing of the

charge­sheet, accused Nos.11 and 12 had been granted

regular bail, while accused Nos.1 and 2 had not been arrested.

Rest of the accused, including the respondent (Accused

No.10), were in judicial custody. The respondent (Accused

No.10) was arrested on 17th August, 2017 and had been in

judicial custody since then. His age, as indicated in the

charge­sheet, was about 70 years. The High Court then

adverted to paragraph 17.6.5 onwards of the charge­sheet

[report under Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure

(Cr.P.C.)] and summarized the allegations against respondent

(Accused No.10) as follows:

     “18. Specific to the Appellant are the allegations made in
     Paragraph 17.6.5 of the charge­sheet which is subtitled
     ‘Hawala’. This being the principal allegation against the
     Appellant, requires to be summarized as under:
     (i) The Appellant is one of the conduits to bring money from
     off­shore locations of India to fuel anti­India activities in
                            8

Jammu and Kashmir. Reference is again made to the same
incriminating document i.e. D No.132 (a).

(ii) A­10 was bringing money from off­shore locations to India
“by layering it through the scores of firms and companies he
has opened”. Reference is made to an NRE account of the
Appellant at the J&K Bank where, from 2011 till 2013, he is
said to have received Rs.93, 87, 639. 31 from ‘unknown
sources’.

(iii) The Appellant was showing foreign remittances under
‘other income’ in his proprietorship M/s Trison
International, Srinagar. Foreign remittances in the sum of
Rs.2,26,87,639.31 were received by the Appellant in different
accounts from 2011 to 2016. It is repeated that
Rs.93,87,639.31 was received in his NRE account from 2011
to 2013.

(iv) It is stated that Rs.14 lacs were remitted in the account
of a medical college in Jammu through NEFT on 9th April,
2013 against the fees deposited for his son (who incidentally
is a medical doctor and through whom the present appeal
has been filed). It is stated that Rs.60 lacs were remitted in
the current account of the Appellant in J&K Bank. Rs.5 lacs
were remitted in the account of M/s Trison Farms and
Constructions Pvt. Limited (‘TFCPL’). It is stated that all
these foreign remittances “are from unknown sources”.

(v) On 7th November, 2014, one Nawal Kishore Kapoor (who
initially was a witness but has, since the filing of the charge­
sheet, been arrayed as an accused himself), a resident of
United Arab Emirates (‘UAE’) entered into an agreement with
TFCPL, whose Managing Director (‘MD’) is the Appellant to
take land measuring 20 kanals in Budgam in J&K on lease
in consideration of a sum of Rs.6 crores as premium and
Rs.1,000/­ annual rent for an initial period of 40 years
which could be extended through mutual agreement. In the
said agreement, TFCPL was declared as the absolute owner
of the land. Mr. Kapoor remitted a total sum of Rs.5.579
crores in 22 instalments between 2013 and 2016 to the
Appellant.

(vi) During investigation it was revealed that no land exists in
the name of TFCPL as per the balance sheet of that
                                 9

     company. Further, it was ascertained that Rs.5,57,90,000
     was mobilized by Mr. Kapoor from unknown sources and
     remitted to Appellant to lease a piece of land which does not
     even exist in the name of TFCPL and therefore the agreement
     itself lacks legal sanctity. According to the NIA, this “proves
     that the said agreement was a cover” created by the
     Appellant “to bring foreign remittances from unknown
     sources to India”.

     (vii) The Chartered Accountant (‘CA’) who signed the audited
     balance sheet of M/s Trison International., TFCPL and M/s
     Yasir Enterprises for various years between 2013­14 and
     2015­16 “did so without seeing any supporting documents”.
     According to the NIA, the balance sheets of the above
     entities/companies were sent to the CA by Mustaq Mir, Cost
     Accountant and Shabir Mir, CA from Wizkid Office, Srinagar
     through email and he was asked to sign on them in Delhi
     without showing any documents. According to the NIA, this
     also clearly showed that the Appellant was remitting money
     received from unknown sources to India.

     (viii) TFCPL raised an unsecured loan of Rs.2,65,55,532/­
     from the Directors of the company, i.e. the Appellant, his
     wife, and his three sons in the Financial Year (‘FY’) 2010­11
     in the form of both cash and cheque and this was used to
     repay the secured loan of Rs.2,94,53,353/­ in the books of
     J&K Bank. The source of money with the Directors could not
     be explained satisfactorily by the Appellant.

     (ix) The seizure from the house of the Appellant of a list of ISI
     officials and a letter from Tariq Shafi, proprietor of Al Shafi
     Group addressed to the PHC recommending grant of visa to
     the Appellant “shows his proximity with Pakistani
     Establishment”. It is stated that the name of Tariq Shafi
     figures in the document of foreign contributions seized from
     the house of the Appellant‟s cashier­cum­accountant
     Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt.”

6.   The High Court also adverted to the accusations against

respondent (Accused No.10) in paragraphs 17.9 and 17.10 of

the charge­sheet, to the effect that CDRs relied upon by the
                           10

prosecution revealed that the accused persons were in contact

“with each other, with some militants/OGWs (Over Ground

Workers) and the hawala conduit” i.e. the respondent (Accused

No.10) and the other accused, that the respondent (Accused

No.10) was in constant contact on telephone with A­3, A­4, A­

5 and A­6 and that A­3 to A­12 were in contact with each

other, either directly or indirectly. In paragraph 17.10 of the

charge­sheet, it is stated that respondent (Accused No.10) was

a known hawala dealer and financer and a number of cases

were registered against him, which were being investigated by

the sister investigating agencies. The High Court, however,

noted that the charge­sheet neither gave details of the other

cases registered and being investigated against the respondent

nor revealed the details thereof to the Court. The High Court

also noted accusations against the respondent (Accused

No.10) in paragraphs 18.10, 18.13 and 18.14, revealing the

linkage between A­3 to A­10 and indicating clear meeting of

minds of the said accused in hatching the conspiracy in
                            11

support of A­1 and A­2 and other Hurriyat leaders and other

terrorist organizations in J & K.

7.   After noting the relevant facts emanating from the

charge­sheet filed against the respondent, the High Court

adverted to the conclusions recorded by the Trial Court. It

then proceeded to analyse the relevant provisions of the 1967

Act and the principle underlying the decisions of this Court

concerning the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)

Act, 1985 (“TADA”) and the Maharashtra Control of Organised

Crime Act, 1999 (“MCOCA”), in light of the exposition in

Hitendra Vishnu Thakur (supra) and           Niranjan Singh

Karam Singh Punjabi (supra), and posed a question to itself

as to whether the material gathered by the NIA in the present

case could have enabled the Trial Court to come to the

conclusion that there were reasonable grounds for believing

that the accusation against the respondent (Accused No.10)

was prima facie true. After so noting, it observed that the

statements of the proposed/prospective witnesses recorded

under Section 161 Cr.P.C. did not constitute admissible
                           12

evidence. Those could only be used to confront the witnesses

who would subsequently appear at the trial. It noted that this

crucial aspect had to be kept in view while referring to such

statements at that stage. The High Court then noted that the

Investigating Agency had recorded the statements of the

witnesses under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. but had kept the same

in a sealed cover enclosed to the charge­sheet. The High Court

noted that the statements at serial Nos.277 and 278 were of

protected witnesses “Charlie” and “Romeo” respectively, and

those at serial Nos.279 to 284 were described as statements of

protected   witnesses   “Romeo”,   “Alpha”,   “Gamma”,   “Pie”,

“Potter”, “Harry” and “xxx”. These statements were kept in a

sealed cover and not supplied to the respondent (Accused

No.10). Further, these statements were presumably not

perused by the Designated Court. Notably, the application

moved by the Investigating Agency under Section 44 of the

1967 Act to accord protection to those witnesses remained

pending before the Designated Court. Here, it may be

mentioned that during the pendency of the present appeal
                           13

before this Court, the said application has been decided in

favour of the Investigating Agency vide order dated 11 th

January, 2019 passed by the Designated Court. We shall refer

to this a little later.

8.    Reverting to the judgment of the High Court, it opined

that the said statements under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. could

not be considered, as copies thereof had not been provided to

the respondent. It then proceeded to hold that Section 44 of

the 1967 Act merely permitted the identity and address of

such witnesses to be kept secret by the Court. It held that it

was not possible to read Section 17 of the NIA or Section 44 of

the 1967 Act as an exception to Section 207 read with Section

173 Cr.P.C., which mandates that the accused shall be

supplied copies of the police report and other documents relied

upon by the prosecution in the charge­sheet, without delay

and free of cost. It then proceeded to analyse the interplay

between Sections 207, 161, 164 and 173 of Cr.P.C. and opined

that even in respect of statements recorded under Section 161

of Cr.P.C., there was no wholesale exclusion of the entire
                                   14

        document from being provided to the accused. What was

        permitted was the redaction of such portion of the document

        which could reveal the identity and address of the maker of

        the statement. Be it noted that the High Court did not think it

        necessary to direct the Designated Court to first decide the

        application filed by the Investigating Agency under Section 44

        of the 1967 Act before proceeding with the hearing of the

        appeal filed by the respondent. Instead, the High Court

        preferred to exclude those statements kept in a sealed cover

        from consideration. The High Court did not advert to Section

        48 of the 1967 Act, which makes it amply clear that the

        provisions of the Act shall have effect notwithstanding

        anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment

        other than the said Act etc. The High Court then went on to

        observe that the charge­sheet made no reference to the

        statements recorded under Section 164 of the witnesses in

        respect of whom protection was sought by the Investigating

        Agency. The High Court distinguished the decision of this

        Court in K. Veeraswami Vs. Union of India and Ors.5
5
    (1991) 3 SCC 655
                            15

pressed into service by the Investigating Agency to buttress its

submission that it is not necessary that the charge­sheet must

contain detailed analysis of the evidence, and that the Trial

Court ought to consider not only the narration in the charge­

sheet but also all documents accompanying thereto. The High

Court, however, opined that in the context of the relatively

high burden placed on the accused in terms of the proviso to

Section 43D(5) of the 1967 Act, of having to demonstrate that

the prosecution had not been able to show that there existed

reasonable grounds to show that the accusation against him

was prima facie true, the absence of any reference in the

charge­sheet to the statements under Section 164 Cr.P.C.,

which are of a higher probative value than the statements

under Section 161 Cr.P.C., was significant. It thus observed

that such statements could not be kept back from the

accused.   Resultantly,   the    statements   of   the   protected

witnesses recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. were kept out of

consideration by the High Court, with liberty to the parties to
                              16

independently make submissions before the Trial Court at the

appropriate stage.

9.   The High Court then straightaway proceeded to analyse

the efficacy of document D­132(a) forming part of the charge­

sheet. In light of the statement of Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt

from whom the same was recovered, it noted in paragraph 61

of the impugned judgment that it was unlikely that the

document D­132(a) was recovered from the residence of

Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt till 16th August, 2017, and

thereafter proceeded to observe thus:

     “62. While the genuineness and the evidentiary value of
     Document 132 (a) is yet to be established by the NIA at the
     trial, since this one document is being relied upon by the
     NIA as being central to its case against the Appellant, it is
     but inevitable that the trial Court and now this Court has to
     discuss it in some detail for the purpose of deciding whether
     the Appellant can be released on bail.

     63. The question that arises is whether there is anything to
     show with reference to each of the dates mentioned in the
     above Document No. 132 (a) that the figures shown against
     the entry on each date (purporting to be specific amounts of
     money) was in fact received by the Appellant in his personal
     accounts or in the accounts of any of his entities. Although
     the case of the NIA is that the money has been received,
     there is no document or statement, which forms part of the
     charge sheet, which in fact indicates this.
     64. The above document is also relied upon by the NIA as
     providing proof of the linkages of the Appellant to A­1,
     through the entry dated 3rd May, 2015 and with the
                          17

Pakistan High Commission (PHC) through the entries dated
15th and 20th October, 2016. Yet none from the PHC has
been named, much less statement of such a person been
recorded to confirm that those figures represented money
that was received from the PHC.

65. The case of the NIA in the charge sheet is that the same
document is also proof of the fact that the monies so
received were passed on to the Hurriyat leaders. Reference is
made to the fourth column of the above document where the
names of some of the Hurriyat leaders are mentioned.
However, there is nothing to show that the money was
received by the Appellant and then transmitted by him to
any of the named Hurriyat leaders. Nor have any of the
‘prospective witnesses’ including Mr Bhatt made any
statement to that effect.

66. Mr. Luthra urged that the signature of the Appellant in
the right hand bottom corner of the document has been
confirmed by the handwriting expert to match the specimen
signature of the Appellant. In reply it was pointed out by Mr.
Vikas Pahwa, learned Senior counsel for the Appellant, that
the mere fact that the Appellant’s signature appeared on the
document did not mean that he had in fact signed the
document in acceptance of the truth of its contents.
According to him, it is too early to speculate whether the
Appellant when he signed the paper, if at all, put his
signature on a blank green legal size paper which may be
have then been used for legal purposes for an affidavit etc.

67. It is indeed too early in the case to speculate whether the
Appellant in fact signed the document after it was typed out
and whether his signature amounts to accepting the truth of
its contents or for that matter whether the contents of the
document in question constitute conclusive proof of what the
NIA alleges the document to be.

68. In the circumstances, the Court is not satisfied that a
sheet of paper containing typed entries and in loose form,
not shown to form part of the books of accounts regularly
maintained by the Appellant or his business entities, can
constitute material to even ‘prima facie’ connect the
Appellant with the crime with which he is sought to be
charged. The conclusion of the trial Court that this
                               18

     document shows the connection of the Appellant with the
     other accused as regards terrorist funding does not logically
     or legally flow from a plain reading of the document.”



10. The High Court then adverted to the other documents. It

analysed the concerned documents and concluded that the

entire bunch of documents did not reveal that the trading

activities undertaken by the respondent were geared towards

funding of terrorist activities, as alleged in the charge­sheet. It

may be apposite to reproduce the relevant extract from the

impugned judgment in this regard, which reads thus:

     “69. Mr. Luthra then referred to the statements of Mustaq
     Ahmad Mir and Shabbir Ahmad Mir, the reply of Mr Mustaq
     Ahmad Mir (Ex.D­214), the CFSL report dated 6th
     November, 2017 (document D­154); the seizure memo dated
     3rd June, 2017 (document D­3) regarding the recovery being
     made from the residence of the Appellant; the seizure memo
     of the same date of the recoveries from the office of the
     TFCPL (document D­4); and the bunch of papers seized from
     the Appellant [D­4(e)] referred to by the trial Court.

     70. Beginning with the last referred document, [D­4(e)], it is
     actually a bunch of documents, the first of which is a letter
     dated 28th June, 2016, written by the Prime Minister of
     Pakistan Mr Mohammad Nawaz Sharif to the Appellant
     thanking him for the bouquet sent to him with wishes for his
     good health and well being.

     71. Then there is a letter dated 20th November, 2007 from
     the President of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir, Chambers of
     Commerce and Industry, addressed to the Appellant,
     appointing the Appellant as an Honorary Trade Consultant
     at Srinagar. It notes that Pakistan and India had
     initiated/undertaken a number of Kashmir related CBMs
                               19

     (confidence building measures) in the recent past to provide
     respite to the Kashmiris on both sides of the LoC (Line of
     Control):
          ‘1.Pakistan and India have initiated/undertaken a
          number of Kashmir related CBMs in recent past to
          provide respite to the Kashmiris on both sides of the
          LoC. One such CBM which is under active consideration
          is commencement of trade between both parts of
          Kashmir. Necessary modalities including the items to be
          traded are being worked out.’

     72. The other documents reflect the correspondence carried
     out in the regular course of business between the
     Appellant’s business entities and other entities including the
     Al­Shafi Group of companies, headquartered at Lahore. A
     business invitation was extended to the Appellant on 7th
     February, 2014 by Mohd. Tariq Shafi, the director of Al­Shafi
     Group of companies to visit them for business negotiations.
     There is a letter of the same date addressed by Mr. Mohd.
     Tariq Shafi to the PHC in New Delhi for grant of Pakistan
     Business Visa to the Appellant.

     73. It must be noticed at this stage that the NIA does not
     dispute that the Appellant is a leading businessman in
     Kashmir. He runs a conglomerate of business entities and
     has been active in the context of the Indo­Pakistan trade.
     Nothing has been shown to this Court from the entire bunch
     of documents which would suggest that these trade activities
     were geared toward funding of terrorist activities, as alleged
     in the charge­sheet.”

11. The High Court then adverted to the statements of

Mustaq Ahmad Mir and Shabbir Ahmad Mir and noted that

the same had no evidentiary value since they were merely

statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and even if taken at

their face value, they would only indicate that some of the

entries in the accounts and, in particular, the source of credit
                            20

entries were not explained properly. Further, the accounts of

the entities of the respondent were regularly audited and it

was not possible to prima facie conclude that these unknown

sources were, in fact, connected to the other accused and that

remittances were received from Pakistan or UAE for terrorist

activities. The Court noted that there must be something more

substantial than mere audited accounts that may have entries

that require explanation to the Income Tax Authorities. As a

result, the High Court concluded that the documents relied

upon by the Investigating Agency did not persuade the Court

to prima facie conclude that the respondent received money

from A­1 or Pakistan High Commission or others and was

passing on the said funds to the Hurriyat leaders for funding

terrorist activities and stone­pelting.   The High Court also

adverted to the statement of the ‘protected witness’    W­48

about the proximity of the respondent (Accused No.10) with A­

4 and A­6 and opined that the same could not be construed as

material that would enable the prosecution to show that

accusation against the respondent about his funding terrorist
                               21

activities was prima facie true. Lastly, the High Court dealt

with transaction of lease involving Naval Kishore Kapoor and

noted thus:

     “77. Turing to the transaction of lease involving Mr. Naval
     Kishore Kapoor, it is explained on behalf of the Appellant
     that only individuals domiciled in Kashmir can hold
     properties there. There was no declaration of ‘ownership’ of
     lands by the companies and in any event it was a lease. The
     lease itself has not been shown to be a sham transaction. As
     regards the NRE account, it is pointed out that it has since
     been closed and the fine amount was also paid. As regards
     the CDRs, it is pointed out that there may have been
     exchange of calls between the Appellant and A­6 but not
     between the Appellant and A­3, A­4 or A­5. This cannot at
     this stage be said to constitute material to show that the
     accusation of a criminal conspiracy between the Appellant
     and A­6 for commission of terrorist offences is prima facie
     true. It also emerged during the course of the hearing of this
     appeal that neither the APHC nor any of its 26 constituent
     organisations are ‘banned’ organisations within the meaning
     of the UAPA.”



12. Having said thus, the High Court proceeded to conclude

that the order passed by the Designated Court was cryptic and

unsustainable both on facts and in law. It then went on to

observe that there was nothing on record to indicate the

previous criminal involvement of the respondent in any offence

or the possibility of the respondent fleeing from justice, if

released on bail. Further, the respondent who was a

septuagenarian and was suffering from various medical
                                         22

        ailments, was in judicial custody for more than a year and had

        not tampered with the evidence or interfered with any of the

        ‘prospective/protected’ witnesses. The High Court then went

        on to rely on the dictum in Davender Gupta Vs. National

        Investigating Agency6 and Sanjay Chandra Vs. CBI                         7
                                                                                     .

        Finally, the High Court directed the release of respondent on

        bail and issued directions in that regard subject to conditions

        stated in the concluding part of the impugned judgment which

        reads thus:
               “Conclusion
               82. The impugned order dated 8th June, 2018 of the trial
               Court is accordingly set aside. The Appellant is directed to be
               released on bail subject to his furnishing a personal bond in
               the sum of Rs.2 lakhs with two sureties of like amount to the
               satisfaction of the trial Court, and further subject to the
               following conditions:
                    (i) The Appellant shall report to the IO in charge of the
                    case as and when required. He shall provide to the IO as
                    well as the trial Court the mobile phone on which he
                    can be contacted and his current address where he will
                    be available. He will keep both the IO and the trial Court
                    informed promptly if there is any change in either.
                    (ii) He will not influence or intimidate the
                    proposed/prospective Crl.A.768/2018 Page 40 of 40
                    prosecution witnesses or tamper with the evidence of
                    the prosecution in any manner.
                    (iii) The Appellant will surrender his passport before the
                    trial Court at the time of execution of the bail bonds. He
                    will not travel out of the country without prior
                    permission of the trial Court.

6
    (2014) SCC Online AP 192
7
    AIR 2012 SC 830
                                 23
           (iv) If there is any breach of the above conditions, it will
           be open to the NIA to apply to the trial Court for
           cancellation of bail.

     83. It is clarified that the observations of this Court in this
     order both on facts and law are based on the materials
     forming part of the charge sheet and are prima facie in
     nature and for the limited purpose of considering the case of
     the Appellant for grant of bail. They are not intended to
     influence the decisions of the trial Court at any stage of the
     case hereafter.

     84. The appeal is allowed in the above terms.”



13. The view so taken by the High Court has been assailed by

the Investigating Agency – the appellant herein, on diverse

counts. According to the appellant, the High Court has

virtually conducted a mini trial and even questioned the

genuineness of the documents relied upon by the Investigating

Agency. In that, the High Court adopted a curious approach in

finding fault with the Investigating Agency for not naming any

official from the High Commission of Pakistan as accused or

recording their statements as witnesses, for inexplicable

reasons.    In so observing, the High Court clearly overlooked

the fact that the officials of the High Commission are accorded

diplomatic immunity. Not only that, while considering the

statements of witnesses recorded under Section 161 of
                                     24
Cr.P.C., the High Court went on to observe that the same were

        inadmissible in evidence and discarded it from consideration

        for forming opinion as to whether the accusations against the

        respondent (Accused No.10) were prima facie true. The Court,

        however, was obliged to consider all the statements recorded

        under Section 161 of Cr.P.C. in light of the exposition in

        Salim Khan Vs. Sanjai Singh and Anr.              8
                                                              Similarly, the

        statements recorded under Section 164, which were produced

        in a sealed cover, had been completely discarded. The

        approach of the High Court, to say the least, contends the

        learned Attorney General, was tenuous and not permissible at

        the stage of consideration of prayer for bail. The analysis done

        by the High Court is bordering on being perverse as it has

        virtually conducted a mini trial at the stage of consideration of

        the prayer for bail. According to the appellant, the charge­

        sheet filed against the respondent was accompanied by

        documentary evidence, statements of prospective witnesses

        and     other   evidence   which   indicated   complicity   of   the

        respondent and reinforced the aspect that the accusations
8
    (2002) 9 SCC 670
                            25

made against him were prima facie true. It is submitted that at

the stage of consideration of bail, the totality of the evidence

available against the respondent must be reckoned and ought

to be taken into account as it is, without anything more. The

question of admissibility of such evidence would be a matter

for trial. The sufficiency or insufficiency of the evidence cannot

be the basis to answer the prayer for grant of bail.         It is

contended that after considering the statements of protected

witnesses recorded under Section 164 of the Code, the same

reinforces the accusations made against the respondent

(Accused No.10) as being prima facie true. Accordingly, it is

submitted that the High Court order be set aside and the

application for bail preferred by the respondent (Accused

No.10) be rejected.

14. Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand,

submits that the High Court justly came to hold that no

evidence was forthcoming to indicate the complicity of the

respondent in the commission of the alleged offences and that

the documents and evidence relied upon by the Investigating
                                    26

        Agency were not enough to sustain the accusations,        much

        less as being prima facie true. It is submitted that the

        accusations made against the respondent in the charge­sheet

        do not fall under Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act. Further,

        the pivotal document D­132(a) was not sufficient to fasten any

        criminal liability upon the respondent. As a matter of fact, the

        said document is a loose sheet of paper and cannot be looked

        at in view of the mandate of Section 34 of the Evidence Act. To

        buttress this submission, reliance has been placed on Central

        Bureau of Investigation Vs. V.C. Shukla and Ors. 9 In any

        case, the said document itself cannot and does not prima facie

        suggest that the funds, as shown, were received and disbursed

        in the manner described in the document. Further, there is

        no independent corroboration forthcoming much less to

        establish the complicity of the respondent in attracting the

        imperatives of Section 17 of 1967 Act. It is submitted that

        even if the contents of the said document were taken as it is,

        with the exception of accused No.4 (Altaf Ahmad Shah @


9
    (1998) 3 SCC 410
                                   27

         Fantoosh), no other person to whom the amount was paid or

         from whom the amount was received, has been arrayed as an

         accused in the charge­sheet. The statements of witnesses

         recorded under Section 161 or Section 164 of Cr.P.C. do not

         mention anything about the involvement of the respondent in

         commission of the stated offences. The statements of the co­

         accused cannot be considered as admissions, much less used

         against the respondent. Further, there was no evidence to

         indicate the involvement of the respondent in the larger

         conspiracy much less regarding terrorist activity. It is

         submitted that the High Court was justified in analysing the

         materials on record to satisfy itself as to whether the

         accusations made against the respondent were prima facie

         true. That enquiry was permissible in terms of the exposition

         in   Ranjitsing   Brahmajeetsing   Sharma    Vs.   State   of

         Maharashtra and Anr.10      and Chenna Boyanna Krishna

         Yadav Vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr. 11 According to

         the respondent, no fault can be found with the High Court and

10
     (2005) 5 SCC 294
11
     (2007) 1 SCC 242
                            28

the view taken by the High Court, being a possible view, did

not require any interference in exercise of the power under

Article 136 of the Constitution of India. It is finally submitted

that this Court, if it so desires, may impose additional

conditions whilst upholding the order of bail passed by the

High Court.

15. Before we proceed to analyse the rival submissions, it is

apposite to restate the settled legal position about matters to

be considered for deciding an     application for bail,   to   wit,

(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable ground to

believe that the accused had committed the offence; (ii) nature

and gravity of the charge; (iii) severity of the punishment in the

event of conviction; (iv) danger of the accused absconding or

fleeing, if released on bail; (v) character, behaviour, means,

position and standing of the accused; (vi) likelihood of the

offence being repeated; (vii) reasonable apprehension of the

witnesses being tampered with; and (viii) danger, of course, of
                                           29

         justice being thwarted by grant of bail. (State of U.P. through

         CBI Vs. Amarmani Tripathi12).

         16. When it comes to offences punishable under special

         enactments, such as the 1967 Act, something more is required

         to be kept in mind in view of the special provisions contained

         in Section 43D of the 1967 Act, inserted by Act 35 of 2008

         w.e.f. 31st December, 2008.             Sub­sections (5), (6) and (7)

         thereof read thus:

                “43D. Modified application of certain provisions of the
                Code.­ xxx         xxx           xxx         xxx
                (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no
                person accused of an offence punishable under Chapters IV
                and VI of this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or
                on his own bond unless the Public Prosecutor has been
                given an opportunity of being heard on the application for
                such release:
                Provided that such accused person shall not be released on
                bail or on his own bond if the Court, on a perusal of the case
                diary or the report made under section 173 of the Code is of
                the opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing
                that the accusation against such person is prima facie true.

                (6) The restrictions on granting of bail specified in sub­
                section (5) is in addition to the restrictions under the Code or
                any other law for the time being in force on granting of bail.
                  (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­sections (5)
                and (6), no bail shall be granted to a person accused of an
                offence punishable under this Act, if he is not an Indian
                citizen and has entered the country unauthorisedly or
                illegally except in very exceptional circumstances and for
                reasons to be recorded in writing.”
12
     (2005) 8 SCC 21 (para 18)
                            30
17. By virtue of the proviso to sub­section (5), it is the duty of

the Court to be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for

believing that the accusation against the accused is prima

facie true or otherwise. Our attention was invited to the

decisions of this Court, which has had an occasion to deal

with similar special provisions in TADA and MCOCA. The

principle underlying those decisions may have some bearing

while considering the prayer for bail in relation to offences

under the 1967 Act as well. Notably, under the special

enactments such as TADA, MCOCA and the Narcotic Drugs

and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, the Court is required

to record   its opinion that there are reasonable grounds for

believing that the accused is “not guilty” of the alleged offence.

There is degree of difference between the satisfaction to be

recorded by the Court that there are reasonable grounds for

believing that the accused is “not guilty” of such offence and

the satisfaction to be recorded for the purposes of the 1967

Act that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the

accusation against such person is “prima facie” true. By its
                            31

very nature, the expression “prima facie true” would mean that

the materials/evidence collated by the Investigating Agency in

reference to the accusation against the concerned accused in

the first information report, must prevail until contradicted

and overcome or disproved by other evidence, and on the face

of it, shows the complicity of such accused in the commission

of the stated offence. It must be good and sufficient on its face

to establish a given fact or the chain of facts constituting the

stated offence, unless rebutted or contradicted. In one sense,

the degree of satisfaction is lighter when the Court has to

opine that the accusation is “prima facie true”, as compared to

the opinion    of   accused “not guilty” of such offence as

required under the other special enactments. In any case, the

degree of satisfaction to be recorded by the Court for opining

that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the

accusation against the accused is prima facie true, is lighter

than the degree of satisfaction to be recorded for considering a

discharge application or framing of charges in relation to

offences under the 1967 Act. Nevertheless, we may take
                               32

guidance from the exposition in the case of Ranjitsing

Brahmajeetsing Sharma (supra), wherein a three­Judge

Bench of this Court was called upon to consider the scope of

power of the Court to grant bail. In paragraphs 36 to 38, the

Court observed thus:

     “36. Does this statute require that before a person is
     released on bail, the court, albeit prima facie, must come to
     the conclusion that he is not guilty of such offence? Is it
     necessary for the court to record such a finding? Would
     there be any machinery available to the court to ascertain
     that once the accused is enlarged on bail, he would not
     commit any offence whatsoever?

     37. Such findings are required to be recorded only for the
     purpose of arriving at an objective finding on the basis of
     materials on record only for grant of bail and for no other
     purpose.

     38. We are furthermore of the opinion that the restrictions
     on the power of the court to grant bail should not be pushed
     too far. If the court, having regard to the materials brought
     on record, is satisfied that in all probability he may not be
     ultimately convicted, an order granting bail may be passed.
     The satisfaction of the court as regards his likelihood of not
     committing an offence while on bail must be construed to
     mean an offence under the Act and not any offence
     whatsoever be it a minor or major offence. … What would
     further be necessary on the part of the court is to see the
     culpability of the accused and his involvement in the
     commission of an organised crime either directly or
     indirectly. The court at the time of considering the
     application for grant of bail shall consider the question from
     the angle as to whether he was possessed of the requisite
     mens rea….”

And again in paragraphs 44 to 48, the Court observed:
                          33
“44. The wording of Section 21(4), in our opinion, does not
lead to the conclusion that the court must arrive at a
positive finding that the applicant for bail has not committed
an offence under the Act. If such a construction is placed,
the court intending to grant bail must arrive at a finding that
the applicant has not committed such an offence. In such an
event, it will be impossible for the prosecution to obtain a
judgment of conviction of the applicant. Such cannot be the
intention of the legislature. Section 21(4) of MCOCA,
therefore, must be construed reasonably. It must be so
construed that the court is able to maintain a delicate
balance between a judgment of acquittal and conviction and
an order granting bail much before commencement of trial.
Similarly, the court will be required to record a finding as to
the possibility of his committing a crime after grant of bail.
However, such an offence in futuro must be an offence under
the Act and not any other offence. Since it is difficult to
predict the future conduct of an accused, the court must
necessarily consider this aspect of the matter having regard
to the antecedents of the accused, his propensities and the
nature and manner in which he is alleged to have committed
the offence.
45. It is, furthermore, trite that for the purpose of
considering an application for grant of bail, although detailed
reasons are not necessary to be assigned, the order granting
bail must demonstrate application of mind at least in serious
cases as to why the applicant has been granted or denied the
privilege of bail.
46. The duty of the court at this stage is not to weigh the
evidence meticulously but to arrive at a finding on the basis
of broad probabilities. However, while dealing with a special
statute like MCOCA having regard to the provisions
contained in sub­section (4) of Section 21 of the Act, the
court may have to probe into the matter deeper so as to
enable it to arrive at a finding that the materials collected
against the accused during the investigation may not justify
a judgment of conviction. The findings recorded by the court
while granting or refusing bail undoubtedly would be
tentative in nature, which may not have any bearing on the
merit of the case and the trial court would, thus, be free to
decide the case on the basis of evidence adduced at the trial,
without in any manner being prejudiced thereby.
                                          34
               47. In Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan13 this Court
               observed: (SCC pp. 537­38, para 18)
                    ‘18. We agree that a conclusive finding in regard to the
                    points urged by both the sides is not expected of the
                    court considering a bail application. Still one should not
                    forget, as observed by this Court in the case Puran v.
                    Rambilas14 : (SCC p. 344, para 8)
                    ‘Giving reasons is different from discussing merits or
                    demerits. At the stage of granting bail a detailed
                    examination of evidence and elaborate documentation of
                    the merits of the case has not to be undertaken. … That
                    did not mean that whilst granting bail some reasons for
                    prima facie concluding why bail was being granted did
                    not have to be indicated.’
                    We respectfully agree with the above dictum of this
                    Court. We also feel that such expression of prima facie
                    reasons for granting bail is a requirement of law in
                    cases where such orders on bail application are
                    appealable, more so because of the fact that the
                    appellate court has every right to know the basis for
                    granting the bail. Therefore, we are not in agreement
                    with the argument addressed by the learned counsel for
                    the accused that the High Court was not expected even
                    to indicate a prima facie finding on all points urged
                    before it while granting bail, more so in the background
                    of the facts of this case where on facts it is established
                    that a large number of witnesses who were examined
                    after the respondent was enlarged on bail had turned
                    hostile and there are complaints made to the court as to
                    the threats administered by the respondent or his
                    supporters to witnesses in the case. In such
                    circumstances, the Court was duty­bound to apply its
                    mind to the allegations put forth by the investigating
                    agency and ought to have given at least a prima facie
                    finding in regard to these allegations because they go to
                    the very root of the right of the accused to seek bail. The
                    non­consideration of these vital facts as to the
                    allegations of threat or inducement made to the
                    witnesses by the respondent during the period he was
                    on bail has vitiated the conclusions arrived at by the
                    High Court while granting bail to the respondent. The
                    other ground apart from the ground of incarceration
13
     (2004) 7 SCC 528
14
     (2001) 6 SCC 338
                                         35

                    which appealed to the High Court to grant bail was the
                    fact that a large number of witnesses are yet to be
                    examined and there is no likelihood of the trial coming
                    to an end in the near future. As stated hereinabove, this
                    ground on the facts of this case is also not sufficient
                    either individually or coupled with the period of
                    incarceration to release the respondent on bail because
                    of the serious allegations of tampering with the
                    witnesses made against the respondent.’

               48. In Jayendra Saraswathi Swamigal v. State of T.N.15 this
               Court observed: (SCC pp. 21­22, para 16)

                    ‘16. … The considerations which normally weigh with
                    the court in granting bail in non­bailable offences have
                    been explained by this Court in State v. Capt. Jagjit
                    Singh16 and Gurcharan Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.)17
                    and basically they are — the nature and seriousness of
                    the    offence;   the    character   of   the    evidence;
                    circumstances which are peculiar to the accused; a
                    reasonable possibility of the presence of the accused not
                    being secured at the trial; reasonable apprehension of
                    witnesses being tampered with; the larger interest of the
                    public or the State and other similar factors which may
                    be relevant in the facts and circumstances of the case.’ ”


         18. A priori, the exercise to be undertaken by the Court at

         this stage ­ of giving reasons for grant or non­grant of bail ­ is

         markedly different from discussing merits or demerits of the

         evidence. The elaborate examination or dissection of the

         evidence is not required to be done at this stage. The Court is

         merely expected to record a finding on the basis of broad


15
     (2005) 2 SCC 13
16
     (1962) 3 SCR 622
17
     (1978) 1 SCC 118
                           36

probabilities regarding the involvement of the accused in the

commission of the stated offence or otherwise. From the

analysis of the impugned judgment, it appears to us that the

High Court has ventured into an area of examining the merits

and demerits of the evidence. For, it noted that the evidence

in the form of statements of witnesses under Section 161 are

not admissible. Further, the documents pressed into service

by the Investigating Agency were not admissible in evidence. It

also noted that it was unlikely that the document had been

recovered from the residence of Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt till

16th August, 2017 (paragraph 61 of the impugned judgment).

Similarly, the approach of the High Court in completely

discarding the statements of the protected witnesses recorded

under Section 164 of Cr.P.C., on the specious ground that the

same was kept in a sealed cover and was not even perused by

the Designated Court and also because reference to such

statements having been recorded was not found in the charge­

sheet already filed against the respondent is, in our opinion,

in complete disregard of the duty of the Court to record its
                            37

opinion that the accusation made against the concerned

accused is prima facie true or otherwise. That opinion must

be reached by the Court not only in reference to the

accusation in the FIR but also in reference to the contents of

the case diary and including the charge­sheet (report under

Section 173 of Cr.P.C.) and other material gathered by the

Investigating Agency during investigation. Be it noted that the

special provision, Section 43D of the 1967 Act, applies right

from the stage of registration of FIR for offences under

Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act until the conclusion of the

trial thereof. To wit, soon after the arrest of the accused on the

basis of the FIR registered against him, but before filing of the

charge­sheet by the Investigating Agency; after filing of the

first charge­sheet and before the filing of the supplementary or

final charge­sheet consequent to further investigation under

Section 173(8) Cr.P.C., until framing of the charges or after

framing of the charges by the Court and recording of evidence

of key witnesses etc. However, once charges are framed, it

would be safe to assume that a very strong suspicion was
                            38

founded upon the materials before the Court, which prompted

the Court to form a presumptive opinion as to the existence of

the factual ingredients constituting the offence alleged against

the accused, to justify the framing of charge. In that situation,

the accused may have to undertake an arduous task to satisfy

the court that despite the framing of charge, the materials

presented along with the charge­sheet (report under Section

173 of Cr.P.C.), do not make out reasonable grounds for

believing that the accusation against him is prima facie true.

Similar opinion is required to be formed by the Court whilst

considering the prayer for bail, made after filing of the first

report made under Section 173 of the Code, as in the present

case.
19. For that, the totality of the material gathered by the

Investigating Agency and presented along with the report and

including the case diary, is required to be reckoned and not by

analysing   individual pieces of evidence or circumstance. In

any case, the question of discarding the document at this

stage, on the ground of being inadmissible in evidence, is not

permissible.   For,   the   issue   of   admissibility   of   the
                              39

document/evidence would be a matter for trial. The Court

must look at the contents of the document and take such

document into account as it is.
20. The question is whether there are reasonable grounds for

believing that the accusations made against the respondent

(Accused No.10) are prima facie true. That will have to be

answered keeping in mind the totality of materials including

the one presented along with the police report. Be it noted that

the prosecution is relying on several documents forming part

of the first charge­sheet (pending further investigation) filed

against the respondent (Accused No.10) allegedly showing his

involvement in the commission of the stated offences.

Reference has been made to some of the crucial documents

mentioned in the chart handed over to the Court by the

appellant. The same, inter alia, read thus:

              NIA CASE NO.RC­10/2017/NIA/DLI
           TERROR FUNDING IN JAMMU & KASHMIR

              EVIDENCES FILED WITH CHARGE­SHEET
               (Excluding Supplementary Charge sheet)
           Against Accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10)
Exhibit                     Details of Documents

  D­1     Order no.11011/26/2017­IS.IV, dated 30.05.2017 of Sh. N.S.
                            40
       Bisht, Under Secretary, GOI, MHA, New Delhi.

D­2    FIR No.RC­10/2017/NIA/DLI dated 30.05.2017, PS NIA New
       Delhi.

D­3    Seizure memo dated 03.06.2017 in respect of search and
       recovery of articles/documents seized from the premises of
       accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10).

D­3a   Income Tax Returns of Three Star Enterprises seized from the
       premises of accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) dated
       03.06.2017.

D­3b   Income Tax Returns of Trisons Farms and Construction Pvt.
       Ltd. seized from the premises of accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah
       Watali (A­10) dated 03.06.2017.

D­3c   Acknowledgment ITR­4 of Yamin Zahoor Shah seized from the
       premises of accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) dated
       03.06.2017.

D­3d   Acknowledgment ITR­4 of Yawar Zahoor Shah seized from the
       premises of accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) dated
       03.06.2017.

D­3e   Income Tax Returns of M/s Three Y seized from the premises
       of accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) dated
       03.06.2017.

D­3f   Income Tax Returns in respect of Yasir Enterprises seized from
       the premises of accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10)
       dated 03.06.2017.

D­3g   One blue colour small pocket diary seized from the premises of
       accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) dated 03.06.2017.

D­3h   One blue booklet containing I.D.D Codes and Phone numbers
       seized from the premises of accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah
       Watali (A­10) dated 03.06.2017.

D­3i   A bunch of papers related to Pakistan Steel Mill Corp. Ltd.
       seized from the premises of accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah
                            41

       Watali (A­10) dated 03.06.2017.

D­3j   A bunch of papers containing Court documents related to
       Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali seized from the premises of
       accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) dated 03.06.2017.

D­3k   A bunch of papers containing Misc. documents related to
       Zahoor Ahmed Shah seized from the premises of accused
       Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) dated 03.06.2017.

D­3l   A bunch of papers containing various letter heads related to
       Zahoor Ahmad seized from the premises of accused Zahoor
       Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) dated 03.06.2017.

D­4    Production cum Seizure Memo dated 03.06.2017 regarding the
       seizure of documents/articles from the office of accused
       Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (A­10) i.e. Trison Farms and
       Construction Pvt. Ltd.

D­4a   Copies of documents related to N.Z. International, Yasir
       Enterprises,    Trison   Farms     &    Construction,  Trison
       International, Trison Power Pvt. Ltd., M/s 3Y, Kashmir Veneer
       Industry along with Passport details of Zahoor Ahmad Shah
       Watali (A­10) and his family members seized from the office of
       accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali i.e. Trison Farms and
       Construction Pvt. Ltd.

D­4b   Copy of order number DMS/PSA/37/2011 dated 28.09.2011
       issued by District Magistrate Srinagar regarding detention of
       one Tariq Ahmad Khan @ SanjMolvi seized from the office of
       accused Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) i.e. Trison Farms
       and Construction Pvt. Ltd.

D­6c   One blue Colour Diary “Evergreen Traders” seized from the
       premises of accused Altaf Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh (A­4) on
       03.06.17.

D­6e   A press Note containing anti India talks seized from the
       premises of accused Altaf Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh (A­4) on
       03.06.17.
                            42
D­6f   A program issued on 04.08.2016 under the signature of Syed
       Ali Shah Geelani, Chairman, All Party Hurriyat Conference
       seized from the premises of accused Altaf Ahmad Shah @
       Fantoosh (A­4) on 03.06.17.

D­6g   One paper containing details of amount received from
       chairman and others showing an amount of Rs.1,15,45,000/­
       seized from the premises of accused Altaf Ahmad Shah @
       Fantoosh (A­4) on 03.06.17.

D­7a   Two letters dated 10.03.2006 and 17.03.2006) written by the
       Area Commander of Hizbul Mujahideen (HM) to accused
       Nayeem Khan (A­5) seized from the house of accused nayeem
       Khan dated 03.06.2017.

D­7b   Letter heads of proscribed terrorist organization Lashkar e
       Toiba (LeT), Jammu & Kashmir seized from the house of
       accused Nayeem Khan (A­5) dated 03.06.2017.

D­7c   Letter written to Pakistan Embassy by accused Nayeem Khan
       (A­5) for recommending Visa to visit Pakistan seized from the
       house of accused Nayeem Khan dated 03.06.2017.

D­7d   Letter heads of National Front containing pro Pak and anti­
       India talks in urdu seized from the house of accused Nayeem
       Khan (A­5) dated 03.06.2017.

D­7e   One letter head of Mujahidin Jammu & Kashmir seized from
       the house of accused Nayeem Khan (A­5) dated 03.06.2017.

D­7g   A bunch of hand written and printed papers containing
       recommendation Letters written to Pakistan Embassy for Visa
       for students etc. seized from the house of accused Nayeem
       Khan (A­5) dated 03.06.2017.

D­9a   Hand written (Urdu) letters from LeT on the letter head titled
       as “Lashkar­e­Tuibah Jammu Kashmir Head Office
       Muzafarabad.” seized from the house of accused Shahid­ul­
       Islam @ AftabHilali Shah (A­3) on 03.06.2017.

D­9b   A photograph of Aftab Hilali Shah @ Shahid­ul­Islam holding
                               43

        AK­47 with other cadres seized from the residence of
        AftabHilali Shah @ Shahid­Ul­Islam (A­3) on 03.06.2017.

D­9c    Phograph of Aftab Hilali Shah @ Shahid­ul­Islam (A­3) with
        Proscribed terrorist organization Hizbul Mujahiddin Chief Syed
        Salahuddin (A­2) seized from the residence of AftabHilali Shah
        @ Shahid­Ul­Islam (A­3) on 03.06.2017.

D­9d    04 hand written loose papers seized from the residence of
        AftabHilali Shah @ Shahid­Ul­Islam (A­3) on 03.06.2017.

D­9e    One letter head in respect of All Parties Hurriyat Conference
        addressed to Deputy High Commissioner, High Commission of
        Pakistan New Delhi from Media advisor APHC, Advocate
        Shahidul Islam for issuing the Visa seized from the residence
        of Aftab Hilali Shah @ Shahid­Ul­Islam (A­3) on 03.06.2017.

D­9g    List of active militants (year 2016­17) of different outfits in the
        valley seized from the residence of Aftab Hilali Shah @ Shahid­
        Ul­Islam (A­3) on 03.06.2017.

D­11d   The photocopy of the hand written letter written by Afzal Guru
        to SAS Geelani seized from the premises of Mohd. Akbar
        Khandey @ Ayaz Akbar (A­7) on 04.06.17.

D­19    Letter no.22/NIA/CIV/CR/17/6547 dated 12.07.2017 from
        Sh. Kulbir Singh, AIG (CIV), PHQ, J&K Srinagar in reply NIA
        Letter No. RC­10/2017/NIA providing details pertaining to
        case RC­10/2017 to CIO NIA.
D­20    Scrutiny report of Inspector Vinay Kumar related to 07 CDs
        received vide letter no. 22/NIA/CIV/CR/17/6547 dated
        12.07.2017 from PHQ, J&K Srinagar along with photo album.
D­42    Letter dated 27.06.2017 from TV Today Network Ltd. India
        Today Group Mediaplex, Film City, Sector 16A, Noida to CIO,
        NIA forwarding exact, true and correct copy of India
        Television’s raw footage.
D­43    Letter no. RC­10/2017/NIA/DLI/7831 dated 14.06.2017 to
        DG, BSF, Lodhi Road, New Delhi for providing details of stone­
        pelting, burning of schools & college buildings and damage to
                              44

        Govt. property as reported in Kashmir Valley since July, 2016.
 D­44   Letter no. 26/Kmr/Ops(B)W/BSF/17/18758 dated 2/3
        August 2017 from Director General, BSF (Ops Directorate),
        New Delhi to CIO, NIA details of stone­pelting, burning of
        schools & college buildings and damage to Govt. property as
        reported in Kashmir Valley since July, 2016.
 D­63   Letter dated 28.08.2017 from Nodal Officer Vodafone, New
        Delhi to CIO NIA forwarding certified copies of CDR, CAF and
        65B Certificate in respect of mobile Nos. 9796158864 &
        9811813796.
 D­65   Letter dated 01.12.2017 from Nodal Officer, Reliance Jio
        Infocomm. Ltd., Delhi to CIO, NIA forwarding certified copies of
        CDR, CAF and 65B Certificate in respect of mobile nos.
        7006046476, 7006208314 & 7889521803.
 D­70   The transcripts of the audio­video of sting operation by the
        reporters of India Today related to accused Mohd. Nayeem
        Khan (A­5).
 D­71   The transcripts of the audio­video of sting operation by the
        reporters of India Today related to accused Farooq Ahmad Dar
        @ Bitta Karate (A­6).
 D­75   Letter No. 22/NIA­III/CIV/CR/17/10275­76 dated 23.09.2017
        from Sh. Kulbir Singh AIG (CIV), J&K PHQ, Srinagar to CIO
        NIA forwarding details of accused persons of the case.

D­127   Letter No. I&O/IMS/T­ACT/3/2015 NIA/10011 dated
        03.08.2017 from Sh. Vishwas Kumar Singh, (W­196), ASP,
        I&O, NIA New Delhi to CIO, NIA.

D­130   Seizure memo dated 16.08.2017 in respect of search and
        seizure of articles/documents found from the premises of
        Ghulam Mohd. Rather@Gulla (W­29).

D­132   Seizure memo dated 16.08.2017 in respect of search and
        seizure of articles/documents found from the premises of
        Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt (W­29).

D­132a Various miscellaneous papers related financial transactions
       seized from the premises of Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt (W­29) on
                              45

         16.08.2017.

D­132b One small diary title Arun (11) Notes Pad seized from the
       premises of Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt (W­29) on 16.08.2017.

D­132c One green colour diary of 2009 seized from the premises of
       Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt (W­29) on 16.08.2017.

D­132e One brown colour diary of 2010 seized from the premises of
       Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt (W­29) on 16.08.2017.

D­132f   One dark brown colour diary mark Frankford (A division of
         Ultramark group) seized from the premises of Ghulam Mohd.
         Bhatt (W­29) on 16.08.2017.

D­133    Seizure memo dated 16.08.2017 in respect of search and
         seizure of articles/documents found from the premises of
         Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt@Mohd. Akbar (W­29).

D­135    Seizure memo dated 16.08.2017 in respect of search and
         seizure of articles/documents found from the premises of Dr.
         Peerzada Kaiser Habeeb Hakeem.

D­135a One transparent file folder of Trison International group of
       companies seized from the premises of Dr. Peerzada Kaiser
       Habeeb Hakeem on 16.08.2017.
D­135b One orange colour file folder of account statement of M/s
       Three Star Enterprises for the year of 2005­06 seized from the
       premises of Dr. Peerzada Kaiser Habeeb Hakeem on
       16.08.2017.
D­135c One Khaki colour folder of Johar Enterprises stamp paper file
       no.47/P seized from the premises of Dr. Peerzada Kaiser
       Habeeb Hakeem on 16.08.2017.
D­137    Seizure memo dated 26.08.2017 in respect of search and
         seizure of articles/documents found from the office of Zahoor
         Ahmad Shah Watali (A­10) i.e. Trison Farms and Construction
         Pvt. Ltd.
D­137a One ledger and cash book of Trison Farms and construction
       Pvt. Ltd. Baba Dharam Das Complex, Khayam Srinagar for the
                              46

         year 2010­11 seized from the office of Trison farms and
         construction private Limited on 26.08.2017.
D­137b One ledger and cash book of M/S Yasir Enterprises, Baghat
       Barzullah, Sanat Nagar, Srinagar for the year of 2010­11
       seized from the office of Trison farms and construction private
       Limited on 26.08.2017.
D­137c One ledger and cash book of M/S Three Y, Sanat Nagar,
       Srinagar for the year 2010­11 seized from the office of Trison
       farms and construction private Limited on 26.08.2017.
D­137d One ledger and cash book of M/S Tirson International for the
       year 2010­11 seized from the office of Trison farms and
       construction private Limited on 26.08.2017.
D­137f   A bunch of documents related to Enforcement Directorate
         seized from the office of Trison farms and construction private
         Limited on 26.08.2017.
D­154    Letter report no. CFSL­2017/D­993/3953 dated 06.11.2017
         from CFSL, (CBI), Lodhi Road, New Delhi to CIO NIA
         containing handwriting examination report alonwith original
         seizure seized from the house of Ghulam Mohd. Bhat r/o
         Tarahama.
D­167    Memoramdum for specimen voice sample in respect of accused
         Mohd. Nayeem Khan (A­5) dated 31.07.2017.
D­168    Memorandum for specimen voice smaple in respect of accused
         Farooq Ahmed Dar @ Bitta Karate (A­6) dated 31.07.2017.

D­169    Letter No. I&O/IMS/DE/33/2017/NIA dated 29.11.2017 from,
         Inspector, IMS, NIA New Delhi to CIO NIA alongwith
         transcripts of conversation and videos.

D­183    Technical analysis report in respect of accused Farooq Ahmad
         Dar @ Bitta Karate (A­6) forwarded vide Inter office note
         No.RC­10/2017/NIA/DLI/reports/1351 dated 10.12.2017.

D­184    Report on Protest calendar taken out from the open source
         alongwith source path forwarded vide Inter office note No.RC­
         10/2017/NIA/DLI/reports/1351 dated 10.12.2017.

D­197    Letter No.D.III.a/2017­Ops (NIA) dated 25.07.2017 from 2 I/C
                             47

        (Ops/Int.), Office of Inspector General CRPF, Brein Nishat,
        Srinagar, J&K to CIO NIA.

D­204   Original agreement documents between M/s Trison Farms and
        Mr. Nawal Kishore Kapoor dated 07.11.2014.

D­205   Notice under section 43 (F) UA(P) Act dated 30.11.2017 to
        Nawal     Kishore    Kapoor     (W­28)    for    furnishing
        information/document from Insp T TBhutia, NIa, New Delhi.

D­206   Reply dated 4.12.201of Notice under section 43(f) of UA(P) Act
        dated 30.11.2017 from Nawal Kishore Kapoor (W­28).

D­207   Notice to witness under Section Cr.P.C.& 43 (F) of UA (P) Act
        dated 07.11.2017 to CVO, SBI, Mumbai to provide bank
        account details of account no.274724019 of Nawal Kishore
        Kapoor (W­28) from Sh Jyotiraditya, DC.

D­208   Letter No. Gen/2017­18/46 dated 18.11.2017 from Asst.
        General Manager, SBI NRI Branch, Jalandhar, Punjab
        forwarding certified copies of account opening form and
        account statement of account number 20074724019 of Nawal
        Kishore Kapoor (W­28).

D­211   Letter No. F.No. ITO/W­3(4) Antg/2017­18/3540 dated
        20.10.2017/11.12.2017 from Income Tax Officer, Anantnag
        containing income tax return details for last six years in
        respect of accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (A­10).

D­212   Production cum receipt memo dated 17.11.2017 related to
        documents produced by Naval Kishore Kapoor (W­28) along
        with documents.

D­220   Production cum Receipt Memo dated 14.12.2017 related to
        production of copy of text audit reports and audit financial
        statements of Ms. Trison Farms and Construction Pvt. Ltd.
        Etc. along with received documents.

D­222   Inter office Note No.I&O/IMS/DE/33/2017/NIA/722 dated
        17.01.2017 from Inspector S.K. Tyagi, IMS to CIO NIA
        forwarding 03 video clips Indentifying the voice of Hafiz Saeed
                              48

        along certificate 65 B of IEA.

D­224   Letter No.F. No. T­3/1/FE/SRZO/2013 dated 12.12.17 from
        Sh. Sharad Kumar, (W­1) Assistant Director, Directorate of
        Enforcement, Government of India, Durani House Rajbagh,
        Srinagar to Sh. Ajeet Singh, SP NIA (W­229) forwarding
        alongwith enclosures therein proceedings against accused
        Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali (A­10) under the FEMA Act.

D­248   Letter No. RC­10/2017/NIA/DLI/354 dated 11.01.2018 from
        Sh. Rajesh Kumar, Inspector NIA (W­209) to CIO forwarding of
        report on international linkage, India Hit report and report on
        Pakistani based Hurriyat representative along with 65­B
        Certificate.
D­252   No. RC­10/2017/NIA/DLI/646 dated 15.01.2018 received
        from SI Sangram Singh, NIA (W­220) pertaining to transcripts
        of downloaded videos.

D­256   Letter No. RC­10/2017/NIA/DLI/5706 dated 26.12.2017 to
        GM (CM), Nodal Officer, BSNL, 4th Floor, Telephone Exchange,
        Trikuta Nagar, Near RBI Jammu, J&K from CIO NIA to provide
        CDRs, CAF and 65 Certificate of mobile nos. mentioned in the
        letter.

D­257   Certified copies of CDRs, CAF and Form 65 B of mobile
        numbers       9419011561,   9419504376,     9419075468,
        9419547999, 9419006355, 9419008421, 9419001097 &
        9469037774 (BSNL J&K) received from BSNL, J&K.

D­259   Letter of Nodal Officer Bharti Airtel Ltd. Forwarding certified
        copies of CDR, CAF of mobile numbers 9596070530,
        9906519595, 8494071470 & 8491001561 alongwith certificate
        u/s 65B of Indian Evidence Act.”


                           (emphasis supplied in italics and bold)

21. During the hearing, emphasis was placed by the learned

Attorney General on documents D­132, D­132(a)/23, D­3/6,
                                49

D­3g/20, D­3h/28, D­3j to D­3j/5, D­9b, D­9c, D­154 and D­

185/10. Besides these documents, our attention was also

invited to the statements of Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt (W­29)

dated 30th August, 2017, and 23rd November, 2017, as well as

the redacted statements of protected witnesses (“Charlie”,

“Romeo”, “Alpha”, “Gamma”, “Pie”, “Potter”, “Harry” and “xxx”)

recorded under Section 164, which have now been taken on

record by the Designated Court in terms of order dated 11 th

January, 2019. Notably, the order passed by the Designated

Court permitting redaction of those statements has not been

assailed by the respondent. In our opinion, the High Court,

having noticed that the Designated Court had not looked at

the stated statements presented in a sealed cover, coupled

with the fact that the application under Section 44 filed by the

Investigating Agency was pending before the Designated Court,

and before finally answering the prayer for grant of bail,

should have directed the Designated Court to first decide the

said   application   and   if   allowed,   consider   the   redacted

statements, to form its opinion as to whether there are
                               50

reasonable   grounds for believing that the accusation made

against the respondent is prima facie true or otherwise. For, in

terms of Section 43D, it is the bounden duty of the Court to

peruse the case diary and/or the report made under Section

173 of the Code and all other relevant material/evidence

produced by the Investigating Agency, for recording its

opinion. We could have relegated the parties before the High

Court but the counsel appearing for the respondent, on

instructions, stated that the respondent would prefer to await

the decision of the Designated Court and, depending on the

outcome of the application under Section 44 of the Act, would

contest the proceedings before this Court itself. Accordingly, at

the request of the respondent, we kept the present appeal

pending. Since the Designated Court has finally disposed of

the application preferred by the Investigating Agency vide

order dated 11th January, 2019, the correctness whereof has

not   been   challenged   by    the   respondent,   the   redacted

statements of the concerned protected witnesses have been

taken on record.
                            51
22. Accordingly, we have analysed the matter not only in

light of the accusations in the FIR and the charge­sheet or the

police   report   made   under   Section   173,   but   also   the

documentary evidence and statements of the prospective

witnesses recorded under Sections 161 and 164, including the

redacted statements of the protected witnesses, for considering

the prayer for bail.

23. As regards the redacted statements, objection of the

respondent was that the certificate given by the competent

authority is not in conformity with the certificate required to

be given in terms of Section 164(4) of Cr.P.C. This objection

has been justly countered by the learned Attorney General

with the argument that the objection borders on the issue of

admissibility of the said statements. We find force in the

submission that the issue regarding admissibility of the

statements and efficacy of the certificates given by the

competent authority, appended to the redacted statements

would be a matter for trial and subject to the evidence in

reference to Section 463 of Cr.P.C. and cannot be overlooked
                                          52

         at this stage. Viewed thus, the exposition in the case of

         Ramchandra Keshav Adke (dead) by LRs. and Ors. Vs.

         Govind Joti Chavare and Ors.18, in paragraph 25 of the

         reported judgment will be of no avail to the respondent.

         24. After having analyzed the documents and the statements

         forming part of the charge­sheet as well as the redacted

         statements now taken on record, we disagree with the

         conclusion recorded by the High Court. In our opinion, taking

         into account the totality of the report made under Section 173

         of the Code and the accompanying documents and the

         evidence/material already presented to the Court, including

         the redacted statements of the protected witnesses recorded

         under Section 164 of the Code, there are reasonable grounds

         to believe that the accusations made against the respondent

         are prima facie true. Be it noted, further investigation is in

         progress. We may observe that since the prayer for bail is to

         be rejected, it may not be appropriate for us to dilate on

         matters which may eventually prejudice the respondent


18
     (1975) 1 SCC 559 = AIR 1975 SC 915
                           53

(Accused No.10) in any manner in the course of the trial.

Suffice it to observe that the material produced by the

Investigating Agency thus far (pending further investigation)

shows the linkage of the respondent (Accused No.10) with A­3,

A­4, A­5 and A­6 and, likewise, linkages between the

respondent (Accused No.10) and A­3 to A­12, as revealed from

the CDR analysis. The Chart A showing the inter­linkages of

the named accused inter se and Chart B showing the inter­

linkages of the named accused with others and the frequency

of their interaction on phone during the relevant period are as

under:
54
55
                               56
25. The summing up of the outcome of the investigation done

until filing of the first report is noted in paragraph 17.10,

which reads thus:

     “17.10 SUMMING UP:
     Hence, as has been discussed above, the investigation has
     established that:­

     1.   The terrorist and Hurriyat leaders have a close nexus with the
          active militants, OGWs and stone­pelters in Kashmir Valley.
          They are closely coordinating with each other and have formed
          a terrorist gang to achieve their common goal of secession
          from the Union of India by way of an armed rebellion.

     2.   To fuel the secessionist activities, Pakistan is providing funds
          to the Hurriyat leaders and the same are channelized through
          Hawala, LoC trade and other means. Sometimes, the funds
          are provided directly by Pakistan High Commission in India.

     3.   Hurriyat has convenor/representative(s) in Pakistan who liaise
          with Pakistan agencies and also with the Kashmir Cell of the
          ISI, the United Jehad Council and the Jamaat­Ud­Dawah.

     4.   The benefits drawn out of the LoC trade are reaching the
          Hurriyat leaders for fuelling the unrest in the Valley.

     5.   Funds are raised locally by way of collecting donations from
          the common people in the name of Zakat and Betul Maal.

     6.   The Hurriyat leaders are working in a systematic and
          organized manner as per the instructions of their Pakistani
          handlers by setting up a network of their cadres at village
          level, block level and District level.

     7.   The High Commission of Pakistan organizes functions and
          meetings in New Delhi, to which the Hurriyat leaders from
          Kashmir are invited and they are given instructions and funds
          so that the unrest in the Valley can be fuelled in an organized
          manner.
                               57
    8.    The Hurriyat leaders are raising funds from the Pakistani
          establishments/agencies in the name of helping the youth
          injured/killed during the action of security forces.

    9.    The families of the active militants and killed militants are
          supported by the Hurriyat leaders financially, socially as well
          as by arranging for the higher education of their wards in
          Pakistan.

    10. The Hurriyat leaders attend the funeral of killed militants,
        eulogise them as ‘martyrs’, hail their anti­India activities as
        ‘gallant’ and deliver speeches against the Government of India
        and motivate the youth of Kashmir to join militancy for the so­
        called freedom of Kashmir by way of an armed struggle. They
        misguide the common man by spreading false propaganda
        against the Government of India.

    11. To further this conspiracy, the Hurriyat leaders, the
        terrorists/terror organizations and stone­pelters are working
        in tandem and they are getting financial and logistic support
        from Pakistan.”

26. The     accusation     and      charge   against    the   accused,

including the respondent, is in paragraph 18 of the report

which reads thus:

    “18. CHARGE:

    18.1 In the instant case, there is sufficient evidence in the
    form of incriminating documents, statements of witnesses
    and digital evidence that establishes beyond any reasonable
    doubt that the accused persons i.e. the Hurriyat leaders,
    terrorists and stone­pelters have been orchestrating violence
    and unrest in Jammu & Kashmir as a part of well­planned
    conspiracy under the overall patronage and financial support
    of Pakistani Establishment and agencies and that all the
    accused persons were acting in pursuance of their common
    goal i.e. to achieve secession of the State of Jammu &
    Kashmir from the Union of India by waging a war against the
    Government of India.
                           58
18.2 The documentary evidences seized during various
searches such as letters of the banned terrorist
organizations seeking financial assistance from the Hurriyat
leaders, blank letterheads of terror organisations,
conversations between Hafiz Saeed @ Burhan Wani, Hafiz
Saeed and Asiya Andrabi, support extended by Hafiz Saeed
and Syed Salahuddin to the protest calendars issued by the
Hurriyat leaders, all these show that Hurriyat and terror
organizations are working hand in glove. Their common
objective is to attain secession of Jammu & Kashmir from
the Union of India and to achieve this objective, they have
established a network of cadres throughout Kashmir Valley
who motivate and incite the youth to attack all symbols of
Indian authority, especially Indian security forces who have
been deployed there for the maintenance of law and order.
To achieve their objective, they are mobilizing funds from all
possible sources. They are getting funds from Pakistani
Establishment through the Pakistan High Commission;
the funds are being remitted to India from offshore
locations through hawala and accused A­10 Zahoor
Ahmad Shah Watali is an important conduit for the
same. They are raising funds through local donations such
as Zakaat & Betulmaal, etc. They are generating funds by
resorting to illegalities and irregularities such as under­
invoicing and cash­dealings in LoC barter trade. All this
money is used to fund stone­pelting, to support the families
of killed and active militants and to help pellet victims and to
fuel terrorism in Jammu & Kashmir with the ultimate
objective of breaking Jammu & Kashmir away from the
Union of India.

18.3 They are all working in sync to achieve their greater
goal. The nexus between the Pakistani agencies, Hurriyat
leaders and terror organizations is amply substantiated by
the chats retrieved from their email accounts, WhatsApp,
Facebook profiles and Websites and also from the
statements of the protected witnesses. Their nexus with
hawala conduit, Zahoor Watali is also substantiated by
the documentary and digital evidence.

18.4 Though the Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir, 1957,
declares the State of Jammu & Kashmir to be an integral
part of India, and the said pronouncement is irrevocable, the
                           59

accused persons have been incessantly engaged in violence
and carrying out subversive and secessionist activities in
Jammu & Kashmir by waging a war against the Government
of India.

18.5 Hence, as discussed in the foregoing paras, the
evidence collected during investigation, prima facie,
establishes a case against all the accused persons for
conspiring to wage war against the Government of India by
way of establishing a network of cadres of banned terrorist
organizations LeT & HM as well as cadres in the garb of so­
called political front viz., the All Parties Hurriyat Conference.

18.6 The scrutiny of the documents and the recovery
from the digital devices have provided a large data of
incriminating material in which the above accused A­3
to A­12 are a part of a gang who with the help of A­1 &
A­2 and others collaborate and coordinate with each
other to form strategies and action plan to launch
massive violent protests, hartaals, bandhs, strikes,
processions, demonstrations during which stone pelting
is organised on security forces and government
establishments. These documents and digital evidences
clearly indicates an action plan to instigate general public to
observe strikes, hold anti­India protests through press
releases, social media and use of Immams and mosques. The
recovery of protest calendars from A­4 and the direct impact
of such orchestrated protests have led to enormous loss of
life and property which have been explained in detail.

18.7 The investigation have revealed linkage of A­1
and A­2 with A­3 to A­12 in a web of directions being
passed through e­mails, SMSs, WhatsApp, videos and
other means of communication to form a clear nexus
between the above accused and the leaders of Hurriyat
Conference. The recovery of a number of incriminating
videos in which the separatists leaders and accused are
exhorting the general public, sympathizing with the
militants, seeking support and donations to carry out
militant activities and instigating general public, especially
youth to raise a revolt and launch violence against security
forces and wage a war against Government of India, is
clearly established.
                          60
18.8 The secessionists, especially the leaders of the
Hurriyat Conference and the accused are a part of the
terrorist designs to raise funds to propagate their ideology
and agenda of secessionism and subversive activities
prejudicial to the law of the land. The investigations have
clearly brought out that the Hurriyat has formed a well­
developed network of cadres with district presidents, block
level leaders and workers who collect donations from public,
businessmen, apple growers and draw gains from profits of
unregulated LoC trade. The money is routed through a
complex system of hawala transfers and cash couriers
using conduits such as A­10 who gathers money from
Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi and through
fake and bogus companies floated in UAE and other
countries and delivers the funds to the Hurriyat
leadership for subversive activities.

      The documents recovered and statements of witnesses
to that effect also clearly establish the mechanism of funding
and complicity of the accused in generating funds for its
further use in organizing violent protests, assistance to the
militants and creating an atmosphere of terror, chaos and
uncertainty.

18.9 During the investigation about the past conduct of the
accused, it is ascertained that as A­1 is a designated
terrorist being the head of proscribed terror organisation
Lashker­e­Toiba, A­2 is the head of proscribed organisation
Hizb­Ul­Mujahideen. A­3, A­4, A­5, A­6, A­8, A­9 are former
militants with various cases of terrorism against them and
have been detained under the Public Safety Act on
numerous occasions. A­10 is a known hawala dealer and
financer and has a number of cases against him which
are being investigated by sister investigation agencies.

18.10 The CDR Linkages and technical analysis of
social media clearly establish that the accused A­3 to A­
10 are in constant communication with each other and
there is a clear meeting of minds of the above accused
in hatching the conspiracy with the support of A­1 and
A­2 as well as other secessionist leaders of the Hurriyat
                           61

Conference and other proscribed terrorist organizations
of Jammu & Kashmir.

18.11 This case is a terror conspiracy case in which the
terrorist act is not a single act of terror like an incident or
series of incidents. It is a terrorist act as defined under UA
(P) Act­1967 wherein the intention is to threaten the unity,
integrity and sovereignty of India by striking terror in the
people or any section of people in India by overawing by
means of criminal force or show of criminal force causing
death of any public functionary or attempts to cause death
of any public functionary. The terrorist gang of the accused
above, have also committed terrorist act as they have
disrupted the essential services and daily life of the citizenry
of Jammu & Kashmir and have caused damage and
destruction of property in India intended to be used in
connection with any other purpose of the Government of
India, any State Government or any of their agencies.

18.12 The analysis of documentary evidences seized during
the searches, the statement of witnesses and the
incriminating material recovered from the digital media
seized from the accused clearly bring out the fact that with
the active      support    and connivance       of Pakistani
establishments, Pakistani agencies, terrorist groups
operating from Pakistani soil, the above accused have
hatched a criminal conspiracy to engage in violence and
carry out subversive and secessionist activities in Jammu &
Kashmir and to achieve their objectives, have established a
network of cadres who are funded through Pakistani
agencies via hawala dealers, local conduits and also by
raising funds through local donations and by generating
illegal profits through the barter LoC trade. The accused
have used these funds for organised stone pelting through a
set charter of protests and demonstrations which are issued
in the form of “protest calendars” on regular basis resulting
in an atmosphere of chaos, terror, uncertainty and fear in
the State of Jammu & Kashmir. The main aim and objective
of this entire conspiracy is to secede the State of Jammu &
Kashmir, which is an integral part of India, from the Union
of India and wage war against the Government of India to
meet the objectives.
                         62
18.13 Hence, the accused persons are liable for prosecution
under the following sections of law:­
                          63

          Name of       Liable for prosecution under sections
Accuse    Accused       of law
d
 A­1     Hafiz          section 120B, 121, 121A &124A of IPC,
         Muhammad       section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 & 40
         Saeed          of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
                        1967.
A­2      Mohd. Yusuf    section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Shah @ Syed    section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 & 40
         Salahuddin     of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
                        1967.
A­3      Aftab Ahmad    section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Shah @         section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 & 40 of
         Aftab Hilali   Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
         Shah @         1967.
         Shahid­ul­
         Islam
A­4      Altaf Ahmad    section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Shah @         section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 & 40 of
         Fantoosh       Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
                        1967.
A­5      Nayeem         section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Ahmad Khan     section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 & 40 of
                        Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
                        1967.
A­6      Farooq         section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Ahmad Dar      section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 & 40 of
         @ Bitta        Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
         Karate         1967.
A­7      Md. Akbar      section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Khanday        section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 & 40 of
                        Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
                        1967.
A­8      Raja           section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Mehrajuddin    section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 & 40 of
         Kalwal         Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
                        1967.
A­9      Bashir         section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Ahmad Bhat     section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 & 40 of
         @ Peer         Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
         Saifullah      1967.
A­10     Zahoor         section 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of IPC,
         Ahmad Shah     section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 39 & 40 of
         Watali         Unlawful Activities(Prevention) Act,1967.
A­11     Kamran         section 120B, 121 & 121A of IPC,
         Yusuf          section 13, 16, 18 & 20 of Unlawful
                        Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
A­12     Javed          section 120B, 121 & 121A of IPC,
         Ahmad Bhat     section 13, 16, 18 & 20 of Unlawful
                              64


     18.14 The sanction for prosecution under section 45(1)(i)(ii)
     of the UA (P) Act in respect of the accused persons for the
     offences under section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of
     the UA (P) Act and under section 196 CrPC for the offences
     under section 121, 121A and 124A of IPC has been accorded
     by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India vide
     order No.11011/26/2017/IS­IV dated 16th January, 2018.
     The sanction for prosecution under section 188 CrPC has
     also been accorded by Government of India vide order
     No.11011/26/2017/IS­IV dated 16th January, 2018 for the
     offences committed outside of India.

     18.15 It is therefore, prayed that, the Hon’ble Court may
     please take cognizance of the offences under sections 120B,
     121, 121A & 124A of the IPC, sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20,
     38, 39 & 40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
     in respect of the accused A­1 to A­12 (As per the mentioned
     in para 18.13), issue process to the accused persons and try
     the aforesaid accused persons and punish them in
     accordance with law.”
                           (emphasis supplied in italics and bold)

27. The charge against respondent is not limited to Section

17 of the 1967 Act regarding raising funds for terrorist acts

but also in reference to Sections 13,16,18,20,38,39 and 40 of

the 1967 Act. Section 13 is in Chapter II of the 1967 Act. The

special provisions regarding bail under Section 43D(5),

however, are attracted in respect of the offences punishable

under Chapters IV and VI, such as Sections 16,17,18,20,38,39

and 40 of the 1967 Act. Sections 39 and 40 form part of

Chapter VI, whereas other sections (except Section 13) form
                            65

part of Chapter IV to which the subject bail provisions are

applicable, mandating the recording of satisfaction by the

Court that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the

accusation against such person is prima facie true.

28. Reverting to the documents on which emphasis has been

placed, document D­132 is the Seizure Memo of properties

seized from the premises of Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt (W­29),

the then Munshi/Accountant of the respondent (Accused

No.10).    Document D­132(a) is the green page document,

seized during the search of the residence of said Ghulam

Mohammad Bhatt, containing         information about foreign

contributions and expenditures of the respondent (Accused

No.10)    during   2015/2016.    Whether    this   document    is

admissible in evidence would be a matter for trial. Be that as it

may, besides the said document, the statement of Ghulam

Mohammad Bhatt (W­29) has been recorded on 30 th August,

2017 and 1st November, 2017. Whether the credibility of the

said witness should be accepted cannot be put in issue at this

stage. The statement does make reference to the diaries
                             66

recovered from his residence showing transfer of substantial

cash amounts to different parties, which he has explained by

stating that cash transactions were looked after by the

respondent (Accused No.10) himself.      He had admitted the

recovery of the green colour document from his residence,

bearing signature of the respondent (Accused No.10) and

mentioning about the cash amounts received and disbursed

during the relevant period between 2015 and 2016. The

accusation against the respondent (Accused No.10) is that

accused A­3 to A­10 are       part of the All Parties Hurriyat

Conference which calls itself a political front, whereas their

agenda is to create an atmosphere conducive to the goal of

cessation of J & K from the Union of India. The role attributed

to the respondent (Accused No.10) is that of being part of the

larger conspiracy and to act as a fund raiser and finance

conduit. Ample material has been collected to show the

linkages between the Hurriyat leaders of the J & K and

terrorists/terrorist   organizations   and   their   continuous

activities to wage war against Government of India. Regarding
                               67

the funding of terrorist activities in J & K and, in particular,

the involvement of the respondent (Accused No.10), the

charge­sheet mentions as under:

     “17.6 Funding of Secessionist and Terrorist Activities in
     Jammu & Kashmir:
     If publicity and propaganda is oxygen for the terror groups,
     terror financing is its life­blood. Terror financing provides
     funds for recruitment, operationalization of training and
     training camps, procurement of arms and ammunition,
     operational cost of planning and resources for terrorist acts,
     running of underground networks, well­planned stone
     pelting, school burnings, targeted attacks, provision of legal
     support for terrorists and over­ground workers facing
     judicial process, ex­gratia payment for militants killed in
     terrorist operations, regular payments to the families of
     terrorists and militants killed or convicted, funds for
     propaganda to clergy as well as relief measures for civilian
     population and also in case of natural disasters. The
     investigation in the case has revealed that the secessionists
     are mobilizing funds from all possible sources to fuel unrest
     and support the on­going secessionist and terrorist activities
     in Jammu & Kashmir.

     17.6.1 Funding from Pakistan:
     i)    The Hurriyat leaders are receiving funds from Pakistan
     through conduits and also from the Pakistan High
     Commission directly. It was substantiated by an
     incriminating document seized from the house of
     Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt druing search. Ghulam Mohd.
     Bhatt worked as the cashier­cum­accountant with
     accused A­10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, a known
     Hawala conduit. The document clearly shows that
     accused A­10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali was receiving
     money from Accused A­1 Hafiz Saeed (Head of Jamaat­
     ud­Dawa), from the ISI, from the Pakistan High
     Commission at New Delhi and also from a source based
     in Dubai. Accused A­10 was remitting the same to the
     Hurriyat leaders, separatists and stone­pelters of
     Jammu & Kashmir. The said document has been
                          68

maintained in regular course of his business and is
signed by accused Zahoor Watali himself. This
document clearly shows that Hurriyat leaders were
receiving funds from Pakistan through the officials of
Pakistan High Commission and through accused A­10
Zahoor Watali.
      The signature of Accused A­10 Zahoor Watali has
also been verified and as per the expert report, his
signature on the questioned document matches with his
specimen handwriting as well as his admitted
handwriting.

ii)    Further, the role of Pakistan in funding secessionist
activities also surfaced in the scrutiny of the un­edited
version of the audio/video furnished by the office of India
Today T.V. News Channel wherein accused A­5 Nayeem
Khan admits that the secessionists and terrorists of the
Valley are receiving financial support from Pakistan and
would have received approximately Rs.200 crores to organise
anti­India protests and agitations after the killing of Burhan
Wani, the Commander of the proscribed terror organisation
Hizb­ul­Mujahiddin. He further speaks about funds reaching
them from Saudi Arabia/Dubai through Hawala via Delhi
(Balimaran/Chandni Chowk). He admits that S.A.S. Geelani
(Chairman, APHC­G), Mirwaiz Umar Farooq (APHC­M) and
Yasin Malik (JKLF) are receiving funds from Pakistan. He
further admits the pivotal role played by the Pakistan High
Commission to convey and receive instructions from
Pakistan. Nayeem Khan also stated that the accused Hafiz
Mohd Saeed has supported S.A.S. Geelani, Chairman,
APHC­G by paying at least 10­12 crores during anti­India
agitation after killing of Burhan Wani. Accused Nayeem
Khan further admitted that, if funded, he can fuel unrest in
the Valley any time.

iii)  Similarly, the scrutiny of the audio/video of the sting
operation also reveals accused A­6 Farooq Ahmad Dar
Bitta Karate admitted that the funds are being sent by
Pakistan to the secessionists and terrorists in the
Kashmir Valley including him for organizing forcible
closures, anti­India protests and processions and stone­
pelting on the security forces. He further claimed that he has
                           69

his cadres in every part of Kashmir who can act on his call
at any given point of time and fuel unrest in the Valley.
When given an offer of financial support, accused Bitta
Karate put forth a demand of Rs.70 crores for fuelling unrest
upto six months.
      The voice samples of Nayeem Khan and Farooq
Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate have been forensically examined
and the CFSL report has confirmed the match with their
voices.

iv)   Further, the investigation has revealed that the senior­
most officials of the High Commission of Pakistan were in
regular contact with the Hurriyat leaders. The High
Commission of Pakistan in New Delhi used to organise
functions and meetings in New Delhi, to which the Hurriyat
leaders from Kashmir were invited and they were given
instructions and funds on a regular basis. These funds
were given to various allied groups of the APHC and
investigation have revealed that a First Secretary level
officer of Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi
would act as a channel and A­10 Zahoor Ahmed Shah
Watali would act as a courier to deliver the funds to
the Hurriyat leadership. These funds as explained
above were used to foment the secessionist and
separatist activities and unrest in the valley in an
organized manner. One such invitation card from the
Pakistan High Commission was seized from the house of A­6
Farooq Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate:­

            On the occasion of the National Day
             Pakistan High Commissioner and
                    Mrs. Salman Bashir
          Request the pleasure of the company of
                  Mr. Farooq Ahmed Dar
                      At a Reception
     on Friday, 22 March 2013 from 1930 to 2100 hrs.

Venue:                                    R.S.V.P.
2/50­G, Shantipath, Tel.                011­24121819
Chanakyapuri, New Dehli                 Fax 011­26872339

Dress: National/Lounge Suit/Uniform    E­mail:pakhcnd@gmail.com
                          70

              (Please bring this card with you)


Investigation has also established that the accused A­4 was
in direct contact with the High Commissioner of Pakistan in
New Delhi and would apprise him about the situation in
Jammu & Kashmir.

17.6.2 Funding from Terrorist Organisations based in
Pakistan:
During the course of investigation, it is also ascertained that
the separatists and secessionists of Jammu & Kashmir were
also receiving money from the terrorists and terrorist
organizations operating out of Pakistan/PoK. The
incriminating document seized from the house of
Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt who worked as a cashier­cum­
accountant with accused A­10 Zahoor Watali shows
that Zahoor Watali received money from accused A­1
Hafiz Saeed, Head of JuD and Chief of proscribed terror
organisation Lashkar­e­Toiba and remitted it to the
Hurriyat leaders espousing the cause of secession of
Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India.

17.6.3 Local Donations/Zakat/Baitulmal:
During the course of investigation, it is established that the
Hurriyat has its network of cadres at districts and local
levels. There are District Presidents and block level leaders
who have the responsibility to raise the funds through
donation during the religious festivals and month of
Ramzan. In a well­established system, the receipt books are
printed and funds are collected from shopkeepers,
businessmen and residents of Kashmir. The money is also
collected to become a member of the Tehreek­e­Hurriyat.
Selected members are made as Rukuns and are tasked to
propagate the separatist ideology of Hurriyat. These Rukuns
act as foot soldiers and ensure that bandhs and hartaals are
successful. They also lead the processions and participate in
stone pelting.

Investigation also established that various District
Presidents collect Rs.5 to 10 Lac per district as Baitulmal.
Funds are also collected from apple­growers and
businessmen who are compelled to donate to Hurriyat
                          71

central office. This money is used for administrative and
operational purposes of organizing protests and strikes as
well as for aid to militants and their families.

The seizure of unaccounted receipts of an amount of
Rs.1,15,45,000/­ from accused A­4 Altaf Ahmad Shah
Fantoosh also shows that money is being raised by way of
donations. Similarly, records pertaining to the collection of
funds were also seized from the house of accused A­8
Mehrajuddin Kalwal, who was also the District President of
Tehreek­e­Hurriyat for Srinagar and Ganderbal.

Further, during the course of investigation, it is also
established that the Hurriyat leadership appeals to the
public to contribute money generously by way of donations
for their so­called freedom movement. This is clearly
reflected in the Website of the Hurriyat Conference viz.
www.huriyatconference.com, which shows a message from
S.A.S. Geelani “Help the families of martyrs and
prisoners….. people should come forward for donations
in the month of Ramadan as the number of people
affected by this movement is large”.
This substantiates that Hurriyat is raising funds through
donations and using the same to fuel secessionist activities
and to support the families of killed and jailed terrorists.

17.6.4 LOC Trade:
During the course of investigation, it has been established
that the secessionist and separatist leaders are raising funds
through LoC trade by way of directing the Kashmiri traders
to do under­invoicing of the goods which were imported
through LoC barter trade. They sell the goods to the traders
in Delhi and a part of the profit of the same is shared with
the Hurriyat leaders and other separatists, which in turn is
used on anti­India propaganda, for mobilizing the public to
organise protests and stone­pelting and to support families
of killed/jailed militants. The hawala operators based in
Srinagar, New Delhi and other parts of the country and
abroad are being used to transfer the funds so generated.
The investigation has revealed that the funds are generated
by resorting to sale of third­party goods, under­weighing,
under­invoicing, large­scale dealings in cash and committing
irregularities in maintenance of records. This modus­
                               72

      operandi leads to generation of huge cash surpluses on the
      Indian side which are then channelized through several
      formal banking channels as well as cash couriers and
      hawala dealers to the separatists and secessionists active in
      Jammu & Kashmir.

      Investigation has revealed that a significant number of
      traders engaged in cross LoC trade have relatives across the
      border who are closely associated with banned terrorist
      organizations, especially Hizb­Ul­Mujahideen. Investigation
      has also revealed that certain ex­militants and their family
      members are using proxy companies and are registered as
      traders. During the course of investigation, use of LoC trade
      route for smuggling of contraband and weapons has also
      come to light. A separate investigation is underway regarding
      the irregularities in the LoC trade.

      17.6.5 Hawala:
      Apart from the above mentioned sources and channels, the
      secessionists depend heavily on the hawala network and
      conduits to bring money from off­shore locations to India to
      fuel­anti­India activities in Jammu & Kashmir.

i)    During the course of investigation, it was ascertained
      that accused A­10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali is one
      such conduit. The seizure of the incriminating
      document from the house of his cashier­cum­accountant
      viz. Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt regarding the foreign
      contributions received by Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali
      from Paskistani establishment and terror organizations
      and their further remittance to the Hurriyat leaders
      and secessionists of Jammu & Kashmir clearly shows
      that he was an active channel to transmit funds from
      abroad to India to fuel secessionist activities and to
      wage a war against the Government of India.

ii)   During the course of investigation, it is revealed that
      accused A­10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali was bringing
      money from off­shore locations to India by layering it
      through the scores of firms and companies he has
      opened. It was ascertained that Zahoor Ahmad Shah
      Watali has an NRE A/c No.0252040200000505 in J&K
                              73

       Bank and he received foreign remittances to the tune of
       Rs.93,87,639.31/­ in this account from 2011 till 2013
       from unknown sources.

iii)   During the course of investigation, it was also
       ascertained that the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah
       Watali was showing foreign remittances under ‘other
       income’ in his proprietorship firm viz. Trison
       International, Srinagar. From the analysis of his bank
       accounts, it has been ascertained that foreign
       remittances to the tune of Rs.2,26,87,639.31 were
       received by the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali in
       different accounts from the year 2011 to 2016. An
       amount of Rs.93,87,639.31/­ came in Zahoor Ahmad
       Shah Watali A/c No.NRE­0252040200000505 in J&K
       Bank from 2011 to 2013. An amount of Rs.14 lakh was
       remitted in the account of Acharya Shri Chander
       College of Medical Sciences (ASCOMs), Jammu account
       No.1213040100000229 on 09.04.2013 through NEFT
       against fee deposited for his son, viz., Yawar Zahoor
       Shah Watali. An amount of Rs.60 lakh was remitted in
       current account of accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali
       in J&K Bank A/c No.CD4508. An amount of Rs.5 lakh
       was remitted in the account of Trison Farms &
       Constructions    Pvt.  Ltd.   A/c   OTN­10162.     The
       investigation has revealed that all these foreign
       remittances are from unknown sources.

iv)    During the course of investigation, it was also revealed
       that on 07.11.2014, one Naval Kishore Kapoor, son of
       Om Prakash Kapoor, resident of P.O. Box­8669, Aman,
       U.A.E. entered into an agreement with Trison Farms
       and Constructions Pvt. Ltd. through its Managing
       Director Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali to take a piece of
       land measuring 20 Kanals in Sozeith Goripora Nagbal,
       Budgam on lease in consideration of an amount of Rs.6
       crore as premium and Rs.1000/­ annual rent for an
       initial period of 40 years extendable as may be
       mutually agreed between the parties. In the agreement,
       M/s Trison Farms and Constructions Pvt. Ltd. was
                              74

      declared to be the absolute owner of the piece of land in
      question. Mr. Naval Kishore Kapoor remitted a total
      amount of Rs.5.579 crores in 22 instalments between
      2013 and 2016 to the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah
      Watali.

v)    During the course of investigation, it was ascertained
      that no land exists in the name of M/s Trison Farms
      and Constructions Pvt. Ltd. as per the balance sheets of
      the said company. (AY 2011­12 to 2016­17). It was also
      ascertained that the large sum of money i.e.
      Rs.5,57,90,000 was mobilized by Naval Kishore Kapoor
      from unkown sources and remitted to the accused
      Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali over a period of 2 years to
      lease a piece of land which is not even existing in the
      name of the company mentioned as first party in the
      agreement and the agreement itself lacks legal
      sanctity. This proves that the said agreement was a
      ‘cover’ created by the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah
      Watali to bring foreign remittances from unknown
      sources to India.

vi)   During the course of investigation, it is also
      ascertained that the Chartered Accountant, who signed
      the audited balance sheets of the firms belonging to the
      accused A­10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali viz. M/s
      Trison International (2013­14 and 2015­16), Trison
      Farms & Constructions Pvt. Ltd. (2013­14 and 2015­16),
      M/s 3Y (2012­13, 2013­14 and 2015­16) and M/s Yasir
      Enterprises (2013­14 and 2015­16) did so without
      seeing any supporting documents. The balance sheets
      of these companies were sent to him by one Mustaq Mir,
      Cost Accountant and Shabir Mir, Chartered Accountant
      from Wizkid Office, Srinagar through email and he was
      asked to sign on them in Delhi without showing any
      documents.

      This clearly shows that Zahoor Watali was remitting
      money received from unknown sources to India.
                               75
vii)    The investigation has also revealed that in the FY 2010­
        11, a firm belonging to accused A­10 Zahoor Ahmad
        Shah Watali and his family members viz., Trison Farms
        and Constructions Pvt. Ltd. raised unsecured loan of
        Rs.2,65,55,532/­ from the Directors of the company, i.e.
        the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, his wife
        Sarwa Begum and his sons Yassir Gaffar Shah, Yawar
        Zahoor & Yamin Zahoor in the form of both cash and
        cheque and the same was used towards repayment of
        secured loan of Rs.2,94,53,353/­ in the books of J&K
        Bank. The source of money with the Directors could not
        be explained satisfactorily by the accused Zahoor
        Ahmad Shah Watali.

viii)   The seizure from the house of accused A­10 Zahoor
        Ahmad Shah Watali, of a list of ISI officials and a
        letter from Tariq Shafi, proprietor of AI Shafi group
        addressed to Pakistan High Commission recommending
        grant of visa to Zahoor Watali shows his proximity with
        Pakistani establishment. It is pertinent to mention here
        that the name of Tariq Shafi figures in the document of
        foreign contributions seized from the house of Zahoor
        Watali’s cashier­cum­accountant viz., Ghulam Mohd.
        Bhatt.”
                   (emphasis supplied in italics and bold)

29. In reference to these accusations, the entry in the diaries

and the green­colour document, recovered from the residence

of Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt, is significant. Further, the

seizure memo described as document D­3/6, in respect of

search and seizure of articles/documents seized from the

premises of the respondent (Accused No.10) dated 3 rd June,

2017, would unravel the activities of the respondent, including
                          76

regarding his financial deals. Another crucial document

described as D­3g/20 is a contact diary seized from the

respondent vide Memo D­3, which contains        the Pakistan

National name and contact “Tariq Shafi 0092425765022…

26A” whose name figures in document D­132(a)/23. The Code

“0092” pertains to Pakistan. Another contact diary was seized

from the respondent vide Memo D­3, which, at page D­3h/28

contains the same name and contact, namely, “Tariq Shafi

00923008459775/ 0092425765022”. The documents D­3j to

D­3j/5 also indicate the involvement of the respondent in

terrorist activities, including that three cases of TADA have

been registered against him in the past and investigated and

one case of J & K PSA, 1978. The High Court erroneously

proceeded on the premise that the charge­sheet makes no

reference to any other criminal case against the respondent.

Additionally, the charge­sheet is accompanied with documents

D­9b and D­9c, which are photographs of ex­militant Aftab

Hilali Shah @ Shahid­ul­Islam (A­3) holding AK­47, seen with

other terrorists. These photographs were seized from the
                              77

residence of the said ex­militant on 3rd June, 2017. The

prosecution case is that the respondent (Accused No.10) was

in constant touch with the said ex­militant Aftab Hilali Shah @

Shahid­ul­Islam (A­3), as noticed from the inter­linkage chart

depicted above. That fact is backed by the CDR analysis

report, also part of the charge­sheet. The charge­sheet also

contains document D­185/10, which is a contact list of

accused   Nayeem    Khan      (A­5)   retrieved   through   forensic

analysis, having mobile numbers of persons associated with

Hurriyat party; and of one Mudasir Cheema Pak who is none

other than the First Secretary of Pakistan High Commission.

His   name   also   figures   in   document       D­132(a)/23.   The

Designated Court, besides adverting to the aforementioned

documents, also adverted to other documents and the

statements of the prospective witnesses (Ws­1, 28, 29, 38, 39,

43, 44, 48 and 52). The High Court has not appreciated the

said material which found favour with the Designated Court to

record its   opinion that there are reasonable grounds for

believing that the accusation against the respondent is prima
                              78

facie true.   The view so expressed by the Designated Court

commends to us. Suffice it to observe that the High Court

adopted a tenuous approach ­ by first discarding the

document D­132(a) and then discarding the statement of

witnesses recorded under Section 161 and also the statements

recorded under Section 164, presented by the Investigating

Agency in a sealed cover. As aforesaid, the High Court ought to

have taken into account the totality of the materials/evidences

which depicted the involvement of the respondent in the

commission of the stated offences and being a member of a

larger conspiracy, besides the offence under Section 17 for

raising funds for terrorist activities.

30. In the case of Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi

(supra), the Court essentially considered the scope and ambit

of the enquiry by the Trial Court at the stage of “discharge”. In

that context, the Court made observations in paragraphs 6

and 8 of the said judgment which must be understood

accordingly. In the present case, however, we are called upon

to consider the prayer for bail in the context of the purport of
                            79

the proviso to Section 43D(5) of the 1967 Act which mandates

that the accused person involved in the commission of offence

referable to Chapters IV and VI of the 1967 Act shall not be

released on bail or on bond. However, the Court may release

such accused on bail only if it is of the opinion, on perusal of

the case diary and/or the report made under Section 173 of

Cr.P.C. that there are “no reasonable grounds” for believing

that the accusation against such person is prima facie true.

Conversely, if in the opinion of the Court, there are reasonable

grounds for believing that the accusation against such person

is prima facie true, the question of granting bail would not

arise as the bar under the first part of the proviso of no bail in

such cases would operate.

31. The fact that there is a high burden on the accused in

terms of the special provisions contained in Section 43D(5) to

demonstrate that the prosecution has not been able to show

that there exists reasonable grounds to show that the

accusation against him is prima facie true, does not alter the

legal position expounded in K. Veeraswami (supra), to the
                               80

effect that the charge­sheet need not contain detailed analysis

of the evidence. It is for the Court considering the application

for bail to assess the material/evidence presented by the

Investigating Agency along with the report under Section 173

of Cr.P.C.   in its entirety, to form its opinion as to whether

there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation

against the named accused is prima facie true or otherwise.

32. In the case of Hitendra Vishnu Thakur                  (supra), the

Court was called upon to consider the following questions as

noted in the opening paragraph of the judgment, viz.:

     “In this batch of criminal appeals and special leave petitions
     (criminal) the three meaningful questions which require our
     consideration are: (1) When can the provisions of Section
     3(1) of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
     Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the TADA) be attracted?
     (2) Is the 1993 Amendment, amending Section 167(2) of the
     Code of Criminal Procedure by modifying Section 20(4)(b)
     and adding a new provision as 20(4)(bb), applicable to the
     pending cases i.e. is it retrospective in operation? and (3)
     What is the true ambit and scope of Section 20(4) and
     Section 20(8) of TADA in the matter of grant of bail to an
     accused brought before the Designated Court and the factors
     which the Designated Court has to keep in view while
     dealing with an application for grant of bail under Section
     20(4) and for grant of extension of time to the prosecution for
     further investigation under clause (bb) of Section 20(4) and
     incidentally whether the conditions contained in Section
     20(8) TADA control the grant of bail under Section 20(4) of
     the Act also? We shall take up for consideration these
     questions in seriatim”
                               81

The focus essentially was on matters relevant for consideration

of application for bail on the ground of default in filing the

charge­sheet within the statutory period. Indeed, one of the

questions was about the scope of the provisions relating to

grant of bail in respect of offence punishable under special

enactment TADA. That has been discussed in paragraphs 13

and 14 of the reported judgment, which reads thus:

     “13. We would, therefore, at this stage like to administer a
     word of caution to the Designated Courts regarding invoking
     the provisions of TADA merely because the investigating
     officer at some stage of the investigation chooses to add an
     offence under same (sic some) provisions of TADA against an
     accused person, more often than not while opposing grant of
     bail, anticipatory or otherwise. The Designated Courts
     should always consider carefully the material available on
     the record and apply their mind to see whether the
     provisions of TADA are even prima facie attracted.
     14. The Act provides for the constitution of one or more
     Designated Courts either by the Central Government or the
     State Government by notification in the Official Gazette to try
     specified cases or class or group of cases under the Act. The
     Act makes every offence punishable under the Act or any
     rule made thereunder to be a cognizable offence within the
     meaning of Section 2(c) of the CrPC. The Act vests
     jurisdiction in the Designated Court to try all such offences
     under the Act by giving precedence over the trial of any other
     case against an accused in any other court (not being a
     Designated Court) notwithstanding anything contained in
     the Code or any other law for the time being in force. The
     conferment of power on the Designated Courts to try the
     offences triable by them, punishable with imprisonment for a
     term not exceeding three years or with fine or with both, in a
     summary manner in accordance with the procedure
     prescribed in the CrPC notwithstanding anything contained
                           82

in Section 260(1) or 262 CrPC by applying the provisions of
Sections 263­265 of the Act is a marked departure. The right
of appeal straight to the Supreme Court against any
judgment, sentence or order not being an interlocutory order
vide Section 19(1) of the Act demonstrates the seriousness
with which Parliament has treated the offences under TADA.
An onerous duty is therefore cast on the Designated Courts
to take extra care to scrutinise the material on the record
and apply their mind to the evidence and documents
available with the investigating agency before charge­
sheeting an accused for an offence under TADA. The
stringent provisions of the Act coupled with the enhanced
punishment prescribed for the offences under the Act make
the task of the Designated Court even more onerous,
because the graver the offence, greater should be the care
taken to see that the offence must strictly fall within the four
corners of the Act before a charge is framed against an
accused person. Where the Designated Court without as
much as even finding a prima facie case on the basis of the
material on the record, proceeds to charge­sheet an accused
under any of the provisions of TADA, merely on the
statement of the investigating agency, it acts merely as a
post office of the investigating agency and does more harm to
meet the challenge arising out of the ‘terrorist’ activities
rather than deterring terrorist activities. The remedy in such
cases would be worse than the disease itself and the charge
against the State of misusing the provisions of TADA would
gain acceptability, which would be bad both for the criminal
and the society. Therefore, it is the obligation of the
investigating agency to satisfy the Designated Court from the
material collected by it during the investigation, and not
merely by the opinion formed by the investigating agency,
that the activity of the ‘terrorist’ falls strictly within the
parameters of the provisions of TADA before seeking to
charge­sheet an accused under TADA. The Designated Court
must record its satisfaction about the existence of a prima
facie case on the basis of the material on the record before it
proceeds to frame a charge­sheet against an accused for
offences covered by TADA. Even after an accused has been
charge­sheeted for an offence under TADA and the
prosecution leads evidence in the case, it is an obligation of
the Designated Court to take extra care to examine the
evidence with a view to find out whether the provisions of the
Act apply or not. The Designated Court is, therefore,
                                83

     expected to carefully examine the evidence and after
     analysing the same come to a firm conclusion that the
     evidence led by the prosecution has established that the case
     of the accused falls strictly within the four corners of the Act
     before recording a conviction against an accused under
     TADA.”

Again, in paragraph 22 of the said judgment, the Court

observed thus:

     “22. ….The two provisions operate in different and
     independent fields. The basis for grant of bail under Section
     20(4), as already noticed, is entirely different from the
     grounds on which bail may be granted under Section 20(8) of
     the Act. It would be advantageous at this stage to notice the
     provisions of Section 20(8) and (9) of the Act.

         ‘(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no
         person accused of an offence punishable under this Act
         or any rule made thereunder shall, if in custody, be
         released on bail or on his own bond unless—
         (a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity
         to oppose the application for such release, and
         (b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application,
         the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds
         for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and
         that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
         (9) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub­
         section (8) are in addition to the limitations under the
         Code or any other law for the time being in force on
         granting of bail.’

     As would be seen from the plain phraseology of sub­section
     (8) of Section 20, it commences with a non obstante clause
     and in its operation imposes a ban on release of a person
     accused of an offence punishable under TADA or any rule
     made thereunder on bail unless the twin conditions
     contained in clauses (a) and (b) thereof are satisfied. No bail
     can be granted under Section 20(8) unless the Designated
     Court is satisfied after notice to the public prosecutor that
     there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused
     is not guilty of such an offence and that he is not likely to
     commit any offence while on bail. Sub­section (9) qualifies
                                          84

               sub­section (8) to the extent that the two conditions
               contained in clauses (a) and (b) are in addition to the
               limitations prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure
               or any other law for the time being in force relating to the
               grant of bail. Strictly speaking Section 20(8) is not the source
               of power of the Designated Court to grant bail but it places
               further limitations on the exercise of its power to grant bail
               in cases under TADA, as is amply clear from the plain
               language of Section 20(9). The Constitution Bench in Kartar
               Singh case19 while dealing with the ambit and scope of sub­
               sections (8) and (9) of Section 20 of the Act quoted with
               approval the following observations from Usmanbhai case20:
               (SCC p. 704, para 344)
                    ‘Though there is no express provision excluding the
                    applicability of Section 439 of the Code similar to the
                    one contained in Section 20(7) of the Act in relation to a
                    case involving the arrest of any person on an accusation
                    of having committed an offence punishable under the
                    Act or any rule made thereunder, but that result must,
                    by necessary implication, follow. It is true that the
                    source of power of a Designated Court to grant bail is
                    not Section 20(8) of the Act as it only places limitations
                    on such power. This is made explicit by Section 20(9)
                    which enacts that the limitations on granting of bail
                    specified in Section 20(8) are ‘in addition to the
                    limitations under the Code or any other law for the time
                    being in force’. But it does not necessarily follow that
                    the power of a Designated Court to grant bail is
                    relatable to Section 439 of the Code. It cannot be
                    doubted that a Designated Court is ‘a court other than
                    the High Court or the Court of Session’ within the
                    meaning of Section 437 of the Code. The exercise of the
                    power to grant bail by a Designated Court is not only
                    subject to the limitations contained therein, but is also
                    subject to the limitations placed by Section 20(8) of the
                    Act.’
               and went on to add: (SCC p. 704, para 345)

                    ‘Reverting to Section 20(8), if either of the two conditions
                    mentioned therein is not satisfied, the ban operates and
                    the accused person cannot be released on bail but of
                    course it is subject to Section 167(2) as modified by
19
     (1994) 3 SCC 569
20
     (1988) 2 SCC 271
                              85

         Section 20(4) of the TADA Act in relation to a case under
         the provisions of TADA.’

     Thus, the ambit and scope of Section 20(8) of TADA is no
     longer res integra and from the above discussion it follows
     that both the provisions i.e. Section 20(4) and 20(8) of TADA
     operate in different situations and are controlled and guided
     by different considerations.”

33. We fail to understand as to how this decision will be of

any avail to the respondent. In our opinion, the Designated

Court had rightly rejected the bail application after adverting

to the relevant material/evidence indicative of the fact that

there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation

against the respondent is prima facie true.

34. With reference to the document D­132(a), the High Court

was impressed by the argument that the same would be

inadmissible. To buttress that opinion of the High Court, the

respondent would rely on the decision of this Court in V.C.

Shukla    (supra).   Further, it was submitted that in light of

Section 34 of the Evidence Act, the said document could not

be admitted in evidence, since it was not an entry in the books

of account regularly kept in the course of business. In any

case, that document by itself would not be sufficient in the
                                     86

         absence of any independent evidence. Learned Attorney

         General, relying on the underlying principle in Khoday

         Distilleries Ltd. and Ors. Vs. State of Karnataka and

         Ors.21, would contend that there cannot be business in crime

         and, as such, Section 34 of the Evidence Act will have no

         application. He further submits that the prosecution may use

         the facts noted in the said document and prove the same

         against the respondent by other evidence. This argument need

         not detain us. For, we find force in the argument of the

         learned Attorney General that the issue of admissibility and

         credibility of the material and evidence presented by the

         Investigating Officer would be a matter for trial. Furthermore,

         indubitably, the prosecution is not solely relying on the

         document D­132(a) recovered from the residence of Ghulam

         Mohammad Bhatt (W­29). There are also other incriminatory

         documents recovered from respondent (Accused No.10) himself

         during the search, including other independent evidence,

         which, indeed, will have to be proved during the trial.

21
     (1995) 1 SCC 574 (para 60)
                            87
35. The appellant has relied on the exposition in Salim

Khan (supra), to contend that in cases where the High Court

adopted a totally erroneous approach, as in the present case,

discarding the crucial material/evidence which is referred to in

the report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. and presented before the

Designated Court, then the order granting bail by the High

Court   cannot   be   countenanced.   The   argument    of   the

respondent is that the said decision would make no difference

as it is concerning an application for cancellation of bail made

by the informant. However, we find force in the argument of

the appellant that the High Court, in the present case, adopted

an inappropriate approach whilst considering the prayer for

grant of bail. The High Court ought to have taken into account

the totality of the material and evidence on record as it is and

ought not to have discarded it as being inadmissible. The High

Court clearly overlooked the settled legal position that, at the

stage of considering the prayer for bail, it is not necessary to

weigh the material, but only form opinion on the basis of the

material before it on broad probabilities. The Court is expected
                           88

to apply its mind to ascertain whether the accusations against

the accused are prima face true. Indeed, in the present case,

we are not called upon to consider the prayer for cancellation

of bail as such but to examine the correctness of the approach

of the High Court in granting bail to the accused despite the

materials and evidence indicating that accusations made

against him are prima facie true.

36. In a decision of this Court in Chenna Boyanna Krishna

Yadav (supra), to which reference has been made, the Court

has re­stated the twin conditions to be considered by the

Court before grant of bail in relation to MCOCA offences. We

are of the view that in the present case, the Designated Court

rightly opined that there are reasonable grounds for believing

that the accusation against the respondent is prima facie true.

As we are not inclined to accept the prayer for bail, in our

opinion, it is not necessary to dilate on other aspects to

obviate prolixity.

37. A fortiori, we deem it proper to reverse the order passed

by the High Court granting bail to the respondent. Instead, we
                            89

agree with the conclusion recorded by the Designated Court

that in the facts of the present case, the respondent is not

entitled to grant of bail in connection with the stated offences,

particularly   those falling under Chapters IV and VI of the

1967 Act.

38. Accordingly,    this   appeal   succeeds.   The   impugned

judgment and order is set aside and, instead, the order passed

by the Designated Court rejecting the application for grant of

bail made by the respondent herein, is affirmed.

39. All pending applications are also disposed of.

                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (Ajay Rastogi)
New Delhi;
April 02, 2019.

