1 
 THE EXTRADITION ACT, 1962  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Application of Act.  
CHAPTER II  
EXTRADITION OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO FOREIGN STATE TO WHICH CHAPTER III DOES NOT APPLY  
4. Requisition for surrender.  
5. Order for magisterial inquiry.  
6. Issue of warrant for arrest.  
7. Procedure before magistrate.  
8. Surrender of fugitive criminal.  
9. Power of magistrate to issue warrant of arrest in certain cases.  
10. Receipt in evidence of exhibits, depositions and other documents and authentication 
thereof.  
11. Chapter not to apply to commonwealth countries to which Chapter III applies.  
CHAPTER III  
RETURN OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO FOREIGN STATES WITH EXTR ADITION A RRANGEMENTS  
12. Application of Chapter.   
13. Liability of fugitive criminals from foreign States to be apprehended and returned.  
14. Endorsed and provisional warrants.  
15. Endorsed warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal.  
16. Provisiona l warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal.  
17. Dealing with fugitive criminal when apprehended.  
18. Return of fugitive criminal by warrant.  
CHAPTER IV  
SURRENDER OR RETURN OF ACCUSED OR CONVICTED PERSONS FROM FOREIGN STATES  
19. Mode of requisition  or form of warrant for the surrender or return to India  of accused or 
convicted person who is in a foreign State or Commonwealth country.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Conveyance of accused or convicted person surrendered or returned.  
21. Accused or convicted person sur rendered or returned by foreign State not to be tried for 
certain offence.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Liability of fugitive criminals to be arrested and surrendered or returned.  
23. Jurisdiction as to offences committed at sea or in air.  
24. Discharge  of person apprehended if not surrendered or returned within two 
months.  
25. Release of persons arrested on bail.  
26. Abetment of extradition offences.  
27. Lawfulness of, and retaking on escape from, custody under warrants.  
28. Property found on fugit ive criminal.  
29. Power of Central Government to discharge any fugitive criminal.  
30. Simultaneous requisitions.  
31. Restrictions on surrender.  
32. Sections 29 and 31 to apply without any modification thereof.  
33. Act not to affect the Foreigners Act , 1946.  
34. Extra territorial jurisdiction.  
34A.  Prosecution on refusal to extradition.  
34B.  Provisional arrest.  
34C.  Provision of life imprisonment for death penalty.  
35. Notified orders and notifications to be laid before Parliament.  
36. Power to  make rules.  
37. Repeal s and savings.  
 THE SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
  
THE EXTRADITION ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1962  
[15th September , 1962 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the extradition of fugitive criminals  
1[and to provide for matters conne cted there with or incidental thereto.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows:―  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Extradition Act, 
1962.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Governmen t may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, ― 
3[(a) “composite offence ” means an act or conduct of a person occurred, wholly or in part, in 
a foreign State or in india but its effects or Intended effects, taken as a whole, would constitute an 
extradition offence in India or in a foreign State, as the case may be;]  
(b) “conviction ” and “convicted ” do not include or refer to a conviction which under foreign 
law is a conviction for  contumacy, but the term “person accused ” includes a per son so convicted 
for contu macy ; 
4[(c) “extradition offence ” means ― 
(i) in relation to a foreign State, being a treaty State, an offence provided for in the 
extradition treaty with that State;  
(ii) in relation to a foreign State other than a treaty State an offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year under the laws of India or of a 
foreign State and includes a composite offence;]  
(d) “extradition treaty ” means a treaty  5[,agreement or arrange ment) made by India with a 
foreign State relating to the extradition of fugitive criminal s, and includes any treaty  5[,agreement 
or arrange ment] relating to the extradition of fugitive criminals made before the 15th day of 
August, 1947, which extends to, and is binding on, India;  
(e) “foreign State ” means any State outside India  6* * *  and in cludes every constituent part, 
colony or dependency of such State;  
7[(f) “fugitive criminal ” means a person who is accused or con victed of an extradition offence 
within the jurisdiction of a foreign State and includes a person who, while in India, conspir es, 
                                                           
1. Added by Act 66 of 1993, s.  2 (w.e.f. 18-12-1993).  
2. 5th January, 1963, vide Notification No. G.S.R. 55, dated 5th January, 1963, see Gazet te of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (i). 
3. Subs . by Act 66 of 1993, s . 4, for clause  (a) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for cl ause (c) (w.e.f.18 -12-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “or agreement” (w.e.f. 18-12-1993).  
6. The words “other than a commonwealth c ountry ,” omitte d by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-1993 ). 
7. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause  (f) (w.e.f.  18-12-1993).  4 
 attempts to commit or incites or participates as an accomplice in the commission of an extradition 
offence in a foreign State;]  
(g) “magistrate ” means a m agistrate of the first cl ass or a presidency magistrate ; 
(h) “notified order ” means an order noti fied in the Official Gazette;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and  
(j) “treaty State ” means a foreign State with which an extradition treaty is in operation.  
3.  Application of Act.―1[(1) The Central Government may, by notifi ed order, direct that the 
provisions of this Act, other than  Chapter III, shall apply , to such foreign State or part thereof as may 
be specified in the order.]  
(2) The Central Government may, by the same notified order as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) or 
any subsequent notified order, restrict such application to fugitive criminals found, or suspected to be, 
in such part of India as may be specified in the order.  
(3) Where the notified o rder relates to a treaty State ,― 
(a) it shall set out in full the extradition treaty with that State ;  
(b) it shall not remain in force for any period longer than that treaty ; and 
(c) the Central Government may, by the same or any subsequent notified order, render the 
application of thi s Act subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as 
may be deemed expedient for implementing the treaty with that State.  
2[(4) Where there is no extradition treaty made by In dia with any foreign State, the  
Central Government m ay, by notified order, treat any Convention to which India and a foreign State 
are parties, as an extradition treaty made by India with that foreign State providing for extradition in 
respect of the offences specified in that Convention.]  
CHAPTER II  
EXTRAD ITION OF  FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO FOREIGN STATE  3* * * TO WHICH CHAPTER III DOES  
NOT APPLY  
4. Requisition for surrender .―A requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal of a 
foreign State  4* * * may be made to the Central Government ― 
(a) by a diplomat ic representative of the foreign  State 4* * * at Delhi; or  
(b) by the Government of that foreign State  4* * * communicating with the Central 
Government through its diplomatic representative in that State 5***; 
and if neither of these modes is convenient, t he requisition shall be made in such other mode as is 
settled by arrangement made by the Government of the foreign State  4* * * with the Government of 
India.  
5. Order for magisterial Inquiry. ―Where such requisition is made, the Central Government 
may, if it thinks fit, issue an order to any Magistrate who would have had jurisdiction to inquire into 
the offence if it had been an offence committed within the local limits of his jurisdiction dire cting him 
to inquire into the case.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).   
2. Ins. by s. 5 , ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. The words “ AND TO COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES ” omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4.  The words “or commonwealth country” omitted by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f.18 -12-1993).  
5.  The words “or country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  5 
 6. Issue of warrant for arrest .― On receipt of an order of the Central Government under  
section 5, the magistrate shall issue a warrant for the arrest of the fugitive criminal.  
7.  Procedure before magistrate .―(1) When the fugitive criminal ap pears or is brought before 
the magistrate, the magistrate shall inquire into the case in the same manner and shall have the same 
jurisdiction and powers, as nearly as may  be, as if the case were one triable by a court of session or  
High Court.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the magistrate shall, in 
particular, take such evidence as may be produced in support of the requisition of the foreign State           
1* * *  and on behalf of the fugitive cr iminal, including any evidence to show that the offence of which 
the fugitive criminal accused or has been convicted is an offence of political character or is not an 
extradition offence.  
(3) If the Magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie  case is not m ade out in support of the 
requisition of the foreign State  1* * *, he shall discharge the fugitive criminal.  
(4) If the Magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie  case is made out in support of the requisition 
of the foreign State  1* * *  he may commit the  fugitive criminal to prison to await the orders of the 
Central Government and shall report the result of his inquiry to the Central Government, and shall 
forward together with such report, and written statement which the fugitive criminal may desire to 
submit for the consideration of the Central Government.  
 8. Surrender of fugitive criminal. ―If upon receipt of the report and statement under sub -
section ( 4) of section 7, the Central Government  is of opinion that the fugitive cr iminal ought to be 
surrendered to the foreign State 1* * *, it may issue a warrant for the custody and removal of the 
fugitive criminal and for his delivery at a place and to a person to be named in the warrant.  
9. Power of magistrate to issue warrant of arrest in certain cases .―(1) Where it appears to 
any magistrate that a person within the local limits of his jurisdicti on, is a fugitive criminal of a 
foreign State  1* * * , he may, if he thinks fit, issue a warrant for the arrest of that person on such 
information and on such evidence as would, in his opinion, justify the issue of a warrant if the offence 
of which the pers on is accused or has been convicted had been committed within the local limits of 
his jurisdiction.  
(2) The magistrate shall forthwith report the issue of a warrant under sub -section ( 1) to the  
Central Government and shall forward the informa tion, and th e evidence or certified copies thereof to 
that Government.  
(3) A person arrested on a warrant issued under sub -section ( 1) shall not be detained for more than 
three months unless within that period the magistrate receives from the Central Government an ord er 
made with reference to such person under  section 5.  
10. Receipt in evidence of exhibit s depositions and other docu ments and authentication 
thereof .―(1) In any proceedings against a fu gitive criminal of a foreign State  1* * * under this 
chapter, exhibits and depositions (whether received or taken in the presence of the person against 
whom they are used or not) and copies thereof and official certific ates of facts and judicial documents 
stating facts may, if duly authenticated, be received as evidence.  
                                                           
1. The words “or commonwealth country” o mitted by Act 66 of  1993, s.  3 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
 6 
 (2) Warrants, depositions or statement s on oath , which purport to have been issued or taken by 
any court of Justice outside India or copies thereof, ce rtificates of, or judicial documents stating the 
facts of conviction before any such court shall be deemed to be duly authenticated if ― 
(a) the warrant purports to be signed by a judge, m agistrate or officer of the State  1* * * where 
the same was issued or acting in or of such State  1* * *; 
(b) the depositions of statements or copies thereof purport to be certified , under the hand of a 
judge, magistrate or officer of the State 1* * * where the same were taken , or acting in or for such 
State 1* * * , to be original depositions or statements or to be true copies thereof, as the case may 
require ;  
(c) the certificate of, or judicial document stating the fact of, a conviction purports to be 
certified by a judge, magistrate or officer of the State  1* * * where the conviction took place or 
acting in or for such State ;  
(d)  the warrants, depositions, statements, copies, certificates and judicial documents, as the 
case may be, are authenticated by the oath of some witness or by the official seal of a Minister of 
the State 1* * *  where the same were  2* * *  issued, taken or given.  
11. Chapter not to apply to Commonwealth countries to which Chapter II I applies. ― 
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to fugitive criminals 3* * * to which Chapter III applies.  
CHAPTER III  
RETURN OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO  4[FOREIGN  STATES ] WITH EXTRADITION ARRANGEMENTS  
12. Application of Chapter .― ( 1) This Chapter shall apply  only to any such 5[foreign state] to 
which, by reason of an extradition arrangement entered into with that 6[State], it may seem expedient 
to the Central Government to apply the same.  
(2) Every such application shall be by notified order, and the Central  Government may, by the 
same or any subsequent notified order, direct that this Chapter and Chapters I, IV and V s hall, in 
relation to any such 5[foreign State], apply subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and 
qualifications as it may think  fit to specify in the order for the purpose of implementing the 
arrangement.  
13. Liability of fugitive criminals from foreign States to be apprehended and 
returned .―Where a fugitive criminal of any 5[foreign State] to which this Chapter applies is found i n 
India, he shall be liable to be apprehended and returned in the manner provided by this Chapter to that 
5[foreign State].  
14. Endorsed and provisional warrants .―A fugitive criminal may be apprehended in India 
under an endorsed warrant or a provisional wa rrant.  
15. Endorsed warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal .―Where a warrant for the 
apprehension of a fugitive cr iminal has been issued in any 5[foreign State] to which this Chapter 
applies and such fugitive criminal is, or is suspected to be, in In dia, the Central Government may, if 
satisfied that the warrant was issued by a person having lawful authority to issue the same, endorse 
such warrant in the manner prescribed, and the warrant so endorsed shall be sufficient authority to 
apprehend the perso n named in the warrant and to bring him before and magistrate in India.  
                                                           
1. The words “or country” omitted by Act 66 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
2. The word “respectively” omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. The words “of a commonwealth country”  omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f.  18-12-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “COMMONWEALTH COUNTRI ES” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “commonwealth country”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for  “country” (w.e.f.  18-12-1993).  7 
 16. Provisional warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal .―(1) Any magistrate may issue 
a provisional warrant for the apprehension of a fugitive criminal from any 1[foreign State] to which 
this Chapter applies who is, or is suspected to be, in or on his way to India, on such information and 
under such circumstanc es as would, in his opinion, justify the issue of a warrant, if the offence of 
which the fugitive criminal is accused or has been convicted had been committed within his 
jurisdiction and such warrant may be executed accordingly.  
(2) A magistrate issuing a  provisional warrant shall forthwith send a report of the issue of the 
warrant together with the information or a certified copy thereof to the Central Government, and the 
Central Government may, if it thinks fit, discharge the person apprehended under suc h warrant.  
(3) A fugitive criminal apprehended on a provisional warrant may, from time to time, be 
remanded for such reasonable time, not exceeding seven days at any one time, as under the 
circumstances seems requisite for the production of an endorsed wa rrant.  
17. Dealing with fugitive criminal when apprehended .―(1) If the magistrate, before whom a 
person apprehended under this Chapter is brought, is satisfied on inquiry that the endorsed warrant for 
the apprehension of the fugitive criminal is duly authenticated and that the offence of which the 
person is accus ed or has been convicted i s an extradition offence, the magistrate shall commit the 
fugitive criminal to prison to await his return and shall forthwith send to the Central Government a 
certificate of the committal.  
(2) If on such inquiry the magistrate is of opinion that the endorsed warrant is not duly 
authenticated or that the offence of which such person is accused or has been convicted is not an 
extradition offence, the magistrate may, pending the receipt of the orders of the Central Government, 
detain such person in custody or release him on bail.  
(3) The magistrate shall report the result of his inquiry to the Central Government and shall 
forward together with such report any written statement which the fugitive criminal may desire to 
submit for the co nsideration of that Government.  
18. Return of fugitive criminal by warrant .―The Central Government may, at any time after a 
fugitive criminal has been committed to prison under this Chapter, issue a warrant for the custody and 
removal to the 1[foreign State] concerned of the fugitive criminal and for his delivery at a place and t o 
a person to be named in the warrant.  
CHAPTER IV  
SURRENDER OR RETURN OF ACCUSED OR CONVICTED PERSONS FROM FOREIGN STATES  2* * *  
19. Mode of requisition or form of warrant for the surrender or return to India of accused 
or convicted person who is in a for eign State 3* * *.― (1) A requisition for the surrender of a person 
accused or convicted of an extradition offence  committed in India and who is or is suspected to be, in 
any foreign State 4* * * to which Chapter III does not apply, may be made by the  
Central Governme nt― 
(a) to a diplomatic representative of that State 5* * * at Delhi; or  
(b) to the Government of that State 5* * *  through the diplomatic representative of India in 
that State   5* * * ;  
and if neither of these modes is convenient , the requisition shall be  made in such other mode as is 
settled by arrangement made by the Government of India with that State  5* * *.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 3 , for “commonwealth country” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
2. The words “ OR COMMONWEALTH COUN TRIES ” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. The words “or commonwealth country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. The words “or a commonwealth count ry” omitted by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
5. The words “or country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f.18 -12-1993).  8 
 (2) A warrant issued by a magistrate in India for the apprehension of any person who is, or is 
suspected to be, in any  1[foreign State] to which C hapter III applies shall be in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
20. Conveyance of accused or convicted person surrendered or returned .―Any person 
accused or convicted of an extradition offence who is surrendered or returned by a foreign State 2*** 
may, under the warrant of arrest for his surrender or return issued in such State or country, be brought 
into India and delivered to the prope r authority to be dealt with according to law.  
3[21. Accused or convicted person surrendered or returned by foreign State not to be tried 
for certain offences .―Whenever any person accused or convicted of an offence, which, if committed 
in India would be an  extradition offence, is surrendered or returned by a foreign State, such person 
shall not, until he has been restored or has had an opportunity of returning to that State, be tried in 
India for an offence other than ― 
(a) the extradition offence in relatio n to which he was surrendered or returned; or  
(b) any lesser offence disclosed by the facts proved for the purposes of securing his surrender 
or return other than an offence in relation to which an order for his surrender or return could not 
be lawfully m ade; or  
(c) the offence in respect of which the foreign State has given its consent.]  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Liability of fugitive criminals to be arrested and surrendered or returned .―Every 
fugitiv e criminal of a foreign State 2* * *  shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be liable to be 
arrested and surrendered or returned, whether the offence in respect of which the surrender or return is 
sought was committed before or after t he commencement of this Act, and whether or not a court in 
India has jurisdiction to try that offence.  
23. Jurisdiction as to offences committed at sea or in air .―Where the offence in respect of 
which the surrender or return of a fugitive criminal is sough t was committed on board any vessel on 
the high seas or any aircraft while in the air outside India or the Indian territorial waters which comes 
into any port or aerodrome of India, the Central Government and any magistrate having jurisdiction in 
such port  or aerodrome may exercise the powers conferred by this Act.  
24. Discharge of person apprehended if not surrendered or returned within two months .― 
if a fugitive criminal who, in pursuance of this Act, has been committed to prison to await his 
surrender or return to any foreign State 4* * *  is not conveyed out of India within two months after 
such committal, the High Court, upon application made to it by or on behalf of the fugitive criminal 
and upon proof that reasonable notice of the intention to make such application has been given to the 
Central Government, may order such prisoner to be discharged unless sufficient cause is shown to the 
contrary.  
25. Release of persons arrested on bail .―In the case of a person who is a fugitive criminal 
arrested or detained under th is Act, the provisions of 5[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973                
(2 of 1974) ] relating to bail shall apply in the same manner as they would apply if such person were 
accused of committing in India the offence of which he is accused or has been convicted, and in 
relation to such bail, the magistrate before whom the fugitive criminal is brought shall have, as far as 
may be, the same powers and jurisdiction as a cour t of session under that Code.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 3, for “commonwealth country” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
2. The words “or commonwealth country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. Subs . by s. 12, ibid., for section 21 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. The words “or country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid., for “the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) ”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  9 
 26. Abetment of extradition offences .―A fugitive criminal who is acc used or convicted of 
abetting 1[, conspiring, attempting to commit, inciting or participating as an accomplice in the 
commission of] any extradition offence shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be accused or 
convic ted of having committed such offence and shall be liable to be arrested and surrendered 
accordingly.  
27. Lawfulness of, and re -taking on escape from, custody under warrants .―It shall be lawful 
for any person to whom a warrant is directed for the apprehensi on of a fugitive criminal to hold in 
custody and convey the person mentioned in the warrant to the place named in the warrant, and if 
such person escapes out of any custody to which he may be delivered in pursuance of such warrant, he  
may be re -taken as a person accused of an offence against the law of India may be re -taken upon an 
escape.  
28. Property found on fugitive criminal .―Everything found in the possession of a fugitive 
criminal at the time of his arrest which may be material as evidence in proving the extradition offence 
may be delivered up with the fugitive criminal on his surrender or return, subject to the rights, if a ny, 
of third parties with respect thereto.  
29. Power of Central Government to discharge any fugitive criminal .― If it appears to the 
Central Government that by reason of the trivial nature of the case or by reason of the application for 
the surrender or re turn of a fugitive criminal not being made in good faith or in the interests of justice 
or for political reasons or otherwise, it is unjust or inexpedient to surrender or return the fugitive 
criminal, it may, by order, at any time stay any proceedings unde r this Act and direct any warrant 
issued or endorsed under this Act to be cancelled and the person for whose arrest the warrant has been 
issued or endorsed to be discharged.  
30. Simultaneous requisitions .―If requisitions for the surrender of a fugitive criminal are 
received fr om more than one foreign State 2***, the Central Government may, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case, surrender the fugitive criminal to such State or country as that Gover nment 
thinks fit.  
31. Restrictions on surrender .―3[(1)] A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered or returned to 
a foreign State 4***.―   
(a) if the offence in respect of which his surrender is sought is of a political character or if he 
proves to the sa tisfaction of the magistrate or court before whom he may be produced or of the 
Central Government that the requisition or warrant for his surrender has, in fact, been made with a 
view to try or punish him for an offence of a political character;  
(b) if pr osecution for the offence in respect of which his surrender is sought is according to 
the law of that State 5*** barred by time;  
6[(c) unless provision is made by that law of the foreign State or in the extradition treaty with 
the foreign State that the fugitive criminal shall not be determined or tried in that State for an 
offence other than — 
(i) the extradition offence in relation to which he is to be surrendered or returned;  
(ii) any lesser offence disclosed by the facts proved for the purposes of securing his 
surrender or return other than an offence in relation to which an order for his surrender or 
return could not be lawfully mad e; or  
(iii) the offence in respect of which the Central Government has given its consent;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 14 (w.e.f 18 -12-1993).  
2. The words “or commonwealth country or from any foreign State and any commonwealth country” omitted by s. 15, ibid. 
(w.e.f 18 -12-1993).  
3.  Section  31 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that secti on by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. The words “or  commonwealth country” omitted  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f.18 -12-1993).  
5. The words “or country” omitted  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993) .  10 
 (d) if he has been accused of some offence in India, not being the offence for which his 
surrender or return is sought, or is undergoing sentence under any convict ion in India until after 
he has been discharged, whether by acquittal or on expiration of his sentence or otherwise;  
(e) until after the expiration of fifteen days from the date of his being committed to prison by 
the magistrate.  
1[(2) For the purposes of  sub-section ( 1), the offence specified in the Schedule shall not be 
regarded as offences of a political character.  
(3) The Central Government having regard to the extradition treaty made by India with any 
foreign State may, by notified order, add or omit  any offence from the list given in the Schedule.]  
32. Sections 29 and 31 to apply without any modification thereof .― Notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in section 3 or section 12, the provisions of sections 29 and 31 shall apply 
without any modifi cation to every foreign State 2***. 
33. Act not to affect the Foreigners Act, 1946 .―Nothing in this Act shal l affect the provisi ons 
of the Foreigners Act, 1946  (31 of 1946), or any order made thereunder.  
3[34. Extra territorial jurisdiction .―An extradition offence committed by any person in a 
foreign State shall be deemed to have been committed in India and such  person shall be liable to be 
prosecuted in India for such offence.  
34A. Prosecution on refusal to extradition .― Where the Central Government is of the opinion 
that a fugitive criminal cannot be surrendered or returned pursuant to a request for extradition  from a 
foreign State, it may, as it thinks fit, take steps to prosecute suc h fugitive criminal in India.  
34B. Provisional arrest .―(1) On receipt of an urgent request from a foreign State for the 
immediate arrest of a fugitive criminal, the Central Governm ent may request the Magistrate having 
competent jurisdiction to issue a provisional warrant for the arrest of such fugitive criminal.  
(2) A fugitive criminal arrested under sub -section ( 1) shall be discharged upon the expiration of 
sixty days from the date  of his arrest if no request for his surrender or return is received within the 
said period.  
34C. Provision of life imprisonment for death penalty .―Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law for the time being in force, where a fugitive criminal, who has committed an 
extradition offence punishable with death in India, is surrendered or returned by a foreign State on the 
request of the Centra l Government and the laws of that foreign State do not provide for a death 
penalty for such an offence, such fugitive criminal shall be liable for punishment of imprisonment for 
life only for that offence. ] 
35. Notified orders and notifications to be laid before Parliament .―Every notified order made 
or notification issued under this Act shall, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
36. Power to make rules .―(1) The central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette , make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely:―  
(a) the form in which a requisition for the surr ender of a fugitive criminal may be made;  
(b) the form in which a warrant for the apprehension of an y person in a 4[foreign State]  to 
which Chapter III applies may be made;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 16 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
2. The words “or commonwealth country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for section 34 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “commonwealth country” (w.e.f . 18-12-1993).   11 
 (c) the manner in which any warrant may be endorsed or authenticated under this A ct;  
(d) the removal of fugitive criminals accused or in custody under this Act and their control 
and maintenance until such time as they are handed over to the persons named in the warrant as 
entitled to receive them;  
(e) the seizure and disposition of a ny property which is the subject of, or required for proof of, 
any alleged offence to which this Act applies;  
(f) the form and manner in which or the channel through which a magistrate may be required 
to make his report to the Central Government under thi s Act;  
(g) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may  be comprised in 
one session or 1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session  or the successive session  aforesaid], both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses a gree that the rule should not made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previousl y done under that rule.  
37. Repeals and savings .―(1) The Indian Extradition Act, 1903 (15 of 1903), and any law 
corresponding thereto in force at the commencement of this Act in the territories which, immediately 
before the 1st day of November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States and the North East Frontier 
Agency and Tuensang District (Extradition) Regulation, 1961 (3 of 1961), are hereby repealed.  
(2) The Extradition Acts, 1870 to 1932 (33 and 34 Vict. c. 52; 36 and 37 Vict. c. 60; 6 Edw. 7,  c. 
15; 22 and 23 Geo. 5, c. 39,  44 and 45 Vict. c. 69 ) and the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881, in so far as 
they apply to and operate as part of the law of India, are hereby repealed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and  the Schedule , for certain words (w.e.f 15 -5-1986).  12 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See Section 31(2)] 
OFFENCES WHICH ARE NOT TO BE REGARDED AS OFFENCES OF A POLITICAL CHARACTER  
The following list of offences is to be construed according to the law in force in India on the date 
of the alleged offence. Wherever the names of the relevant Acts are not given, the sections referred to 
are the sections of the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860): ― 
1. Offences under the Anti -Hijacking Act, 1982 (65 of 1982).  
2. Offences under the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982 
(66 of 1982).  
3. An offence within the scope of the Convention on the punishment of crimes agains t 
Internationally   protected persons including diplomatic agents, opened for signature at New York on 
14th December, 1973.  
 4. An offence within the scope of the International Convention against the taking of hostages 
opened for signature at New York on 18 th December, 1979.  
 5. Culpable homicide, murder (sections 299 to 304).  
6. Voluntarily causing hurt or grevious hurt by a dangerous weapon or means ( sections 321 to 
333).  
7. Offences under the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (6 of 1908).  
8. Possession of  a fire -arm or ammunition with intention to endanger life [ section 27 of the Arms 
Act, 1959 (54 of 1959)].  
 9. The use of a fire arm with intention to resist or prevent the arrest or detention [ section  28 of the 
Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959)].  
10. Causing o f loss or damage to property used for public utilities or otherwise with intention to 
endanger life ( section 425 read with section 440).  
11. Wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement ( sections  339 to 348).  
12. Kidnapping and abduction including taking of hostages ( sections 359 to 3 69).  
13. Offences related to terrorism and terrorist acts [Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1987 (28 of 1987).  
14. Abetting, conspiring or attempting to commit, inciting, participating as an accomplice i n the 
commission of any of the offences listed above.]  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1993, s.  18, for “The First and Second Schedules”  (w.e.f. 18-12-1993 ).  