1 
 THE PRISONS ACT, 1894  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Title, extent and commencement . 
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
MAINTENANCE AND OFFICERS OF PRISONS  
4. Accommodation for prisoners.  
5. Inspector General.  
6. Officers of prisons.  
7. Temporary accommodation for prisoners.  
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES OF OFFICERS  
Generally  
8. Control and duties of officers of prisons.  
9. Officers not to have business dealings with prisoners.  
10. Officers not to be interested in prison -contracts.  
Superintendent  
11. Superintendent.  
12. Records to be kept by Superintendent.  
Medical Officer  
13. Duties of Medical Officer.  
14. Medical Officer to report in certain cases.  
15. Report on death of prisoner.  
Jailer  
16. Jailer.  
17. Jailer to give notice of death of prisoner.  
18. Responsibility of Jailer.  
19. Jailer to be present at night.  
20. Powers of Deputy and Assistant Jailers.  2 
 SECTIONS  
Subordinate Officers  
21. Duties of gate -keeper.  
22. Subordinate officers not to be absent without leave.  
23. Convict officers.  
CHAPTER IV  
ADMISSION,  REMOVAL AND DISCHARGE  OF PRISONERS  
24. Prisoners to be examined on admission.  
25. Effects of prisoners.  
26. Removal and discharge of prisoners.  
CHAPTER V  
DISCIPLINE OF PRISONERS  
27. Separation of prisoners.  
28. Association and segregation of prisoners.  
29. Solitary confinement.  
30. Prisoners under sentence of death.  
CHAPTER VI  
FOOD, CLOTHING AND BEDDING OF CIVILAND UNCONVICTED  CRIMINAL  PRISONERS  
31. Maintenance of certain prisoners from private sources.  
32. Restriction on transfer of food and clothing between certain prisoners.  
33. Supply of clothing and bedding to civil and unconvict ed criminal prisoners.  
CHAPTER VII  
EMPLOYMENT OF PRISONERS  
34. Employment of civil prisoners.  
35. Employment of criminal prisoners.  
36. Employment of criminal prisoners sentenced to simple imprisonment.  
CHAPTER VIII  
HEALTH OF PRISONERS  
37. Sick prisoners.  
38. Record of directions of Medical Officers.  
39. Hospital.  
CHAPTER IX  
VISITS TO PRISONERS  
40. Visits to civil and unconvicted criminal prisoners . 
41. Search of visitors.  3 
 CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES IN RELATION TO PRISONERS  
SECTIONS  
42. Penalty for introduction or removal of prohibited articles into or from prison and communication 
with prisoners.  
43. Power to arrest for offence under section . 
44. Publication of penalties.  
CHAPTER XI  
PRISON -OFFENCES  
45. Prison -offences.  
46. Punishment of such offences.  
47. Plurality of punishments under section 46.  
48. Award of punishments under sections 46 and 47.  
49. Punishments to be in accordance with foregoing sections.  
50. Medical Officer to certify to fitness of prisoner for punishment . 
51. Entries in pu nishment -books.  
52. Procedure on committal of heinous offence.  
53. Whipping.  
54. Offences by prison -subordinates.  
CHAPTER XII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
55. Extramural custody, control and employment of prisoners.  
56. Confinement in irons.  
57. Confinement of prisoners  under sentence of transportation in irons.  
58. Prisoners not to be ironed by Jailer except under necessity.  
59. Power to make rules.  
60. [Repealed .]. 
61. Exhibition of copies of rules.  
62. Exercise of powers of Superintendent and Medical Officer.  
THE SCHEDULE. —[Repealed .]. 4 
  
THE PRISONS ACT, 1894  
ACT NO. 9 OF 18941 
[22nd March , 1894]  
An Act to amend the law relating to Prisons.  
WHEREAS , it is expedient to amend the law relating to prisons in 2[India except the territories 
which, immediately before the 1st November , 1956, were comprised in Part B States], and to provide 
rules for the regulation of such prison; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Title, extent and commencem ent.—(1) This Act may be called the Prisons Act, 1894.  
3[(2) It extends to the whole of India except 4[the territories which, immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States] . ]” 
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of July, 1894.  
(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to civil jails in the 5[State] of Bombay 6[as it existed 
immediately before the 1st November, 1956] outside the city of Bombay, and those jails shall continue 
to be administered under the provisions of sectio ns 9 and 16 (both inclusive) of 7Bom bay Act 2 of 
1874, as amended by subsequent enactments.  
                                                      
1. Amended in its application to — 
(1) the Province of Madras by — 
(i) the Prisons and Indian Lunacy (Madras Amendment) Act, 1938 (Mad. Act 14 of 1938);  
(ii) the Prisons (Madras Amendment) Act, 1940 (Mad. Act 5 of 1940);  
(iii) the Prisons (Madras Amendment) Act, 1947 (Mad. Act 18 of 1947); and  
(iv) the Prisons (Madras Amendment) No. II Act,1947 (Mad. Act 19 of 1947).  
(2) the Punjab by s. 2 of the Prisons (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1926 (Punjab Act 9 of 1926).  
(3) Delhi by Delhi Act 6 of 1956.  
(4) Assam by Assam Act 12 of 1956.  
(5) Orissa by Orissa Act 23 of 1956 and 29 of 1958.  
(6) West Ben gal by West Bengal Act 22 of 1957.  
(7) Himachal Pradesh by Himachal Pradesh Act 10 of 1974.  
(8) Kerala by Kerala Act 10 of 1976.  
The Act has been extended to — 
(1) NEFA by Reg. 30 of 1960. subject to certain modifications, vide s. 3 and the Schedule, ibid.                  
(w.e.f. 1 -11-1960).  
(2) the whole of Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Pradesh Act 40 of 1961.  
(3) Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
(4) Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the Fir st Schedule.  
(5) Lakshadweep (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967): vide Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
(6) the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968. s. 3 and the Schedule.  
(7) Extended to the union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Union territory of Ladakh by Act 34 of 
2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
Rep. in part (in West Bengal) by West Bengal Act 7 of 1948.  
Rep. in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956 , for “Part A States and Part C States”.  
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950 , for sub -section ( 2). 
4. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956 , for “Part B States”.  
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950 , for “province” which was subs. by the A O. 1948 for “pres idency”.  
6. Ins. by the A daptation of Laws  (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
7. The Civil Jails Act, 1874.  5 
 2. [Repeal. ]Rep. by the Repealing Act,  1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Definitions. —In this Act — 
(1) “prison ” means any jail or place used permanently or temporarily under the general 
or special orders of a State Government for the detention of prisoners, and includes all 
lands and buildings appurtenant thereto, but does not include — 
(a) any place for the confine ment of prisoners who are exclusively in the custody of the police;  
(b) any place specially appointed by the State Government unde r section 541 of the 1Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882); or  
(c) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general or special order, to 
be a subsidiary jail;  
(2) “criminal prisoner ” means any prisoner duly committed to custody under the writ, 
warrant or order of any Court or authority exercising criminal jurisdiction, or by order of a 
Court -marti al ; 
(3) “convicted criminal prisoner ” means any criminal prisoner under sentence of a Court or 
Court -martial, and includes a person detained in prison under the provisions of Chapter VIII 
of the 1Code of Criminal Procedure , 1882 (10 of 1882), or under the  2Prisoners Act, 1871              
(5 of 1871) ; 
(4) “civil prisoner ” means any prisoner who is not a criminal prisoner ; 
(5) “remission system ” means the rules for the time being in force regulating the award of marks to, 
and the consequent shortening of sentences of, prisoners in jail ; 
(6) “history -ticket ” means the ticket exhibiting such information as is required in respect of each 
prisoner b y this Act or the rules thereunder ; 
(7) “Inspector General ” means the Inspector General of Prisons ; 
(8) “Medical Subordinate ” means an Assistant Surgeon, Apothecary or qualified Hospital 
Assistant; and  
(9) “prohibited article ” means an article the introd uction or removal of which into or out of a prison 
is prohibited by any rule under this Act.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment  of section 3 ( 9 of 1894 ).—In section 3 of the Prisons Act, 1894  (9 of 1894) 
(hereinafter referred to as the said Act), for clause (5) the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(5) ‘remission system’ means the system of regulating the award of marks to, and the 
consequent shortening the sentences of prisoners in jail in accordance with the rules for the 
time being in force ; 
(5a) ‘furlough system’ means the system of releasing prisoners in jail on furlough in 
accordance with the rules for the time being in force.”  
[Vide the Orissa Act 29 of 1958, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 3 of Act IX of 1894 .—In section 3 of the  Prisons Act, 1894 (IX of 1894), 
hereinafter to as the said Act, for clause (5), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely: -- 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
2. See now the Prisoners Act, 1900 (3 of 1900).  
 6 
 “(5) ‘remission system’ means the system of regulation the award of marks to, and the consequent 
shortening of sentence o f, prisoners in jail in accordance with the rules for the time being in force;  
(5A) ‘furlough system’ means the system of releasing prisoners in jail in furlough in accordance with 
the rules for the time being in force.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XXVII of 1953, s. 2] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 3 of Act IX of 1894 .—In the Prisons Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as 
“the Principal Act”), in section 3, clause (8) shall be deleted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XLV of 1959, s. 2]  
CHAPTER  II 
MAINTENANCE AND OFFICERS OF PRISONS  
4. Accommodation for prisoners. —The State Government shall provide, for the prisoners in 
the territories under such Government, accommodation in prisons constructed and regulated in 
such manner as to comply with the requisitions of this Act in respect of the separation of 
prisoners.  
5. Inspector General. —An Inspector General shall be appointed for the territories subject to 
each State Government, and shall exercise, subject to the orders of the State Government, the 
general control and superinte ndence of all  prisons situated in the territories under such 
Government.  
6. Officers of prisons. —For every prison there shall be a Superintendent, a Medical Officer (who may 
also be the Superintendent), a Medical Subordinate, a Jailer and such other office rs as the State 
Government thinks necessary :  
Provided that 1[the State Government of Bombay] may 2*** declare by order in writing that in any 
prison specified in the order the office of Jailer shall be held by the person appointed to be 
Superintendent.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 6 of Act IX of 1894. —In section 6 of the principal Act shall be renumbered 
as sub -section (1) of that section.  
(2) In sub -section (1) so renumbered — 
 (a) after the words “a Superintendent” the brackets and w ords “(who may be a Deputy 
Inspector -General of Prisons)” shall be inserted;  
 (b) the words “a Medical Subordinate” shall be deleted;  
 (c) after the said sub -section ( 1), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“(2) Where one or more Deputy Superintendents are appointed for a prison, they shall, 
subject to the general or special orders of the Inspector -General, exercise, carry out or 
discharge all or any of the powers, duties and functions of a Superintendent under this Act, or 
any law for th e time being in force, as the Superintendent may delegate to them.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XLV of 1959, s. 3]  
7. Temporary accommodation for prisoners. —Whenever it appears to the Inspector 
General that the number of prisoners in any prison is greater than can conveniently or safely be 
kept therein, and it is not convenient to transfer the excess number to some other prison,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “the Governor of Bombay in Council”.  
2. The words “with the previous sanction of the G. G. in C.” omitted, ibid.  7 
 or whenever from the outbreak of epidemic disease within any prison, or for any other reason, it is 
desirable to provide for the temporary shelter and safe custody of any prisoners,  
provision shall be made, by such officer and in such manner as the State Government may 
direct, for the shelter and safe custody in temporary prisons of so many of the prisoners as 
cannot be conveniently or safely  kept in the prison.  
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES OF OFFICERS  
Generally  
8. Control and duties of officers of prisons .—All officers of a prison shall obey the directions 
of the Superintendent; all officers subordinate to the Jailer shall perform such duties as may be 
imposed on them by the Jailer with the sanction of the Superintendent or be prescribed by rules 
under section 1[59]. 
9. Officers not to have business dealings with prisoners. —No officer of a prison shall sell or 
let, nor shall any person in trust for or employed by him sell or let, or derive any benefit from selling or 
letting, any article to any prisoner or have any money or other business dealings, directly or indirectly, 
with any prisoner.  
10. Officers not to be interested in prison -contracts. —No offic er of a prison shall, nor 
shall any person in trust for or employed by him, have any interest, direct or indirect, in any 
contra ct for the supply of the prison : nor shall he derive any benefit , directly or indirectly, from 
the sale or purchase of any artic le on behalf of the prison or belonging to a prisoner.  
Superintendent  
11. Superintendent. —(1) Subject to the orders of the Inspector General, the Superintendent 
shall manage the prison in all matters relating to discipline, labour, expenditure, punishment and 
control.  
(2) Subject to such general or special directions as may be given by the State Government, the 
Superintendent of a prison other than a central prison or a prison situated in a presidency -town 
shall obey all orders not inconsistent with this Act or any rule thereunder which may be given 
respecting the prison by the District Magistrate, and shall report to the Inspector General all such 
orders and the action taken thereon.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 11 of Act IX of 1894 .—In section 11 of the principal Act, in             
sub-section ( 2), the words  “a central prison or” shall be deleted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XLV of 1959, s. 4]  
12. Records to be kept by Superintendent .—The Superintendent shall keep, or cause to be kept, the 
following records : —  
(1) a register of prisoners admitted;  
(2) a book showing when each prisoner is to be released;  
(3) a punishment -book for the entry of the punishments inflicted on prisoners for prison -offences ; 
(4) a visitors book for the entry of any observation made by the visitors touching any matters 
connected with the administration of the prison;  
(5) a record of the money and other articles taken from prisoners;  
and al l such other records a s may be prescribed by rules under section 59 2***. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “60”.  
2.The words and figures “or section 60” omitted by the A. O. 1937.  8 
 Medical Officer  
13. Duties of Medical Officer .—Subject to the control of the Superintendent, the Medical Officer 
shall have charge of the sanitary administration of the prison, and shall perform such 1duties as may be 
prescribed by rules made by the State Government under section 1[59]. 
14. Medical Officer to report in certain cases. —Whenever the Medical Officer has reason to 
believe that the mind of a prisoner is, or is likely to be, injuriously affect ed by the discipline or treatment 
to which he is subjected, the Medical Officer shall report the case in writing to the Superintendent, 
together with such observations as he may think proper.  
This report, with the orders of the Superintendent thereon, shal l forthwith be sent to the Inspector 
General for information.  
15. Report on death of prisoner. —On the death of any prisoner, the Medical Officer shall 
forthwith record in a register the following particulars, so far as they can be ascertained, namely : — 
(1) the day on which the deceased first complained of illness or was observed to be ill,  
(2) the labour, if any, on which he was engaged on that day,  
(3) the scale of his diet on that day,  
(4) the day on which he was admitted to hospital,  
(5) the day on which the Medical Officer was first informed of the illness,  
(6) the nature of the disease,  
(7) when the deceased was last seen before his death by the Medical Officer or Medical 
Subordinate,  
(8) when the prisoner died, and  
(9) (in cases where a post-mortem examination is made) an account of the appearan ces after death,  
together with any special remarks that appear to the Medical Officer to be required.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 15 of Act IX of 1894. —In section 15 of the principal Act, in clause (7), the 
words “or Medical Subordinate” shall be deleted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XLV of 1959, s. 5]  
Jailer  
16. Jailer. —(1) The Jailer  shall reside in the prison, unless the Superintendent permits him in writing 
to reside elsewhere.  
(2) The Jailer shall not, without the Inspector General ’s sanction in writing, be concerned in any other 
employment.  
17. Jailer to give notice of death of prisoner. —Upon  the death of a prisoner, the Jailer shall give 
immediate notice thereof to the Superintende nt and the Medical Subordinate.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 17 of Act IX of 1894. —In section 17 of the principal Act, for the words 
“Medical Subordinate” the words “Medical Officer” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XLV of 1959, s. 6]  
                                                      
1.For rules as to Medical Officer’s duties under s. 13, see different local Rules and Orders.  9 
 18. Responsibility of Jailer. —The Jailer shall be responsible for the safe custody of the records to 
be kept under section 12, for the commitment warrants and all other documents con fided to his care, and 
for the money and o ther articles taken from prisoners.  
19. Jailer to be present at night. —The Jailer shall not be absent from the prison for a night 
without permission in writing from the Superintendent but, if absent without leave for a night from 
unavoidable necessity, he shall immediately report the fact and the cause of it to the Superintendent.  
20. Powers of Deputy and Assistant Jailers. —Where a Deputy Jailer or Assistant Jailer is appointed 
to a prison, he shall, subject to the orders of the Superintendent, be competent to perform any of the 
duties, and be subject to all the responsibilities, of a Jailer under this Act or any rule thereu nder.  
Subordinate Officers  
21. Duties of gate keeper. —The officer acting as gate -keeper, or any other officer of the prison, may 
examine anything carried in or out of the prison, and may stop and search or cause to be searched any 
person suspected of bring ing any prohibited article into or out of the prison, or of carrying out any 
property belonging to the prison, and, if any such article or property be found, shall give immediate notice 
thereof to the Jailer.  
22. Subordinate officers not to be absent witho ut leave. —Officers subordinate to the Jailer shall not 
be absent from the prison without leave from the Superintendent or from the Jailer.  
23. Convict officers. —Prisoners who have been appointed as officers of prisons shall be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
CHAPTER IV  
ADMISSION , REMOVAL AND DISCHARGE OF PRISONERS  
24. Prisoners to be examined on admission. —(1) Whenever a prisoner is admitted into prison, he 
shall be searched, and all weapons and prohibi ted articles shall be taken from him.  
(2) Every criminal prisoner shall also, as soon as possible after admission, be examined under the 
general or special orders of the Medical Officer, who shall enter or cause to be entered in a book, to be 
kept by the Jailer, a record of the state of the prisoner ’s health, and of any wounds or marks on his person, 
the class of labour he is fit for if sentenced to rigorous imprisonment, and any observations which the 
Medical Officer thinks fit to add.  
(3) In the case of female prisoners the search and examination shall be carried out by the matron under 
the general or special orders of the Medical Officer.  
25. Effects of prisoners. —All money or other articles in respect whereof no order of a com petent 
Court has been made , and which may with proper authority be brought into the prison by any criminal 
prisoner or sent to the prison for his use, shall be placed in the custody of the Jailer.  
26. Removal and discharge of prisoners. —(1) All prisoners, previously to being remove d to any 
other prison, shall be examined by the Medical Officer.  
(2) No prisoner shall be removed from one prison to another unless the Medical Officer certifies that 
the prisoner is free from any illness rendering him unfit for removal.  
(3) No prisoner sh all be discharged against his will from prison, if labouring under any acute or 
dangerous distemper, nor until, in the opinion of the Medical Officer, such discharge is safe.  
CHAPTER V  
DISCIPLINE OF PRISONERS  
27. Separation of prisoners .—The requisitions o f this Act with respect to the separation of prisoners 
are as follows : —  10 
 (1) in a prison containing female as well as male prisoners, the females shall be imprisoned in 
separate buildings, or separate parts of the same building, in such manner as to preve nt their seeing, or 
conversing or holding any intercourse with, the male prisoners ;  
(2) in a prison where male prisoners under the age of  1[twenty -one] are confined, means shall be 
provided for separating them altogether from the other prisoners and for separating those of them who 
have arrived at the age of puberty from those who have not;  
(3) unconvicted criminal prisoners shall be kept apart from convicted criminal prisoners ; and  
(4) civil prisoners shall be kept apart from criminal prisoners.  
28. Association and segregation of prisoners. —Subject  to the requirements of the last forego -
ing section, convicted criminal prisoners may be confined either in association or individually in 
cells or partly in one way and partly in the other.  
29. Solitary con finement. —No cell shall be used for solitary confinement unless it is fur nished 
with the means of enabling the prisoner to communicate at any time with an officer of the prison, and 
every prisoner so confined in a cell for more than twenty -four hours, whe ther as a punishment or 
otherwise, shall be visited at least once a day by the Medical Officer or Medical Subordinate.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 29 of Act IX of 1894. —In section 29 of the principal Act, for the 
words “or Medical Subo rdinate” the words “or any  Officer  authorised by the Medical Officer in 
this behalf” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XLV of 1894, s. 7]  
30. Prisoners under sentence of death. —(1) Every prisoner under sentence of death shall, 
immediately on his arrival in the prison after sentence, be searched by, or by order of, the Jailer and all 
articles shall be taken from him which the Jailer deems it dangerous or inexpedient to leave in his 
possession.  
(2) Every such prisoner shall be confined in a cell apa rt from all other prisoners, and shall be placed 
by day and by night under the charge of a guard.  
CHAPTER VI  
FOOD, CLOTHING AND BEDDING OF CIVIL AND UNCONVICTED  CRIMINAL PRISONERS  
31. Maintenance of certain prisoners from private sources. —A civil prisoner or an 
unconvic ted criminal prisoner shall be permitted to maintain himself, and to purchase, or receive from 
private sources at proper hours, food, clothing, bedding or other necessaries, but subject to examination 
and to such rules as may be approved by the Inspector General.  
32. Restriction on transfer of food and clothing between certain prisoners. —No part of 
any food, clothing, bedding or other necessaries belonging to any civil or unconvicted criminal prisoner 
shall be given, hired or sold to any othe r prisoner; and any prisoner transgressing the provisions of this 
section shall lose the privilege of purchasing food or receiving it from private sources, for such time as 
the Superintendent thinks proper.  
33. Supply of clothing and bedding to civil and unconvicted criminal prisoners. —(1) 
Every civil prisoner and unconvicted prisoner unable to provide himself with sufficient clothing 
and bedding shall be supplied by the Superintendent with such clothing and bedding as may be 
necessary.  
(2) When any civil prisoner has been committed to prison in execution of a decree in favour 
of a private person, such person, or his representative, shall, within forty -eight hours after the 
receipt by him of a demand in writing, pay to the Superintendent the cost of the clo thing and 
bedding so supplied to the prisoner; and in default of such payment the prisoner may be 
released.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1930, s. 2, for “eighteen”.  
 11 
 CHAPTER VII  
EMPLOYMENT OF PRISONERS  
34. Employment of civil prisoners. —(1) Civil prisoners may, with the Superintendent ’s per mission, 
work and follow any trade or profession.  
(2) Civil prisoners finding their own implements, and not maintained at the expense of the prison, 
shall be allowed to receive the whole of their earnings; but the earnings of such as are furnished with 
implements or are maintained at the expense of the prison shall be subject to a deduction, to be 
determined by the Superintendent, for the use of implements and the cost of maintenance.  
35. Emplo yment of criminal prisoners. —(1) No criminal prisoner sentenced to labour or 
employed on labour at his own desire shall, except on an emergency with the sanction in writing of the 
Superintendent, be kept to labour for more than nine hours in any one day.  
(2) The Medical Officer shall from time to time examine the labouring prisoners while they are 
employed, and shall at least once in every fortnight cause to be recorded upon the history -ticket of each 
prisoner employed on labour the weight of such prisoner at the time.  
(3) When the Medical Officer is of opinion that the health of any prisoner suffers from employment 
on any kind or class of labour, such prisoner shall not be employed on that labour but shall be placed on 
such other kind or class of labour as the Medical Officer may consider suited for him.  
36. Employment of criminal pri soners sentenced to simple imprisonment. —Provision 
shall be made by the Superintendent for the employment (as long as they so desire) of all criminal 
prisoners sentenced to simple imprisonment; but no prisoner not sentenced to rigorous imprisonment shall 
be punished for neglect of work excepting by such alteration in the scale of diet as may be established by 
the rules of the prison in the case of neglect of work by such a prisoner.  
CHAPTER VIII  
HEALTH OF PRISONERS  
37. Sick prisoners. —(1) The names of prisoners desiring to see the Medical Subordinate or 
appearing out of health in mind or body shall, without delay, by reported by the officer in immediate 
charge of such prisoners to the Jailer.  
(2) The Jailer shall, without delay, call the attention of th e Medical Subordinate to any prisoners 
desiring to see him, or who is ill, or whose state of mind or body appears to require attention, and shall 
carry into effect all written directions given by the Medical Officer or Medi cal Subordinate respecting 
alterations of the discipline or treatment of any such prisoner.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 37 of Act IX of 1894 .—(1) in sub -section ( 1), for the words 
“Medical Subordinate” the words “Medical Officer” shall be substituted.  
(2) In sub -section ( 2)— 
(a) for the words “Medical Subordinate”, where they occur for the first time, the words 
“Medical Officer” shall be substituted.  
(b) the words “or Medical Subordinate” shall be deleted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XLV of 1959, s. 8]  
38. Record of directions of Medical Officers. —All directions given by the Medical Officer or 
Medical Subordinate in relation to any prisoner, with the exception of orders for the supply of medicines 
or directions relating to such matters as are carried into effect by the Medical O fficer himself or under his 
superintendence, shall be entered day by day in the prisoner ’s history -ticket or in such other record as the 
State Government may by rule direct, and the Jailer shall make an entry in its proper place stating in 12 
 respect of each direction the fact of its having been or not having been complied with, accompanied by 
such observations, if any, as the Jailer thinks fit to make, and the date of the entry.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 38 of Act IX of 1894. —In section  38  of the principal Act, -- 
(1) the words “or Medical Subordinate” shall be deleted;  
(2) in the marginal note, for the word “Officers” the wor d “Officer ” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Bombay Act XLV of 1959, s. 9]  
39. Hospital. —In every prison an hospital o r proper place for the reception of sick prisoners  shall be 
provided.  
CHAPTER IX  
VISITS  TO PRISONERS  
40. Visits to civil and unconvicted criminal prisoners. —Due provision shall be made for 
the admission, at proper times and under proper restrictions, into every prison of persons with 
whom civil or unconvicted criminal prisoners may desire to communicate, care being taken that 
so far as may be consistent with the interests of justice, prisoners under trial may see their duly 
qualified legal advisers without the presence of any other person.  
41. Search of visitors. —(1) The Jailer may demand the name and address of any visitor to prisoner, 
and, when the Jailer has any ground for suspicion, may search any visitor, or cause him to be searched, 
but the search shall not be made in the presence of any prisoner or of another visitor.  
(2) In case of any such visitor refusing to permit himself to be searched, the Jailer may deny him 
admission; and the grounds of such proceeding, with the particulars thereof, shall b e entered in such 
record as the State Government may direct.  
CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES IN RELATION TO PRISONS  
42. Penalty for introduction or removal of prohibited articles into or from prison and 
com munication with prisoners. —Whoever,  contrary to any rule under  section 1[59] introduces 
or removes or attempts by any means whatever to introduce or remove, into or from any prison, 
or supplies or attempts to supply to any prisoner outside the limits of a prison, any prohibited 
article,  
and every officer of a prison who, contrary to any such rule, knowingly suffers any such article to be 
introduced into or removed from any prison, to be possessed by any prisoner, or to be supplied to any 
prisoner outside the limits of a prison,  
and whoever, contrary to any such rule, communicates or attempts to communicate with  any 
prisoner,  
and whoever abets any offence made punishable by this section,  
shall, on conviction before a  Magistrate, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six  
months, or to fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, or to both.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of Section 42, Central Act No. 9 of 1894. - In Section 42 of the Prisons Act. 1894 
(Central Act No. 9 of 1894), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in its application to the State of 
Rajasthan, for the existing expression "for a term not exceeding six months, or to fine not exceeding two 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O, 1937, for “60”.  
 13 
 hundred rupees, or to both", the expression "for a term not exceeding three years, or to fine not exceeding 
three thousand rupees, or to both" shall b e substituted.  
[Vide  Rajasthan Act 26 of 2015, s. 2]  
43. Power to arrest for offence under section 42. —When  any person, in the presence of 
any officer of a prison, commits any offence specified in the last foregoing section, and refuses 
on demand of such officer to state his name and residence, or gives a name or residence which 
such officer knows, or has reason to believe, to be false, such officer may arrest him, and shall 
without unnecessary delay make him over to a Police -officer, and thereupon such Po lice-officer 
shall proceed as if the offence had been committed in his presence.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of Section 43, Central Act No. 9 of 1894. - In Section 43 of the principal Act, for the 
existing expression "and refuses on demand of such o fficer to state his name and residence, or gives a 
name or residence which such officer knows, or has reason to believe, to be false," shall be deleted.  
[Vide  Rajasthan Act 26 of 2015, s. 3]  
44. Publication of penalties. —The Superintendent shall cause to b e affixed, in a                  
conspicuous place outside the prison, a notice in English and the Vernacular setting forth the 
acts prohibited under section 42 and the penalties incurred by their commission.  
 
 
CHAPTER XI  
PRISON -OFFENCES  
45. Prison -offences.—The following acts are declared to be prison -offences when commit ted by a 
prisoner: — 
(1) such wilful disobedience to any regulation of the prison as shall have been declared by rules 
made under section 59 to be a prison -offence ;  
(2) any assault or use of criminal force ;  
(3) the use of insulting or threatening language ;  
(4) immoral or indecent or disorderly behaviour ;  
(5) wilfully disabling himself from labour ;  
(6) contumaciously refusing to work ;  
(7) filling, cutting, altering or removing handcuffs, fetters or bars without due authority ;  
(8)  wilful idleness or negligence at work by any prisoner sentenced to rigorous imprisonment ;  
(9)  wilful mismanagement of work by any prisoner sentenced to rigorous imprisonment ;  
(10)  wilful damage to prison -property ;  
(11)  tampering with or defacing history -tickets, records or documents ;  
(12) receiving, possessing or transferring any prohibited article ;  
(13)  feigning illness ;  
(14)  wilfully bringing a false accusation against any officer  or prisoner ;  
(15)  omitting or refusing to report, as soon as it comes to his knowledge, the occurrence of any 
fire, any plot or conspiracy, any escape, attempt or preparation to escape, and any attack or preparation 
for attack upon any prisoner or priso n-official ; and  
(16) conspiring to escape, or to assist in escaping, or to commit any other of the offen ces aforesaid.  
146. Punishment of such offences. —The Superintendent may examine any person to 
touch ing any such offence, and determine thereupon, and  punish such offence by — 
(1) a formal warning :  
Explanation. —A formal warning shall mean a warning personally addressed to a prisoner by the 
Superintendent and recorded in the punishment -book and on the prisoner ’s history -ticket ;  
  
                                                      
1. For rules issued with reference to clauses ( 4),(6) and ( 7) of section 46 see Gazette of India, 1923, Pt. 1, p.1751.  14 
 (2) change of labour  to some more irksome or severe form 1[for such period as may be prescribed 
by rules made by the 2[State Government]] ;  
(3) hard labour for a period not exceeding seven days in the case of convicted criminal prisoners 
not sentenced to rigorous imprisonment  ; 
(4) such loss of privileges admissible under the remission system for the time being in force as 
may be prescribed by rules made by the  3[State Government] ;  
(5) the substitution of gunny or other coarse fabric for clothing of other material, not being 
woollen, for a period which shall not exceed three months ;  
(6) imposition of handcuffs of such pattern and weight, in such manner and for such period, as may 
be prescribed by rules made by the  3[State Government] ;  
(7) imposition of fetters of such patter n and weight, in such manner and for such period, as may be 
prescribed by rules made by the  3[State Government] ;  
(8) separate confinement for any period not exceeding  3[three ] months ;  
Explanation. —Separate confinement means such confinement with or without labour as 
secludes a prisoner from communication with, but not from sight of, other prisoners, and allows 
him not less than one hour ’s exercise per diem and to have his meals in association with one or 
more other prisoners ;  
(9) penal diet, —that is, restriction of diet in such manner and subject to such con ditions regarding 
labour as may be prescribed by the State Government :  
Provided that such restriction of diet shall in no case be applied to a prisoner for more than ninety -six 
consecutive hours , and shall not be repeated except for a fresh offence nor until after an interval of 
one week ;  
(10) cellular confinement for any period not exceeding fourteen days :  
Provided that after each period of cellular confinement an interval of not less duration than such period 
must elapse before the prisoner is again sentenced to cellular or solitary confinement . 
Explanation. —Cellular  confinement means such confinement with or without labour  as entirely secludes a 
prisoner from communication with, but not from sight of, other prisoners ;  
4*                       *                             *                                *                                * 
5[(11)] penal diet as defined in c lause ( 9) combined with  6[cellular] confinement  7***; 
2[(12)] whipping, provided that the number of stripes shall not exceed thirty : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall render any female or civil prisoner liable to the imposition of any 
form of handcuffs or fetters, or to whipping.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam.  
Amendment of section 46 of Act 9 of 1894. —(1) In Section 46 of the Principal Act, clause (12) and the 
words “or to whipping” appearing in the proviso to the said section shall be omitted and a full stop shall be 
substituted for the comma appearing after the word “fetter” in the said proviso.  
  (2) In section 46 of the Principal Act, add the following clauses after clause (11), namely:  — 
“(12) forfeiture of class, grade, or prison privileges for a period not exceeding three months;  
 (13) permanent or temporary reduction from a higher to a lower class  or grade ”. 
 [Vide Assam Act 12 of 1956, s. 2.]  
  
                                                      
1.Added by Act 17 of 1925, s. 2 . 
2.Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “G. G . in C.  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 1925, s . 2, for “six”.  
4. Clause ( 11) omitted  by Act 17 of 1925, s. 2.  
5. Clauses ( 12) and ( 13) renumbered as  clauses  (11) and ( 12) respectively  by s. 2 , ibid. 
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “solitary”.  
7. The words “as defined in clause (11)” omitted  by s. 2, ibid. 15 
 Orissa  
Amendment of section 46 (Act 9 of 1894 ).—In section 46 of the said Act — 
(i) in clause ( 4) for the words “the remission system” the words “the remission or furlough 
system” shall be substituted;  
(ii) clause (5) shall be omitted . 
[Vide the Orissa Act 29 of 1958, s. 3]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section  46 (Act  9 of 1894 ).—In section 46 of the Prisons Act, 1894 (9 of 1894), after 
clause ( 4) the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(4-a) temporary forfeiture of class, grade or prison -privileges or temporary or permanent reduction from a 
higher to a lower class or grade”.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 23 of 1956, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 46 of Act IX of 1894. —In section 46 of the said Act, in clause (4), for the 
words “the remission system” the words “the remission or furlough system” shall be substituted ”. 
[Vide Bombay Act XXVII of 1953, s. 3]  
47. Plurality of punishment, under section 46 .—1[(1)] Any two of th e punishments 
enumerated  in the last foregoing section may be awarded for any such offence in combination, 
subject to the following exceptions, namely : — 
(1) formal warning shall not be combined with any other punishment except loss of privileges under 
clause ( 4) of that section ;  
(2) penal diet shall not be combined with change of labour under clause ( 2) of that section, nor shall 
any additional period of penal diet awarded singly be combined with any period of penal diet awarded in 
combination with  2[cellular]  confinement  ; 
3[(3) cellular confinement shall not he combined with separate confinement, so as to prolong the total 
period of seclusion to which the prisoner shall be liable  ;] 
(4) whipping shall not be combined with any other form of punishment except cellular  4[and] 
separate confinement and loss of privileges admissible under the remission system ;  
5[(5) no punishment will be combined with any other punishment in contravention of rules made by the 
6[State Government]] 
7[(2) No  punishment shall b e awarded for any such offence so as to combine, with the punishment 
awar ded for any other such offence two o f the punishment which may not b e awar ded in combination for 
any such offence.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam.  
Amendment of Section 47 of Act IX of 1894. —In sub -section ( 1) of section 47 of the Principal Act, 
clause ( 4) shall be omitted.  
[Vide Assam Act 12 of 1956, s. 3. ] 
Orissa  
Amendment of  section 47 ( Act 9 of 1894 ).—In section 47 of the said Act, in clause ( 4) of  
sub-section ( 1) for the words “the remission system” the words “the remission or furlough system” shall 
be substituted.  
                                                      
1. Section 47 re -numbered as sub-section ( 1) of section 47 by Act 17 of 1925, s. 3 . 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “solitary”.  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for exception ( 3). 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 1914, s . 2 and the First Schedule , for “or”.  
5. Added  by Act 17 of 1925, s. 3.  
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “G.G. in C.”.  
7. Added  by Act 17 of 1925, s. 3.  16 
 [Vide the Orissa Act 29 of 1958, s. 4]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 47 of Act  IX of 1894. —In section 47 of the said act, in clause (4) of sub -
section (1), for the words “the remission system” the words “the remission or furlough system” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XXVII of 1953, s. 4]  
48. Award of punishments under  sections 46 and 47. —(1) The Superintendent shall have power to 
award any of the punishments  enumerated in the two last foregoing sections, subject, in the case of 
separate confinement for a period exceeding one month, to the previous confirma tion of the Inspector 
General.  
(2) No officer subordinate to the Superintendent shall have power to awar d any punish ment whatever.  
Orissa  
Insertion of n ew section 48 -A (Act 9 of 1894 ).—After section 48 of the said Act, the following new 
section shall be inserted, namely: — 
48-A. Punishment for breach of conditions of suspension of sentence .—If any prisoner f ails 
without sufficient cause to observe any of the conditions on which his sentence was suspended or 
remitted or furlough was granted to him, he shall be deemed to have committed a prison offence and 
the Superintendent may after obtaining his explanation,  punish such offence by — 
(1) a formal warning as provided in clause (1) of section 46; or  
(2) Reduction in grade if such prisoner has been appointed as an officer of prison; or  
(3) Loss of privileges admissible under the remission or furlough system; or  
(4) Loss of such other privileges as the State Government may, by a general or special order direct.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 29 of 1958. s. 5]  
Maharashtra  
After section 48 of the said Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely: --Insertion of 
section 48A in act IX of 1894. — 
“48A. Punishment for breach of conditions of suspension of sentence, etc .-If  any prisoner 
fails without sufficient cause to observe any of the conditions on which his sentence was suspended 
or remitted or furlough was granted to hi m, he shall be deemed to have committed a prison offence 
and the superintendent may, after obtaining his explanation, punish such offence by — 
(1) a formal warning as provided in clause (1) of section 4 6; 
(2) reduction in grade if such prisoner has been app ointed or furlough system; or  
(3) loss of privileges admissible under the remission or furlough system; or  
(4) loss of such other privileges as the state Government may by a general or special order 
direct.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XXVII of 1953, s. 5]  
49. Punish ments to be in accordance with foregoing sections. —Except by order of a Court of 
Justice , no punishment other than the punishments specified in the foregoing sections shall be inflicted on 
any prisoner, and no punishment shall be inflicted on any prisoner otherwise than in accordance with the 
provisions of those sections.  
50. Medical Officer to certify to fitness of prisoner for punishment. —(1) No punishment of penal 
diet, either singly or in combination, or of whipping, or of change of labour under section  46, clause ( 2), 
shall be executed until the prisoner to whom such punishment has been awarded has been examined by 17 
 the Medical Officer, who, if he considers the prisoner fit to undergo the punishment, shall certify 
accordingly in the appropriate column of  the punishment -book pres cribed in section 12.  
(2) If he considers the prisoner unfit to undergo the punishment, he shall in like manner record his 
opinion in writing and shall state whether the prisoner  is absolutely unfit for punish ment of the kind 
awar ded, or whether he considers any modification necessary.  
(3) In the latter case he shall state what extent of punishment he thinks the prisoner can undergo 
without injury to his health.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of Section 50 of Act 9 of 1894. —In sub-section ( 1) of section 50 of the Principal Act 
the words and comma “or of whipping,” shall be omitted.   
[Vide Assam Act 12 of 1956, s. 4.]  
51. Entries in punishment -books.—(1) In the punishment -book prescribed in section 12 there shall 
be recorded, in respect of every punishment inflicted, the prisoner ’s name, register number and the class 
(whether habitual or not) to which he belongs, the prison -offence of which he was guilty, the date on 
which such prison -offence was committed, the number of previous prison -offence s recorded against the 
prisoner,  and the date of his last prison -offence, the punish ment awarded, and the date of infliction.  
(2) In the case of every serious prison -offence, the names of the witnesses proving the offence shall 
be recorded,  and, in the case of offences for which whipping is awarded, the Superintendent shall record 
the substance of the evidence of the witnesses, the defence of the prisoner, and the finding with the 
reasons therefor . 
(3) Against the entries relating to each punishment the Jailor and Superintendent shall affix their 
initials as evidence of the correctness of the entries . 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of Section 51 of Act 9 of 1 894.—In sub -section ( 2) of Section 51 of the 
Principal Act the words “in the words “in the cases of offences for which whipping is awarded” and 
the commas before this words and thereafter shall be omitted.  
[Vide  Assam Act 12 of 1956, s. 5]  
52. Procedure on committal of heinous offence.—If any prisoner is guilty of any offence 
against prison -discipline which, by reason of his having frequently committed such offences or 
otherwise, in the opinion of the Superintendent, is not adequately punishable by the infliction of any 
punishme nt which he has power under this Act to award, the Superintendent may forward such 
prisoner to the Court of the District Magistrate or of any  Magistrate of the first class 1[or Pre sidency 
Magistrate] having jurisdiction, together with a statement of the circumstances, and such Magistrate 
shall thereupon inquire into and try the charge so brought against the prisoner, and, upon conviction, 
may sentence him to imprisonment which may extend to one year, such term to be in addition to any 
term for which such prisoner was undergoing imprisonment when he com mitted such offence, or 
may sentence him to any of the punishments enumerated in section 46 :  
2[Provided that any such case may be transferred for inquiry and trial by the District Magis trate to any 
Magistr ate of the first class and by a Chief Presidency Magistrate to any other Presidency Magistrate : 
and] 
Provided also that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.  
53. Whipping. —(1) No punishment of whipping shall be inflicted in instalments, or except in the 
presence of the Superintendent and Medical Officer or Medical Subordinate.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 1910, s. 2.  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the proviso.  18 
 (2) Whipping shall be inflicted with a light ratan not less than half an inch in diameter on the 
buttocks, and in case of prisoners under the age of sixteen it shal l be inflicted, in the way of school 
discipline, with a lighter ratan.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of Section 53 of Act 9 of 1894. —Section 53 of the Principal Act shall be omitted.  
[Vide Assam Act 12 of 1956, s. 6.]  
54. Offences by prison -subordinates. —(1) Every Jailor or officer of a prison subordinate to him 
who shall be guilty of any violation of duty or wilful breach o r neglect of any rule or regula tion or lawful 
order made by competent authority, or who shall withdraw from the d uties of his office without 
permission, or without having given previous notice in writing of his intention for the period of two 
months, or who shall wilfully overstay any leave granted to him, or who shall engage without authority in 
any employment other  than his prison -duty, or who shall be guilty of cowardice, shall be liable, on 
conviction before a Magistrate, to fine not exceeding two hun dred rupees, or to imprisonment for a period 
not exceeding three months, or to both.  
(2) No person shall under thi s section be punished twice for the same offence.  
CHAPTER XII  
MISCELLANOUS  
55. Extramural custody, control and employment of prisoners .—A prisoner, when being taken to 
or from any prison in which he may be lawfully confined, or whenever he is working outside or is 
otherwise beyond the limits of any such prison in or under the lawful custody or control of a prison -
officer belonging to such person, shall be deemed to be in prison and shall be subject to all the same 
incidents as if he were actually in pr ison.  
56. Confinement in irons. —Whenever the Superintendent considers it necessary (with reference 
either to the state of the prison or the character of the prisoners) for the safe custody of any prisoners that 
they should be confined in irons, he may, sub ject to such rules and instruc tions as may be laid down by 
the Inspector General with the sanction of the State Government, so confine them.  
57. Confinement of prisoners under sentence of transportation in irons. —(1) Prisoners under 
sentence of transportation may, subject to any rules made under section 1[59], be confined in fet ters for 
the first three months after admission to prison.  
(2) Should the Superintendent consider it necessary, either for the safe custody of the prisoner 
himself or for any other reason, that fetters should be retained on any such prisoner for more than three 
months, he shall apply to the Inspector General for sanction to their retention for the period for which he 
considers their retention necessary, and the Inspector General may sanction such retention accordingly . 
58. Prisoners not to be ironed by Jailer except under necessity. —No prisoner shall be put in 
irons or under mechanical restraint by the Jailer of his own authority, except in cas e of urgent necessity, 
in which case notice thereof shall be forthwith given to the Superintendent.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new Sections 58 -A and 58 -B, Central Act No. 9 of 1894. - After the existing Section 58 
and before the existing Section  59 of the principal Act, the following new sections shall be inserted, 
namely:  
                                                      
1. Subs . by the A.O.1937, for “60”.  19 
 "58-A. Release of prisoners on parole. - The State Government or any authority empowered by it 
may release a prisoner on parole in accordance with such rules as may be made in t his behalf.  
58-B. Surrender of prisoners on the expiry of the period of temporary release. - (1) Any prisoner 
released on parole shall surrender himself to the officer in charge of the prison from which he was 
released, on the expiry of the period of parole  or at such earlier time as he may be directed by the State 
Government or any authority empowered by it in this behalf.  
(2) Any Prisoner who does not surrender himself as required by sub -section (1) or fails to comply 
with any other conditions upon which h e is released, may be arrested by any police officer and shall be 
liable upon conviction to be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees or with both." . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 26 of 2015, s. 4]  
59. Power to make rules .—1[(1)] 2[The State Government may]  3[by notification in the Offi cial 
Gazette] make rules consistent with this Act — 
(1) defining the acts which shall constitute prison -offences ;  
(2) determining the classification of prison -offences into serious and minor offences ; 
(3) fixing the punishments admissible under this Act which shall be awardable for commission of 
prison -offences or classes thereof ;  
(4) declaring the circumstances in which  acts constituting both a prison -offence and  an 
offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may or may not be dealt with as a prison -
offence ;  
(5) for the award of marks and the shortening of sentences  ; 
(6) regulating the use of arms against any pris oner or body of prisoners in the case of an outbreak 
or attempt to escape ;  
(7) defining the circumstances and regulating the conditions under which prisoners in danger of 
death may be released ;  
4[(8) for the classification of prisons, and description and  construction of wards, cell s and other 
places of detention ; 
(9) for the regulation by numbers, length or character of sentences, or otherwise, of the prisoners to 
be co nfined in each class of prisons ; 
(10) for the government of prisons and for the appoint ment of all of ficers appointed under this Act ; 
(11) as to the food, bedding and clothing of criminal prisoners and of civil prisoners maintained 
otherwise than at their own cost ; 
(12) for the employment, instruction and control of convicts within or without prisons;  
(13) for defining articles the introduction or removal of which into or out of prisons without due 
authority is prohibited ; 
(14) for classifying and prescribing the forms of labour and regulating the periods of rest from 
labour ; 
(15) for regulating the disposal of the proceeds  of the employment of prisoners ; 
(16) for regulating the confinement in fetters of prison ers sentenced to transportation ; 
(17) for the classification and the separation of prisoners ; 
(18) for regulating the confinement  of convicted crim inal prisoners under section 28 ; 
                                                      
1. Section 59 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by the Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “The G.G. in C. may for any part of British India, and each L.G. with the  previous sanction of  the 
G.G in C. may for the territories under its administration”.  
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15-5-1986).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for clauses ( 8) and ( 9). 20 
 (19) for the preparation and  maintenance of history -tickets ; 
(20) for the selection and appointment of p risoners as officers of prisons ; 
(21) for rewards for good conduct ; 
(22) for regulating the transfer of prisoners whose term of transportation or imprison ment is about 
to expire subject, however, to the consent of the State Government of any other State to which a 
prisoner is to be transferred ; 
(23) for the treatment, transfer and disposal of criminal lu natics or recovered crimin al lunatics 
confined in prisons ; 
(24) for regulating the transmission of appeals and petitions from prisoners and their 
communications with their friends;  
(25) for the appointment and guidance of visitors of prisons ; 
(26) for extending any or all of the provisions of this Act and of the rules thereunder to 
subsidiary jails or special places of confinement appointed under section 541 of the 1Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882), and to the officers employed, and the  prisoners 
confined, therein;  
(27) in regard to the admission, custody, employment, dieting, treatment and release of prisoners; 
and 
(28) generally for carrying into effect the purposes of this Act .] 
2[(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the 
State Legislature.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 59 ( Act 9 of 1894 ).—In section 59  of the said Act, for clause (5) the 
following clause shall be substitute, namely: — 
“(5) for the award of marks,  granting remission or furlough, determining the conditions on 
which and the authority by which such remission or furlough shall be granted and the 
consequent shortening of the sentence.”  
[Vide  the Orissa Act 29 of 1958, s.  6] 
Rajasthan  
Amendment of Section 59, Central Act No. 9 of 1894. - In sub -section (1) of Section 59 of the 
principal Act, - 
(i) in clause (27), the existing word "and", appearing at the end, shall be deleted; and  
(ii) after the clause (27), so amended, and before the existing clause (28), the following new 
clause shall be inserted, namely: - 
"(27-a) for release on parole and determining the conditions on which and the authority by which 
prisoners may be released on parole; and"  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 26 of 2015, s. 5]  
  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986 s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  21 
 Maharashtra  
Amend ment of section 59 of Act IX of 1894. —In section 59 of the said Act, for clause (5), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(5) for the award of marks, granting remission or furlough, determining the conditions on which 
and the authority by which such remission or furlough shall be granted and the consequent shortening 
of the sentence.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XXVII of 1953, s. 6] 
160. [Power of Local Government to make rules. ] Rep. by the A. O. 1937. 
61. Exhibition of copies of rules. —Copies  of rules, under 2[section 59] so far as they affect 
the government of prisons, shall be exhibited, both in English and in the Vernacular, in some 
place to which all persons employed within a prison have access.  
62. Exercise of powers of Superintendent and Medical Officer. —All or any of the powers 
and duties conferred and imposed by this Act on a Superintendent or Medical Officer may in his absence 
be exercised and performed by such other officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf 
either by n ame or by his official designation.  
 
  
                                                      
1. This section has been incorporated with slight modificati ons in clauses ( 8) to ( 27) of s. 59.  
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “sections 59 and 60”.  
 22 
 THE SCHEDULE. —[Enactments repealed. ] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938),                
s. 2 and the Schedule . 
_______  