Summary:

THE PRISONERS ACT, 1900, is an Act to consolidate the law relating to prisoners confined by order of a Court. The Act extends to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States.

The Act is divided into six parts. Part I is the preliminary part, which includes the short title and extent of the Act and definitions of terms used in the Act. Part II deals with general provisions, including the obligation of officers in charge of prisons to detain persons duly committed to their custody, the return of writs and warrants after execution, and the power for State Governments to appoint Superintendents of Presidency prisons. Part III applies only to prisoners in the Presidency-towns and includes provisions for warrants to be directed to Police-officers, the delivery of persons sentenced to imprisonment or death, the delivery of persons sentenced to transportation, the delivery of persons committed by the High Court, the delivery of persons sentenced by Presidency Magistrates, the delivery of persons committed for trial by the High Court, custody pending hearing by the High Court under section 350 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and the delivery of persons arrested in pursuance of a warrant of the High Court or Civil Court in a Presidency-town. Part IV applies to prisoners outside the Presidency-towns and includes provisions for the execution of sentences passed by certain Courts, the authority of officers in charge of prisons to give effect to such sentences, and the procedure for dealing with doubts regarding the legality of warrants sent to officers in charge of prisons for execution. Part V, which dealt with persons under sentence of penal servitude, has been omitted. Part VI deals with the removal of prisoners, and Part VII deals with persons under sentence of transportation.

The Act includes several schedules and forms, which have been repealed by various subsequent legislation. The Act has been amended and extended to various states and territories in India, and certain provisions have been repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1914. The Act applies to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh by act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10-2019). Part IX has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.