Summary:

The Trade Unions Act, 1926 is an Act of the Indian Parliament that regulates the registration, operation, and activities of trade unions in India. The Act provides for the registration of trade unions and defines the law relating to registered trade unions. The Act includes definitions of various terms used in the Act, such as "executive," "office-bearer," "prescribed," "registered office," "registered Trade Union," "Registrar," and "trade dispute."

The Act includes chapters on preliminary provisions, registration of trade unions, rights and liabilities of registered trade unions, regulations, penalties and procedure. The preliminary provisions include the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. The registration of trade unions chapter includes provisions for the appointment of registrars, mode of registration, application for registration, provisions to be contained in the rules of a trade union, power to call for further particulars and to require alteration of name, registration, certificate of registration, minimum requirement about membership of a trade union, and cancellation of registration.

The rights and liabilities of registered trade unions chapter includes provisions on objects on which general funds may be spent, constitution of a separate fund for political purposes, criminal conspiracy in trade disputes, immunity from civil suit in certain cases, enforceability of agreements, right to inspect books of trade union, rights of minors to membership of trade unions, and disqualifications of office-bearers of trade unions. The regulations chapter includes provisions on power to make regulations and publication of regulations.

The penalties and procedure chapter includes provisions on failure to submit returns, supplying false information regarding trade unions, and cognizance of offences. The Act includes a schedule that lists the forms that are to be used for various purposes under the Act. The Act has been amended several times since its enactment to keep it up-to-date with changing times and circumstances.