Summary:
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is a law in India that aims to provide a mechanism for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes. The Act extends to the entire country and came into force on April 1, 1947. The Act defines various terms used throughout the law, including "appropriate Government," "arbitrator," "award," "banking company," "Board," "closure," "conciliation officer," "conciliation proceeding," "Court," "employer," "executive," "independent," "industry," "industrial dispute," "industrial establishment or undertaking," "insurance company," "labour court," "prescribed," "public utility service," "strike," "trade union," "Tribunal," "veteran workman," "wages," and "workman." For example, "appropriate Government" refers to the Central Government in relation to certain industries and the State Government in relation to other industrial disputes. "Award" means a determination of an industrial dispute or a question relating thereto by a Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal, or National Industrial Tribunal, including an arbitration award made under section 10A. "Banking company" includes a banking company as defined in the Banking Companies Act, 1949, having branches or other establishments in more than one State, and certain other banks and financial institutions. "Board" means a Board of Conciliation constituted under this Act. "Closure" means the permanent closing down of a place of employment or part thereof. "Conciliation officer" means a conciliation officer appointed under this Act. "Conciliation proceeding" means any proceeding held by a conciliation officer or Board under this Act. "Court" means a Court of Inquiry constituted under this Act. "Employer" means, in relation to an industry carried on by or under the authority of any department of the Central Government or a State Government, the authority prescribed in this behalf, or where no authority is prescribed, the head of the department. "Executive," in relation to a trade union, means the body, by whatever name called, to which the management of the affairs of the trade union is entrusted. "Industrial dispute" means any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of any person. "Industrial establishment or undertaking" means an establishment or undertaking in which any industry is carried on. "Insurance company" means an insurance company as defined in the Insurance Act, 1938, having branches or other establishments in more than one State. "Labour court" means a Labour Court constituted under this Act. "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. "Public utility service" means any railway service or any transport service for the carriage of passengers or goods by air; any section of an industry, which supplies power, light, or water to the public; any industry, which supplies house-building materials to the public; any industry, which supplies food-stuffs to the public; any industry, which is carried on in a mine or in an oil-field; any industry, which is carried on in a cottage industry; any industry, which is carried on in any other place, if the industry is specified in this behalf in the rules made by the appropriate Government; any industry, which is carried on in any other place, if the industry is carried on in such other place in such manner and under such circumstances as may be prescribed; and any industry, which is carried on in any other place, if the industry is specified in this behalf in any order made by the appropriate Government. "Strike" means a cessation of work by a body of persons employed in any industry acting in combination, or a concerted refusal, or a refusal under a common understanding, of any number of persons who are or have been so employed to continue to work or to accept employment; and any act or omission by a workman or a body of workmen shall be deemed to be a strike if such act or omission is in furtherance of a common understanding of such workmen or body of workmen and is intended or designed to cause, or has caused, a cessation of work in that industry. "Trade union" means any combination, whether temporary or permanent, formed primarily for the purpose of regulating the relations between workmen and employers or between workmen and workmen, or between employers and employers, or for imposing restrictive conditions on the conduct of any trade or business, and includes any federation of two or more trade unions. "Tribunal" means an Industrial Tribunal constituted under this Act. "Veteran workman" means a workman who has completed fifty-five years of age and has put in not less than twenty-five years of service in the industrial establishment or undertaking in which he is employed. "Wages" means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which would, if the terms of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a workman in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and includes 1[the cash value of any part of the remuneration payable in kind;] 2[(i) such allowances (including dearness allowance and house rent allowance) as the workman is for the time being entitled to; 3[(ia) the value of any house accommodation, or of the supply of light, water, medical attendance or other amenity or of any service or of any concessional supply of foodgrains or other articles, if the value of such amenity or service or concessional supply has been determined by agreement or under any law for the time being in force;] 4[(ib) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident fund, and the interest which may have accrued thereon;] 5[(ic) any retrenchment compensation or other compensation paid or payable to the workman in accordance with the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force;] 6[(id) any gratuity payable on the termination of his employment;] 7[(ie) any retrenchment compensation or other compensation paid or payable to the workman under any scheme framed under the Bidi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966 (13 of 1966), or under any scheme framed under the Employees’ Provident Funds and Family Pension Fund Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), or under any scheme framed under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 (46 of 1948);] and 8[(ii) any riding allowance, or the value of any travelling concession, if the terms of employment, express or implied, provide for the payment of the same;] but does not include— 9[(a) any bonus;] 1[(b) any commission or, 10[(bb) any conveyance allowance or the value of any travelling concession, if the terms of employment, express or implied, do not provide for the payment of the same;] 11[(c) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident fund, and the interest which may have accrued thereon, if such contribution and the interest thereon are not payable to the workman

The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is a law in India that provides for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes. The Act defines various terms used throughout the law, including "appropriate Government," "arbitrator," "award," "banking company," "Board," "closure," "conciliation officer," "conciliation proceeding," "Court," "employer," "executive," "independent," "industry," "industrial dispute," "industrial establishment or undertaking," "insurance company," "labour court," "prescribed," "public utility service," "strike," "trade union," "Tribunal," "veteran workman," "wages," and "workman." The Act defines "appropriate Government" as the Central Government in relation to certain industries and the State Government in relation to other industrial disputes. "Award" means a determination of an industrial dispute or a question relating thereto by a Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal, or National Industrial Tribunal, including an arbitration award made under section 10A. "Banking company" includes a banking company as defined in the Banking Companies Act, 1949, having branches or other establishments in more than one State, and certain other banks and financial institutions. "Board" means a Board of Conciliation constituted under this Act. "Closure" means the permanent closing down of a place of employment or part thereof. "Conciliation officer" means a conciliation officer appointed under this Act. "Conciliation proceeding" means any proceeding held by a conciliation officer or Board under this Act. "Court" means a Court of Inquiry constituted under this Act. "Employer" means, in relation to an industry carried on by or under the authority of any department of the Central Government or a State Government, the authority prescribed in this behalf, or where no authority is prescribed, the head of the department. "Executive," in relation to a trade union, means the body, by whatever name called, to which the management of the affairs of the trade union is entrusted. "Industrial dispute" means any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the employment or non-employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of any person. "Industrial establishment or undertaking" means an establishment or undertaking in which any industry is carried on. "Insurance company" means an insurance company as defined in the Insurance Act, 1938, having branches or other establishments in more than one State. "Labour court" means a Labour Court constituted under this Act. "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. "Public utility service" means any railway service or any transport service for the carriage of passengers or goods by air; any section of an industry, which supplies power, light, or water to the public; any industry, which supplies house-building materials to the public; any industry, which supplies food-stuffs to the public; any industry, which is carried on in a mine or in an oil-field; any industry, which is carried on in a cottage industry; any industry, which is carried on in any other place, if the industry is specified in this behalf in the rules made by the appropriate Government; any industry, which is carried on in any other place, if the industry is carried on in such other place in such manner and under such circumstances as may be prescribed; and any industry, which is carried on in any other place, if the industry is specified in this behalf in any order made by the appropriate Government. "Strike" means a cessation of work by a body of persons employed in any industry acting in combination, or a concerted refusal, or a refusal under a common understanding, of any number of persons who are or have been so employed to continue to work or to accept employment; and any act or omission by a workman or a body of workmen shall be deemed to be a strike if such act or omission is in furtherance of a common understanding of such workmen or body of workmen and is intended or designed to cause, or has caused, a cessation of work in that industry. "Trade union" means any combination, whether temporary or permanent, formed primarily for the purpose of regulating the relations between workmen and employers or between workmen and workmen, or between employers and employers, or for imposing restrictive conditions on the conduct of any trade or business, and includes any federation of two or more trade unions. "Tribunal" means an Industrial Tribunal constituted under this Act. "Veteran workman" means a workman who has completed fifty-five years of age and has put in not less than twenty-five years of service in the industrial establishment or undertaking in which he is employed. "Wages" means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which would, if the terms of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a workman in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and includes the cash value of any part of the remuneration payable in kind; such allowances (including dearness allowance and house rent allowance) as the workman is for the time being entitled to; the value of any house accommodation, or of the supply of light, water, medical attendance or other amenity or of any service or of any concessional supply of foodgrains or other articles, if the value of such amenity or service or concessional supply has been determined by agreement or under any law for the time being in force; any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident fund, and the interest which may have accrued thereon; any retrenchment compensation or other compensation paid or payable to the workman in accordance with the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force; any gratuity payable on the termination of his employment; any retrenchment compensation or other compensation paid or payable to the workman under any scheme framed under the Bidi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966, or under any scheme framed under the Employees’ Provident Funds and Family Pension Fund Act, 1952, or under any scheme framed under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948; and any riding allowance, or the value of any travelling concession, if the terms of employment, express or implied, provide for the payment of the same; but does not include any bonus; any commission or, any conveyance allowance or the value of any travelling concession, if the terms of employment, express or implied, do not provide for the payment of the same; any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident fund, and the interest which may have accrued thereon, if such contribution and the interest thereon are not payable to the workman; any gratuity payable on the termination of employment, if it is payable otherwise than under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; any retrenchment compensation or other compensation payable to the workman under any scheme framed under any other law for the time being in force; any house rent allowance granted to the workman to meet the expenditure incurred on payment of rent for his residence; and any other allowance, which is variable and is linked to any factors other than the factors mentioned above. "Workman" means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be expressed or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute, or who is on the date of the commencement of the proceeding, a workman within the meaning of this clause in relation to that dispute.
Summary:

The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, defines various terms related to labor laws and disputes in India. Key terms defined in the Act include:

* "Industrial establishment" - any establishment in which industrial activity is carried on.
* "Industrial dispute" - any dispute or difference between employers and employees in an industrial establishment.
* "Strike" - a cessation of work by a body of persons employed in an industry acting in combination.
* "Lock-out" - the temporary closing of a place of employment or the suspension of work by an employer.
* "Retrenchment" - the termination of the service of a workman by the employer for any reason other than as a punishment for misconduct.
* "Wages" - all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which would be payable to a workman in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment.
* "Workman" - any person employed in an industry to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward.

The Act also specifies the powers and functions of various authorities, such as Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals, in resolving industrial disputes. Additionally, the Act includes provisions for the conciliation and settlement of disputes, as well as provisions for the prevention and regulation of strikes and lock-outs.

State amendments to the Act include changes to the definition of "workman" to include any person employed in an industrial establishment for the promotion of sales, as well as provisions for the adjudication of disputes between an individual workman and his employer.

In summary, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, provides a legal framework for the resolution of disputes between employers and employees in industrial establishments in India. The Act defines key terms related to labor laws and disputes, specifies the powers and functions of various authorities, and includes provisions for the conciliation and settlement of disputes. State amendments to the Act provide additional protections for workmen and individual disputes.
Summary:

The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, establishes various authorities to address industrial disputes in India. These authorities include Works Committees, Conciliation Officers, Boards of Conciliation, Courts of Inquiry, Labour Courts, and Tribunals.

The Act outlines the composition and duties of these authorities. For instance, Works Committees must consist of representatives of employers and workmen and promote measures for securing and preserving amity and good relations between the employer and workmen. Conciliation Officers are appointed to mediate in and promote the settlement of industrial disputes. Boards of Conciliation are constituted to promote the settlement of an industrial dispute, and Courts of Inquiry are established to inquire into any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant to an industrial dispute.

Labour Courts are responsible for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter specified in the Second Schedule and for performing other functions assigned to them under the Act. The Act specifies the qualifications required for appointment as the presiding officer of a Labour Court, including being a Judge of a High Court, having been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge for at least three years, or having held any judicial office in India for not less than seven years.

Industrial Tribunals are constituted for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter, whether specified in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, and for performing other functions assigned to them under the Act. The Act specifies the qualifications required for appointment as the presiding officer of a Tribunal, including being a Judge of a High Court, having been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge for at least three years, or being an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade III with three years' experience in the grade. The Act also allows for the appointment of two persons as assessors to advise the Tribunal in the proceeding before it.

The Act includes state amendments, such as those from Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, which modify the provisions related to the qualifications required for appointment as the presiding officer of a Tribunal. For instance, the Karnataka amendment adds the requirement that the person has been a District Judge for a period of not less than three years. The Kerala amendment substitutes the clause related to the qualifications required for appointment as the presiding officer of a Labour Court with a new clause that includes the requirement that the person is, or has been, a judicial officer not below the rank of a District Judge, or is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade III with three years' experience in the grade.
Summary:

This document pertains to Indian laws related to the appointment and qualifications of judges, as well as the procedures for addressing industrial disputes.

Under Section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, a person is qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court if they have been a member of the Orissa Superior Judicial Service for a period of not less than seven years.

Section 7B establishes National Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes that involve questions of national importance or are likely to affect industrial establishments in more than one state. The presiding officer of a National Tribunal must be a Judge of a High Court.

Section 7C outlines the disqualifications for the presiding officers of Labour Courts, Tribunals, and National Tribunals, including being dependent or having attained the age of sixty-five years.

Section 7D states that the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation and removal and other terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer of the Industrial Tribunal appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 7A shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017.

Section 8 outlines the procedure for filling vacancies in the office of the presiding officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal, National Tribunal, Board or Court.

Section 9 states that no order of the appropriate Government or of the Central Government appointing any person as the chairman or any other member of a Board or Court or as the presiding officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner, and no act or proceeding before any Board or Court shall be called in question in any manner on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, such Board or Court.

Section 9A requires an employer who proposes to effect any change in the conditions of service applicable to any workman in respect of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedule to give notice of the nature of the change proposed to be effected to the workmen likely to be affected by such change, and to not effect such change within twenty-one days of giving such notice.

Section 9B allows the appropriate Government to exempt any class of industrial establishments or workmen from the provisions of Section 9A if it deems necessary in the interest of public.

Section 9C establishes Grievance Redressal Committee for the resolution of disputes arising out of individual grievances in industrial establishments employing twenty or more workmen. The Committee shall consist of equal number of members from the employer and the workmen, and the chairperson shall be selected from the employer and from among the workmen alternatively on rotation basis every year. The total number of members of the Committee shall not exceed more than six, and there shall be, as far as practicable, one woman member if the Committee has two members and in case the number of members are more than two, the number of women members may be increased proportionately. The workman who is aggrieved of the decision of the Committee may prefer an appeal to the employer against the decision of Grievance Redressal Committee and the employer shall, within one month from the date of receipt of such appeal, dispose off the same and send a copy of his decision to the workman concerned.

Section 10 allows the appropriate Government to refer an industrial dispute to a Board, Court, or Tribunal for promoting a settlement, inquiry, or adjudication. Disputes relating to any matter specified in the Second or Third Schedule may be referred to a Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication, respectively. The appropriate Government may also make a reference to a Labour Court or Tribunal for disputes relating to public utility service if a notice under section 22 has been given.
Summary:
The Industrial Disputes Act of 1947 outlines the procedures for resolving industrial disputes in India. The Act provides for the referral of disputes to various bodies, including Boards, Labour Courts, Tribunals, and National Tribunals. The appropriate government, which is determined based on the location of the industrial establishment, has the power to refer disputes to these bodies. The Act also allows for voluntary arbitration agreements between employers and workmen, where disputes can be referred to an arbitrator or arbitrators. The Act specifies the procedures for making and publishing arbitration agreements. Additionally, the Act provides for the continuation of strikes or lock-outs during the adjudication of a dispute, and specifies the points of dispute that must be adjudicated by the Labour Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal. The Act also includes provisions for the inclusion of other establishments in a dispute, and specifies that no proceedings before a Labour Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal shall lapse merely on the ground that any period specified under this sub-section had expired without such proceedings being completed. The Act also provides for the continuation of proceedings in relation to an industrial dispute in the event of the death of any of the parties to the dispute.

In Karnataka, the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987, has added a new sub-section (4A) to section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which allows an individual workman to apply to the Labour Court for adjudication of a dispute within six months from the date of communication to him of the order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination or the date of commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987, whichever is later. The Labour Court shall dispose of such application in the same manner as a dispute referred under sub-section (1).

The Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1988, inserted section 10A, which allows for voluntary reference of disputes to arbitration. The employer and workmen may agree to refer the dispute to arbitration by a written agreement, and the reference shall be to such person or persons (including the presiding officer of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal) as an arbitrator or arbitrators as may be specified in the arbitration agreement. The arbitration agreement shall be in such form and shall be signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed. A copy of the arbitration agreement shall be forwarded to the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer and the appropriate Government shall, within one month from the date of the receipt of such copy, publish the same in the Official Gazette. Where an industrial dispute has been referred to arbitration and the appropriate Government is satisfied that the persons making the reference represent the majority of each party, the appropriate Government may issue a notification in such manner as may be prescribed.
Summary:

The document discusses provisions related to industrial disputes in India. It includes details on the arbitration process, powers of conciliation officers and labor courts, and the procedure for settling disputes.

The Arbitration Agreement: According to Section 4 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, an arbitration agreement is an agreement between an employer and their employees, where they agree to settle any disputes that may arise through arbitration. The arbitrator or arbitrators appointed for this purpose will investigate the dispute and submit an arbitration award to the appropriate government.

Prohibition of Strikes and Lock-outs: Section 6(4A) of the Act allows the appropriate government to prohibit strikes or lock-outs in connection with an industrial dispute that has been referred to arbitration, if a notification has been issued under sub-section (3A).

Exclusion of the Arbitration Act, 1940: Section 5(5) states that the Arbitration Act, 1940, shall not apply to arbitration under this section.

State Amendment: The document also includes an amendment made by the Kerala state government, inserting a new section 10B in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which gives the state government the power to issue orders regarding terms and conditions of service pending settlement of disputes.

Power to issue orders regarding terms and conditions of service pending settlement of disputes: Section 10B of the Act, inserted by the Kerala state government, allows the state government to issue orders regarding terms and conditions of service pending settlement of disputes. This provision is necessary for securing public safety or convenience, maintaining public order, or ensuring the supply of essential services.

Procedure and powers of conciliation officers, Boards, Courts and Tribunals: According to Section 11 of the Act, conciliation officers, Boards, Courts, Labor Courts, Tribunals, and National Tribunals shall follow such procedure as they think fit. They have the same powers as a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit, in respect of enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath, compelling the production of documents and material objects, issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses, and for such other matters as may be prescribed. Every inquiry or investigation by a Board, Court, Labor Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

Costs of Proceedings: The costs of, and incidental to, any proceeding before a Labor Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal shall be in the discretion of that Labor Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal. They have full power to determine by and to whom and to what extent and subject to what conditions, if any, such costs are to be paid, and to give all necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid.

Every Labor Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of sections 345, 346, and 348 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Every award made, order issued, or settlement arrived at by or before a Labor Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute.
Summary:

The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 outlines the procedures for resolving disputes between employers and employees in India. Section 11 of the Act discusses the powers of conciliation officers, who can call for and inspect relevant documents or summon and examine individuals during conciliation proceedings. Refusal to attend or provide documents can result in punishment. Section 11A grants Labour Courts, Tribunals, and National Tribunals the power to provide appropriate relief in cases of discharge or dismissal of workmen, including reinstatement or the award of lesser punishment. Section 12 outlines the duties of conciliation officers, including investigating disputes, holding conciliation proceedings, and reporting settlements or reasons for lack thereof to the appropriate government. Section 13 outlines the duties of Boards, which include attempting to bring about a settlement of disputes and reporting their findings and recommendations to the appropriate government. Section 14 requires courts to inquire into matters referred to them and report thereon to the appropriate government within six months. Section 15 mandates that Labour Courts, Tribunals, and National Tribunals submit their awards within a specified period. Section 16 requires reports and awards to be in writing and signed by all members of the Board or Court, with provisions for recording minutes of dissent. Section 17 mandates the publication of reports and awards within thirty days of receipt by the appropriate government, and Section 17A states that awards become enforceable thirty days after publication.
Summary:

This document summarizes various provisions related to Indian labor laws, specifically focusing on settlements and awards. A settlement is an agreement between an employer and employees that is reached either in the course of conciliation proceedings or through other means. An arbitration award is a decision made by an arbitrator in a dispute between parties.

Under Section 18, a settlement or arbitration award that has become enforceable is binding on all parties to the dispute, as well as other parties who were summoned to appear in the proceedings. A settlement is binding for the period agreed upon by the parties, and if no period is agreed upon, for six months from the date the memorandum of settlement is signed. An award remains in operation for one year from the date it becomes enforceable, but the appropriate government may reduce or extend this period up to a maximum of three years.

Section 19 outlines the period of operation of settlements and awards, while Section 20 outlines the commencement and conclusion of proceedings. Section 21 states that certain matters, such as information obtained by a conciliation officer or arbitrator in the course of an investigation, must be kept confidential if requested by the party in question.

Section 17B deals with the payment of full wages to a workman during the pendency of proceedings in higher courts if the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal has directed reinstatement of the workman and the employer has preferred any proceedings against such award in a High Court or the Supreme Court. The employer is liable to pay such workman, during the period of pendency of such proceedings in the High Court or the Supreme Court, full wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any maintenance allowance admissible to him under any rule if the workman had not been employed in any establishment during such period and an affidavit by such workman had been filed to that effect in such Court. However, if it is proved that the workman had been employed and had been receiving adequate remuneration during any such period or part thereof, the Court may order that no wages shall be payable under this section for such period or part, as the case may be.
Summary:

The document summarizes Indian laws related to strikes, lock-outs, lay-offs, and retrenchment. The laws are spread across multiple sections of the Indian Penal Code, specifically sections 193, 22, 23, 24, 25, 25A, 25B, 25C, and 25D.

Section 193 of the Indian Penal Code deals with the offense of giving false evidence.

Chapter V of the document, titled "Strikes and Lock-outs," discusses the prohibition of strikes and lock-outs in public utility services. Section 22 lays down the conditions under which a person employed in a public utility service can go on strike or an employer can declare a lock-out. The section specifies that a notice of strike or lock-out must be given to the employer or employee, as the case may be, within six weeks before striking or locking out. The notice is not necessary if there is already a strike or lock-out in existence. The employer is required to report any such notices received or given to the appropriate government or authority within five days. Section 23 lays down the general prohibition of strikes and lock-outs in industrial establishments. A strike or lock-out is illegal if it is commenced or declared in contravention of section 22 or section 23 or if it is continued in contravention of an order made under sub-section (3) of section 10 or sub-section (4A) of section 10A. Section 24 lays down the prohibition of financial aid to illegal strikes and lock-outs.

Chapter VA of the document, titled "Lay-off and Retrenchment," deals with the rights of workmen who are laid-off and the employer's duty to maintain muster rolls of workmen. Section 25A lays down the conditions under which sections 25C to 25E inclusive do not apply to industrial establishments. Section 25B defines continuous service for the purposes of this Chapter. A workman is said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock-out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the workman. Section 25C lays down the right of workmen laid-off for compensation. An employer is required to pay compensation to a workman who is laid-off, whether continuously or intermittently, and has completed not less than one year of continuous service under the employer. The compensation is equal to fifty per cent. of the total of the basic wages and dearness allowance that would have been payable to him had he not been so laid-off. Section 25D lays down the duty of an employer to maintain muster rolls of workmen, notwithstanding that workmen in any industrial establishment have been laid-off.
The document summarizes various sections of Indian laws related to workmen's rights and compensation. The sections discussed are from the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

Section 25E outlines the conditions under which workmen are not entitled to compensation if they are laid off. These conditions include refusal to accept alternative employment in the same establishment or any other establishment belonging to the same employer within a radius of five miles, if the alternative employment does not require special skills or previous experience and the same wages are offered. Additionally, if a workman does not present himself for work at the establishment at the appointed time during normal working hours at least once a day, or if laying off is due to a strike or slowing down of production on the part of workmen in another part of the establishment, no compensation will be paid.

Section 25F outlines the conditions precedent to the retrenchment of workmen. An employer cannot retrench a workman who has been in continuous service for not less than one year until certain conditions are met. These conditions include giving one month's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or paying wages for the period of the notice. Additionally, the workman must be paid compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of six months. Finally, notice in the prescribed manner must be served on the appropriate Government.

Section 25FF outlines the compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. If the ownership or management of an undertaking is transferred, every workman who has been in continuous service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such transfer shall be entitled to notice and compensation as if the workman had been retrenched. However, this does not apply if the service of the workman has not been interrupted by such transfer, the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer are not in any way less favourable to the workman, and the new employer is legally liable to pay to the workman in the event of his retrenchment, compensation on the basis that his service has been continuous and has not been interrupted by the transfer.

Section 25FFA outlines the requirement for sixty days' notice to be given of intention to close down any undertaking. An employer who intends to close down an undertaking must serve a notice, in the prescribed manner, on the appropriate Government stating clearly the reasons for the intended closure of the undertaking, except in certain cases such as undertakings with less than fifty workmen or undertakings set up for construction work.

Section 25FFF outlines the compensation to workmen in case of closing down of undertakings. Where an undertaking is closed down for any reason, every workman who has been in continuous service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such closure shall be entitled to notice and compensation as if the workman had been retrenched. However, the compensation to be paid to the workman shall not exceed his average pay for three months if the undertaking is closed down on account of unavoidable circumstances beyond the control of the employer.

Section 25G outlines the procedure for retrenchment. Where any workman in an industrial establishment is to be retrenched and he belongs to a particular category of workmen in that establishment, the employer shall ordinarily retrench the workman who was the last person to be employed in that category. However, the employer may retrench any other workman for reasons to be recorded.

Section 25H outlines the re-employment of retrenched workmen. Where any workmen are retrenched, and the employer proposes to take into his employ any persons, he shall give an opportunity to the retrenched workmen who are citizens of India to offer themselves for re-employment, and such retrenched workman who offer themselves for re-employment shall have preference over other persons.

Section 25I has been repealed.

Section 25J outlines the effect of laws inconsistent with this Chapter. The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law, including standing orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. However, if a workman is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act, the workman shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter.
Summary:

This document summarizes Chapter VB of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, which deals with special provisions relating to lay-off, retrenchment, and closure in certain establishments. The provisions of this chapter apply to an industrial establishment (not being an establishment of a seasonal character or in which work is performed only intermittently) in which not less than 300 workmen were employed on an average per working day for the preceding twelve months. The rights and liabilities of employers and workmen in so far as they relate to lay-off and retrenchment shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. If a question arises whether an industrial establishment is of a seasonal character or whether work is performed therein only intermittently, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon shall be final. The chapter includes definitions, prohibition of lay-off, retrenchment, and closure, and retrenchment compensation. The provisions of section 25C (other than the second proviso thereto) shall apply to cases of lay-off referred to in this section. The chapter also includes provisions for the application of the chapter to certain establishments in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Karnataka, and Orissa.
Summary:

The document outlines provisions related to the retrenchment and closure of establishments or undertakings under Indian labor laws. The Industrial Disputes Act of 1947 is amended to include specific sections dealing with these matters.

Section 25-N pertains to retrenchment in establishments to which the chapter applies. Employers must obtain prior permission from the appropriate government or specified authority before retrenching any workman who has been in continuous service for not less than one year. The permission process involves making an application in the prescribed manner, stating the reasons for retrenchment, and providing a copy of the application to the workmen concerned. The appropriate government or specified authority will consider the reasons, the interests of the workmen, and other relevant factors before granting or refusing permission. If no order is communicated within 60 days, the permission is deemed to have been granted.

Section 25-O deals with the closure of undertakings. Employers must apply for prior permission from the appropriate government at least 90 days before the intended closure date. The application must include the reasons for closure, and a copy must be served on the representatives of the workmen. The appropriate government will consider the reasons, the interests of the general public, and other relevant factors before granting or refusing permission. If no order is communicated within 60 days, the permission is deemed to have been granted.

The Orissa state amendment replaces the principal Act's Section 25-O with a revised version that includes minor changes in formatting and phrasing but does not alter the overall content or meaning of the section.
Summary:

The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, contains provisions related to the closure of industrial establishments. Under Section 25-O, an employer must obtain permission from the appropriate government before closing down an undertaking. If permission is not granted, the closure is deemed illegal and workmen are entitled to benefits under applicable laws. The appropriate government may review its order or refer the matter to a tribunal for adjudication. If no application for permission is made within the specified period, the closure is deemed illegal. The government may exempt certain undertakings from these provisions under exceptional circumstances. Workmen are entitled to compensation if the undertaking is permitted to close down or if permission is deemed to be granted.

Chapter VA of the Act deals with special provisions for the restarting of undertakings closed down before the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1976. The appropriate government may direct the restarting of such undertakings if it is satisfied that the closure was not due to unavoidable circumstances and that restarting the undertaking is necessary for the rehabilitation of workmen or for maintaining essential supplies and services.

Chapter VC of the Act prohibits unfair labour practices. No employer, workman, or trade union shall commit any unfair labour practice. Any person committing an unfair labour practice shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.

Chapter VI of the Act deals with penalties for illegal strikes and lock-outs. Any workman commencing, continuing, or acting in furtherance of an illegal strike shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both. Any employer commencing, continuing, or acting in furtherance of an illegal lock-out shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 30 of the Act deals with the penalty for disclosing confidential information. Any person who wilfully discloses any such information in contravention of the provisions of section 21 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 31 of the Act deals with penalties for other offences. Any employer who contravenes the provisions of section 33 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under this Act for such contravention, be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.

Where a person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company, as well as the officers in default, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Summary:

This document outlines various provisions of Indian labor laws related to industrial disputes. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, includes provisions for conciliation proceedings, arbitration, and adjudication. Section 33 of the Act states that during the pendency of any conciliation proceeding or legal dispute resolution process, employers are prohibited from altering the conditions of service or discharging or punishing any workman involved in the dispute without the permission of the authority before which the proceeding is pending. Section 33A allows any employee aggrieved by an employer's contravention of Section 33 to make a complaint in writing to the conciliation officer, Board, arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal. Section 33B permits the appropriate government to withdraw and transfer certain proceedings to another Labor Court, Tribunal, or National Tribunal. Section 33C outlines the process for recovering money due to a workman from an employer under a settlement, award, or as a result of a legal dispute. The appropriate government may issue a certificate to the Collector for the recovery of the amount due, which shall be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.
Summary:

The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, governs the resolution of industrial disputes in India. The Act defines an industrial dispute as any disagreement between an employer and employee, or between employees, regarding employment, non-employment, terms of employment, or the conditions of labor. The Act establishes procedures for the conciliation, arbitration, and adjudication of industrial disputes.

Under the Act, no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or of the abetment of any such offence, save on complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government. The Act specifies that no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.

The Act protects persons who refuse to take part in or continue to take part in any strike or lock-out which is illegal under this Act. Such persons shall not be subject to expulsion from any trade union or society, or to any fine or penalty, or to deprivation of any right or benefit. They also cannot be placed in any respect, either directly or indirectly, under any disability or at any disadvantage as compared with other members of the union or society.

A workman who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding under this Act by any member of the executive or office bearer of a registered trade union of which he is a member, any member of the executive or other office bearer of a federation of trade unions to which the trade union referred to in clause (a) is affiliated, or where the worker is not a member of any trade union, by any member of the executive or other office bearer of any trade union connected with, or by any other workman employed in the industry in which the worker is employed and authorized in such manner as may be prescribed.

An employer who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding under this Act by an officer of an association of employers of which he is a member, an officer of a federation of association of employers to which the association referred to in clause (a) is affiliated, or where the employer is not a member of any association of employers, by an officer of any association of employers connected with, or by any other employer engaged in, the industry in which the employer is engaged and authorized in such manner as may be prescribed.

No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner in any conciliation proceedings under this Act or in any proceedings before a Court. However, in any proceeding before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, a party to a dispute may be represented by a legal practitioner with the consent of the other parties to the proceedings and with the leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be.

If, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, any difficulty or doubt arises as to the interpretation of any provision of an award or settlement, it may refer the question to such Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal as it may think fit. The Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal to which such question is referred shall, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, decide such question and its decision shall be final and binding on all such parties.

The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, conditionally or unconditionally, any industrial establishment or undertaking or any class of industrial establishments or undertakings from all or any of the provisions of this Act if it is satisfied that adequate provisions exist for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in respect of workmen employed in such establishment or undertaking or class of establishments or undertakings.

No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made thereunder.

The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. Rules made under this section may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with fine not exceeding fifty rupees.

The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or rules made thereunder shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercisable also by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or the State Government, as may be specified in the notification.

The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient or necessary in the public interest so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to the Schedule any industry, and on any such notification being issued, the First Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or alter or amend the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule and on any such notification being issued, the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
This document appears to be the text of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, an Act of the Parliament of India that regulates labor disputes in India. The Act defines various terms related to labor disputes, such as "workman," "employer," and "industrial dispute." It also establishes procedures for resolving industrial disputes, including the role of labor courts, industrial tribunals, and conciliation officers.

The Act includes several schedules that list various matters within the jurisdiction of labor courts, industrial tribunals, and matters with respect to which notice must be given to employees. The First Schedule lists industries that may be declared to be public utility services, which allows the government to impose certain restrictions on strikes and lock-outs in these industries. The Second Schedule lists matters within the jurisdiction of labor courts, including the propriety or legality of an order passed by an employer under the standing orders, the application and interpretation of standing orders, and discharge or dismissal of workmen. The Third Schedule lists matters within the jurisdiction of industrial tribunals, including wages, allowances, hours of work and rest intervals, leave with wages and holidays, and retrenchment of workmen and closure of establishments. The Fourth Schedule lists conditions of service for change of which notice is to be given, including wages, contribution paid or payable by the employer to any provident fund or pension fund, hours of work and rest intervals, and leave with wages and holidays.

The Act also includes a Fifth Schedule that lists unfair labor practices on the part of employers and trade unions of employers, including interference with, restraint from, or coercion of workmen in the exercise of their right to organize, form, join or assist a trade union or to engage in concerted activities for the purposes of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection. It also lists unfair labor practices on the part of workmen and trade unions of workmen, including advising or actively supporting or instigating any strike deemed to be illegal under this Act, coercing workmen in the exercise of their right to self-organization or to join a trade union or refrain from joining any trade union, and staging, encouraging or instigating such forms of coercive actions as willful "go slow", squatting on the work premises after working hours or "gherao" of any of the members of the managerial or other staff.
Summary:

The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is a significant law in India that governs labor disputes in industries. The Act has been extended to various territories such as Goa, Daman and Diu, Pondicherry, and Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands. The Act defines 'industry' as any systematic activity carried on by co-operation between an employer and his workmen for the production, supply or distribution of goods or services with a view to satisfy human wants or wishes. The Act includes various activities in its definition of industry, such as any activity of the Dock Labour Board, any activity relating to the promotion of sales or business, and any activity carried on by a co-operative society or a club. However, the Act excludes certain activities from its definition, such as agricultural operations, hospitals or dispensaries, educational, scientific, research or training institutions, and any activity of the Government relating to the sovereign functions of the Government.

The Act prohibits certain activities, such as indulging in willful damage to employer's property connected with the industry, committing acts of force or violence, or holding out threats of intimidation against any workman to prevent him from attending work. The Act also regulates strikes and lock-outs in industries. A strike is defined as a cessation of work by a body of persons employed in any industry acting in combination, or a concerted refusal, or a refusal under a common understanding, of any number of persons who are or have been so employed to continue to work or to accept employment. A lock-out is defined as the closing of a place of employment, or the suspension of work, or the refusal by an employer to continue to employ any number of persons employed by him.

The Act provides for the settlement of industrial disputes through various means, such as conciliation, arbitration, and adjudication. The Act establishes various authorities to carry out these functions, such as conciliation officers, boards of conciliation, and labor courts. The Act also provides for the punishment of certain offenses, such as the prevention of an arbitrator or a member of a board of conciliation from discharging his duties.

The Act also contains provisions for the regulation of conditions of work, such as weekly hours of work, intervals for rest, and annual leave with wages. The Act also provides for the payment of compensation to workmen in certain cases, such as retrenchment or lay-off. The Act also contains provisions for the appointment of inspectors to ensure compliance with its provisions.

The Act has been amended several times since its enactment to keep up with changing industrial realities. The Andhra Pradesh government has added an explanation to Schedule V, Part II, on the part of workmen and trade unions of workmen, to item 5, defining 'go slow' as any such activity by any number of persons, employed in any industry, acting in combination or with common understanding, to slow down or to delay the process of production or work purposely.

In conclusion, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is a crucial law in India that governs labor disputes in industries. The Act defines 'industry' broadly to include various activities and provides for the settlement of industrial disputes through conciliation, arbitration, and adjudication. The Act also regulates conditions of work and provides for the payment of compensation to workmen in certain cases. The Act has been amended several times to keep up with changing industrial realities, and the Andhra Pradesh government has added an explanation to Schedule V to define 'go slow.'
Summary:

The document provided is a compilation of amendments made to various sections of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The amendments were made through several acts passed between 1950 and 2010. The amendments include changes to the definitions, insertion of new sections, and substitution of existing sections. Some of the key amendments are:

* Act 18 of 1952: Substituted the provision for the appropriate government to refer an industrial dispute for adjudication with the condition that the dispute should not be conciliated.
* Act 36 of 1956: Made significant changes to the Act, including the substitution of the term "Court" with "Industrial Tribunal," the insertion of new sections related to layoff, retrenchment, and closure, and the substitution of existing sections related to arbitration and awards.
* Act 46 of 1982: Made several amendments to the Act, including the insertion of new sections related to re-employment of retrenched workers, the substitution of existing sections related to layoff and retrenchment, and the insertion of a new chapter related to compulsory adjudication of industrial disputes.
* Act 36 of 1964: Made amendments to the Act related to the power of the appropriate government to exclude certain establishments from the Act, the power of the central government to make rules related to layoff and retrenchment, and the power of the industrial tribunal to award compensation in certain cases.
* Act 45 of 1971: Made amendments to the Act related to the power of the appropriate government to make rules related to layoff and retrenchment, the power of the industrial tribunal to award compensation in certain cases, and the substitution of existing sections related to the power of the appropriate government to make rules.
* Act 32 of 1976: Made amendments to the Act related to the power of the appropriate government to make rules related to layoff and retrenchment, the power of the industrial tribunal to award compensation in certain cases, and the substitution of existing sections related to the power of the appropriate government to make rules.
* Act 49 of 1984: Made amendments to the Act related to the power of the appropriate government to make rules related to layoff and retrenchment, the power of the industrial tribunal to award compensation in certain cases, and the substitution of existing sections related to the power of the appropriate government to make rules.

The document also includes a schedule that lists the industries that are declared to be public utility services for the purposes of the Act. The schedule has been amended several times through notifications issued under section 40 of the Act. The latest amendment to the schedule was made in 2011, declaring the motor transport service as a public utility service for six months effective April 17, 2010.
Summary:
The document summarizes various amendments made to different sections of Indian laws. Specifically, it highlights the insertion and substitution of certain provisions in the Indian Companies Act, 1956, and the Companies Act, 2013.

The document begins by mentioning the insertion of section 4(5) by the Notification No. S.O.143(E) dated 27th June, 2012, which deals with the appointment of directors to the board of a company. This amendment allows for the appointment of independent directors, who are not involved in the day-to-day operations of the company, but rather provide objective oversight and strategic guidance.

Next, the document refers to the insertion of section 4(6) by the Notification No. S.O.251(E), dated 25-01-2017, which deals with the eligibility criteria for directors. This amendment clarifies that individuals who have been disqualified by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) due to non-compliance with certain legal requirements are not eligible to be appointed as directors.

The document then mentions the insertion of section 164(2)(a) by the Notification No. S.O.6362(E), dated 28-12-2018, which deals with the disqualification of directors. This amendment specifies that individuals who have not filed their annual returns or financial statements for three consecutive financial years are disqualified from being appointed as directors.

Finally, the document refers to the substitution of section 60(1) by the Act 36 of 1964, s. 23 (w.e.f. 19-12-1964), which deals with the power of the Central Government to make rules. This amendment clarifies that the power to make rules is not limited to matters that are specifically mentioned in the Act, but also extends to any matter that is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act. Similarly, the document mentions the insertion of section 441A by the Act 46 of 1982, s. 23 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984), which deals with the punishment for fraud. This amendment provides for a higher punishment for fraudulent activities, reflecting the seriousness of such offenses.

In summary, the document highlights various amendments made to the Indian Companies Act, 1956, and the Companies Act, 2013, which have introduced new provisions and clarified existing ones related to the appointment, eligibility, disqualification, and punishment of directors. These amendments reflect the government's commitment to ensuring transparency, accountability, and good governance in the corporate sector.