Summary:
THE DAMODAR VALLEY CORPORATION ACT, 1948, is an Act to provide for the establishment and regulation of a Corporation for the development of the Damodar Valley in the Provinces of Bihar and West Bengal.

The Act establishes the Damodar Valley Corporation, which is a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. The Corporation shall consist of a Chairman, a member (technical) and a member (finance), one representative from the Central Government, two representatives one each from the State Government of Jharkhand and West Bengal, three independent experts one each from the field of irrigation, water supply and generation or transmission or distribution of electricity, and a Member-Secretary.

The functions and duties of members shall be such as may be prescribed. The Corporation may construct canals and distributaries and maintain and operate them. The Corporation may determine and levy rates for the bulk supply of water to the State Government for irrigation, and fix the minimum quantity of water which shall be made available for such purpose. The rates at which such water shall be supplied by the State Government to the cultivators and other consumers shall be fixed by that Government after consultation with the Corporation.

The Corporation may determine and levy rates for bulk supply and retail distribution of water for industrial and domestic purposes and specify the manner of recovery of such rates. The Corporation may sell electrical energy to any consumer in the Damodar Valley but no such sale shall, except with the permission of the State Government concerned, be made to any consumer requiring supply at a pressure of less than 30,000 volts.

The Corporation may establish, maintain and operate laboratories, experimental and research stations and farms for conducting experiments and research for utilising the water, electrical energy and other resources in the most economical manner for the development of the Damodar Valley, determining the effect of its operations on the flow conditions in the Hooghly river, making improvements in navigation conditions in the port of Calcutta, and carrying out any other function specified under section 12.

The Corporation shall have the power to do anything which may be necessary or expedient for the purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act. The Corporation may acquire and hold such movable and immovable property as it may deem necessary and to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any such property.