**Summary:**

THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952 is an Act to make provision for the certification of cinematograph films for exhibition and for regulating exhibitions by means of cinematographs. It comprises four parts, namely, Part I - Preliminary, Part II - Certification of Films for Public Exhibition, Part III - Regulation of Exhibitions by Means of Cinematographs, and Part IV - Repeal.

Part I of the Act deals with the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. It also defines various terms used in the Act, such as "adult," "Board," "certificate," "cinematograph," "district magistrate," "film," "place," "prescribed," "regional officer," and "Tribunal."

Part II of the Act deals with the certification of films for public exhibition. The Central Government may constitute a Board of Film Certification, which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than twelve and not more than twenty-five other members appointed by the Central Government. The Board may sanction a film for unrestricted public exhibition, public exhibition restricted to adults, public exhibition restricted to members of any profession or any class of persons, direct the applicant to carry out excisions or modifications in the film, or refuse to sanction the film for public exhibition. The Board may consult in such manner as may be prescribed, any advisory panel in respect of any film for which an application for a certificate has been made.

Part III of the Act deals with the regulation of exhibitions by means of cinematographs. No person shall give an exhibition by means of a cinematograph elsewhere than in a place licensed under this Part or otherwise than in compliance with any conditions and restrictions imposed by such licence. The authority having power to grant licences under this Part shall be the district magistrate. The licensing authority shall not grant a licence unless it is satisfied that the rules made under this Part have been substantially complied with and that adequate precautions have been taken in the place, in respect of which the licence is to be given, to provide for the safety of persons attending exhibitions therein.

Part IV of the Act deals with the repeal of the Cinematograph Act, 1918.

The Cinematograph Act, 1952 is a crucial legislation that governs the certification and exhibition of films in India. It ensures that films are certified for public exhibition after due consideration of their impact on society and that exhibitions are regulated to provide for the safety of persons attending them.