Summary:
THE DRUGS AND MAGIC REMEDIES (OBJECTIONABLE ADVERTISEMENTS) ACT, 1954

The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954, is an Act to control the advertisement of drugs in certain cases, to prohibit the advertisement for certain purposes of remedies alleged to possess magic qualities, and to provide for matters connected therewith.

This Act applies to the whole of India and extends to persons domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who are outside the said territories. The Act defines various terms, including "advertisement," "drug," "magic remedy," "registered medical practitioner," and "taking any part in the publication of any advertisement."

The Act prohibits the advertisement of certain drugs for the procurement of miscarriage in women, the prevention of conception in women, the maintenance or improvement of the capacity of human beings for sexual pleasure, the correction of menstrual disorder in women, and the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of any disease, disorder, or condition specified in the Schedule or any other disease, disorder, or condition (by whatever name called) which may be specified in the rules made under this Act. The Act also prohibits misleading advertisements relating to drugs and advertisements of magic remedies for the treatment of certain diseases and disorders.

The Act also prohibits the import into, and export from, India of certain advertisements. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment, fine, or both. The Act also provides for the powers of entry, search, and seizure, the jurisdiction to try offenses, forfeiture, officers to be deemed to be public servants, indemnity, other laws not affected, savings, power to exempt from application of the Act, and power to make rules.

The Schedule to the Act specifies the diseases, disorders, or conditions to which the provisions of section 3 apply. These include appendicitis, arteriosclerosis, blindness, blood poisoning, Bright's disease, cancer, cataract, deafness, diabetes, diseases and disorders of the brain, diseases and disorders of the optical system, diseases and disorders of the uterus, disorders of menstrual flow, disorders of the nervous system, disorders of the prostatic gland, dropsy, epilepsy, female diseases (in general), fevers (in general), fits, forms and structure of the female bust, gall stones, kidney stones and bladder stones, gangrene, glaucoma, goitre, heart diseases, high or low blood pressure, hydrocele, hysteria, infantile paralysis, insanity, leprosy, leucoderma, lockjaw, locomotor ataxia, lupus, nervous debility, obesity, paralysis, plague, pleurisy, pneumonia, rheumatism, ruptures, sexual impotence, smallpox, stature of persons, sterility in women, trachoma, tuberculosis, tumours, typhoid fever, ulcers of gastrointestinal tracts, and venereal diseases, including syphilis, gonorrhea, soft chancre, venereal granuloma, and lympho granuloma.

The Act has been extended to Pondicherry and the State of Sikkim. The Act has also been amended several times, including by the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Amendment Act, 1963, which added new sections and provisions to the Act.