Summary:

THE SLUM AREAS (IMPROVEMENT AND CLEARANCE) ACT, 1956

Act ID: ACT NO. 96 OF 1956

Enactment Date: [29th December, 1956.]

The Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956, provides for the improvement and clearance of slum areas in certain Union territories and for the protection of tenants in such areas from eviction. The Act is divided into seven chapters.

Chapter I, Preliminary, defines terms used in the Act and outlines its short title, extent, and commencement.

Chapter II, Slum Areas, discusses the declaration of slum areas and the factors considered in determining whether a building is unfit for human habitation.

Chapter III, Slum Improvement, outlines the power of the competent authority to require the improvement of buildings unfit for human habitation and the enforcement of such notices. The chapter also discusses the expenses of maintenance of works of improvement and the restriction on building, etc., in slum areas.

Chapter IV, Slum Clearance and Redevelopment, discusses the power to declare any slum area to be a clearance area, the slum clearance order, and the procedure to be followed where a demolition order has been made.

Chapter V, Acquisition of Land, outlines the power of the Central Government to acquire land and the procedure for making such land available to the competent authority.

Chapter VI, Protection of Tenants in Slum Areas from Eviction, discusses the proceedings for eviction of tenants and the factors considered in granting or refusing to grant permission for such eviction.

Chapter VII, Miscellaneous, outlines the powers of entry, inspection, and breaking into buildings, the service of notices, etc., penalties for non-compliance with the Act, the jurisdiction of courts, previous sanction of the competent authority or officers authorized by it for prosecution, power to delegate, protection of action taken in good faith, bar of jurisdiction, competent authority, etc., to be public servants, Act to override other laws, power to make rules, and protection of action taken in good faith.

The Schedule outlines the principles for determination of the net average monthly income.