Summary:

The All-India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, establishes an institution called the All India Institute of Medical Sciences. This institution is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and has the power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract. The Act includes the corresponding Institutes and other Institutes which may be established on and after the commencement of the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012 (37 of 2012). The Institute shall consist of various members, including the Vice-Chancellor of the Delhi University, the Director General of Health Services, Government of India, the Director of the Institute, representatives of the Central Government, five persons of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science Congress Association, four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities, and three members of Parliament. The Act also declares that the existing Institute declared as an institution of national importance, before the commencement of the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012 (37 of 2012), under section 5 as it stood before such commencement, shall continue to be an institution of national importance. The term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomination or election, unless the Central Government otherwise directs. The President of the Institute shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act or as may be prescribed by rules or regulations. The President and members shall receive such allowances, if any, from the Institute of which they are the President and members as may be prescribed by rules. Every Institute shall hold its first meeting at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government. Thereafter, every Institute shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by regulation. The Act also establishes a Governing Body for every Institute which shall be constituted by such Institute from among its members in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations. The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of every Institute and shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as every Institute may, by regulations made in this behalf, confer or impose upon it. The President of every Institute shall be the Chairman of the Governing Body and as Chairman thereof shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by regulations. The procedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Governing Body, and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of the Governing Body shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations. The Act allows the Institute to establish and maintain one or more medical colleges with different departments, including a department of preventive and social medicine, sufficiently staffed and equipped to undertake not only under graduate medical education but also post-graduate medical education in different subjects. The Institute may also establish and maintain one or more well-equipped hospitals, a dental college, a nursing college, rural and urban health organisations, and other institutions for the training of different types of health workers. The Institute may train teachers for the different medical colleges in India, hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles in under-graduate and post-graduate medical education as may be laid down in the regulations, institute, and appoint persons to, professorships, readerships, lectureships and posts of any description in accordance with regulations, receive grants from the Government and gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or transferors, deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner which is considered necessary for promoting the objects specified in section 13, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by regulations, construct quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in accordance with such regulations as may be made in this behalf, borrow money, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of the Institute, and make regulations for the conduct of its business and the custody, investment and audit of its funds.