Summary:
The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, is a law that applies to Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, and Sikhs by religion, as well as any person who is domiciled in India and not governed by Muslim, Christian, Parsi, or Jewish law. This Act is supplemental to the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, and applies to Hindus domiciled in India who are outside the country. The Act defines "minor" as a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years and "guardian" as a person having the care of the person of a minor or of his property or of both his person and property, and includes natural guardians, guardians appointed by will, guardians appointed or declared by a court, and persons empowered to act as such by or under any enactment relating to any Court of wards. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor, in respect of the minor's person as well as in respect of the minor’s property, are the father, and after him, the mother. However, the custody of a minor who has not completed the age of five years shall ordinarily be with the mother. The natural guardianship of an adopted son who is a minor passes, on adoption, to the adoptive father and after him to the adoptive mother. The natural guardian has the power to do all acts that are necessary or reasonable and proper for the benefit of the minor or for the realization, protection, or benefit of the minor's estate, but the guardian cannot bind the minor by a personal covenant. The natural guardian shall not, without the previous permission of the court, mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange, or otherwise, any part of the immovable property of the minor or lease any part of such property for a term exceeding five years or for a term extending more than one year beyond the date on which the minor will attain majority. Any disposal of immovable property by a natural guardian, in contravention of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), is voidable at the instance of the minor or any person claiming under him. No court shall grant permission to the natural guardian to do any of the acts mentioned in sub-section (2) except in case of necessity or for an evident advantage to the minor. The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, shall apply to and in respect of an application for obtaining the permission of the court under sub-section (2) in all respects as if it were an application for obtaining the permission of the court under section 29 of that Act. A Hindu father entitled to act as the natural guardian of his minor legitimate children may, by will, appoint a guardian for any of them in respect of the minor’s person or in respect of the minor’s property or in respect of both. An appointment made under sub-section (1) shall have no effect if the father predeceases the mother, but shall revive if the mother dies without appointing, by will, any person as guardian. A Hindu widow entitled to act as the natural guardian of her minor legitimate children, and a Hindu mother entitled to act as the natural guardian of her minor legitimate children by reason of the fact that the father has become disentitled to act as such, may, by will, appoint a guardian for any of them in respect of the minor’s person or in respect of the minor’s property or in respect of both. A Hindu mother entitled to act as the natural guardian of her minor illegitimate children may; by will, appoint a guardian for any of them in respect of the minor’s person or in respect of the minor's property or in respect of both. The guardian so appointed by will has the right to act as the minor’s guardian after the death of the minor’s father or mother, as the case may be, and to exercise all the rights of a natural guardian under this Act to such extent and subject to such restrictions, if any, as are specified in this Act and in the will. The right of the guardian so appointed by will shall, where the minor is a girl, cease on her marriage. A minor shall be incompetent to act as guardian of the property of any minor. After the commencement of this Act, no person shall be entitled to dispose of, or deal with, the property of a Hindu minor merely on the ground of his or her being the de facto guardian of the minor. Where a minor has an undivided interest in joint family property and the property is under the management of an adult member of the family, no guardian shall be appointed for the minor in respect of such undivided interest. In the appointment of declaration of any person as guardian of a Hindu minor by a court, the welfare of the minor shall be the paramount consideration. No person shall be entitled to the guardianship by virtue of the provisions of this Act or of any law relating to guardianship in marriage among Hindus, if the court is of opinion that his or her guardianship will not be for the welfare of the minor.