Summary:

The Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, nationalized life insurance business in India by transferring all such business to a Corporation established for the purpose. The Act provides for the regulation and control of the business of the Corporation and related matters. The Corporation is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and may acquire, hold and dispose of property, and may sue and be sued. The Corporation shall consist of up to sixteen members appointed by the Central Government, one of whom shall be appointed as the Chairman. Members shall have no financial or other interest that is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise or performance of their functions. The Corporation shall have a capital of one hundred crore of rupees provided by the Central Government. The Corporation may carry on life insurance business, capital redemption business, annuity certain business, reinsurance business, and any other business that may seem to the Corporation to be capable of being conveniently carried on in connection with its business. The Corporation shall act on business principles in the discharge of its functions, and may impose conditions, appoint directors, and alter the remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of employees as necessary. The Corporation may also constitute one or more trusts having objects similar to existing trusts for the moneys and other assets that stand transferred to and vest in it under the Act. The transfer of the services of any employee of an insurer to the Corporation shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or any other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. The Corporation may also transfer the whole or any part of the life insurance business carried on outside India to any other person or persons, if in the interest of the Corporation it is expedient so to do. The Act also provides for the transfer of existing life insurance business to the Corporation, and the rights and obligations of the insurers and policyholders in this regard. The Act also provides for the winding up of certain insurers and the enforcement of decisions of Tribunals.