Summary:

THE PROBATION OF OFFENDERS ACT, 1958 is an Act that provides for the release of offenders on probation or after due admonition and for matters connected therewith. The Act extends to the whole of India and came into force on different dates in different parts of the State. The Act defines certain terms such as 'Code', 'probation officer', 'prescribed', and uses words and expressions as defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

The Act gives the court the power to release certain offenders after admonition if they have committed an offence punishable under specific sections of the Indian Penal Code or any other law, and if the court is of the opinion that it is expedient to do so. The court may also release offenders on probation of good conduct under section 4, instead of sentencing them to any punishment. The court shall not direct such release unless it is satisfied that the offender or his surety, if any, has a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place over which the court exercises jurisdiction or in which the offender is likely to live during the period for which he enters into the bond.

The court may, in addition to releasing an offender on probation, pass a supervision order directing that the offender shall remain under the supervision of a probation officer named in the order during such period, not being less than one year, as may be specified therein. The court may also impose such conditions as it deems necessary for the due supervision of the offender.

The court may require the offender, before he is released, to enter into a bond, with or without sureties, to observe the conditions specified in the supervision order and such additional conditions as the court may consider fit to impose for preventing a repetition of the same offence or a commission of other offences by the offender.

The court may make at the same time a further order directing the offender to pay compensation and costs. The amount ordered to be paid may be recovered as a fine in accordance with the provisions of sections 386 and 387 of the Code. A civil court trying any suit, arising out of the same matter for which the offender is prosecuted, shall take into account any amount paid or recovered as compensation under sub-section (1) in awarding damages.

The Act also imposes restrictions on imprisonment of offenders under twenty-one years of age. The court shall not sentence such an offender to imprisonment unless it is satisfied that it would not be desirable to deal with him under section 3 or section 4. If the court passes any sentence of imprisonment on the offender, it shall record its reasons for doing so.

The report of a probation officer shall be treated as confidential, but the court may communicate the substance thereof to the offender and may give him an opportunity of producing such evidence as may be relevant to the matter stated in the report.

The court may, if it thinks fit, vary the conditions of any bond entered into by the offender during the period when the bond is effective. If the offender refuses to enter into a fresh bond, the court may sentence him for the offence of which he was found guilty.

If the court has reason to believe that the offender has failed to observe any of the conditions of the bond, it may issue a warrant for his arrest or may, if it thinks fit, issue a summons to him and his sureties, if any, requiring him or them to attend before it at such time as may be specified in the summons.

The court before which an offender is brought or appears may either remand him to custody until the case is concluded or it may grant him bail, with or without surety, to appear on the date which it may fix for hearing.

The court may sentence the offender for the original offence or impose a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees if the failure is for the first time.

The provisions of sections 122, 126, 126A, 406A, 514, 514A, 514B and 515 of the Code shall apply in the case of bonds and sureties given under this Act.

An order under this Act may be made by any court empowered to try and sentence the offender to imprisonment and also by the High Court or any other court when the case comes before it on appeal or in revision.

A person found guilty of an offence and dealt with under the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attaching to a conviction of an offence under such law.

A probation officer shall be a person appointed by the State Government or recognised as such by the State Government or a person provided for this purpose by a society recognised in this behalf by the State Government or any other person who, in the opinion of the court, is fit to act as a probation officer in the special circumstances of the case.

A probation officer shall inquire, in accordance with any directions of a court, into the circumstances or home surroundings of any person accused of an offence with a view to assist the court in determining the most suitable method of dealing with him and submit reports to the court.

Every probation officer and every other officer appointed in pursuance of this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State Government or any probation officer or any other officer appointed under this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder.

The State Government may, with the approval of the Central Government, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of section 31 of the Reformatory Schools Act, 1897 or sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 or of any law in force in any State relating to juvenile offenders or Borstal Schools.

Subject to the provisions of section 18, section 562 of the Code shall cease to apply to the States or parts thereof in which this Act is brought into force.