Summary:

THE DELHI PRIMARY EDUCATION ACT, 1960, is an Act to provide for free and compulsory primary education for children in the Union territory of Delhi. The Act is divided into several sections, each addressing a different aspect of the implementation and enforcement of compulsory primary education.

Section 1 outlines the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. The Act extends to the Union territory of Delhi and will come into force on a date specified by the State Government.

Section 2 provides definitions for various terms used throughout the Act, such as "academic year," "approved school," "attendance authority," "child," "local authority," "parent," "prescribed," "primary education," "rural areas," "special school," "specified area," and "teacher."

Section 3 mandates that every local authority must provide for compulsory primary education for children within its jurisdiction. The local authority must submit proposals for a scheme to the State Government, which will then sanction the scheme with or without modifications.

Section 4 states that once a scheme has been sanctioned, the local authority must declare that primary education is compulsory in the specified area for children within a certain age group and up to a certain class or standard.

Section 5 outlines the grants-in-aid that the State Government will provide to local authorities for the implementation of the scheme.

Section 6 requires the local authority to prepare lists of children in the specified area and revise them at regular intervals.

Section 7 allows the local authority to appoint attendance authorities and assistants to ensure that children attend approved schools.

Section 8 mandates that attendance authorities must notify parents of their obligation to cause their child to attend an approved school.

Section 9 states that it is the parent's responsibility to ensure that their child attends an approved school, unless there is a reasonable excuse for the child's non-attendance.

Section 10 outlines the circumstances that are considered reasonable excuses for a child's non-attendance, such as the lack of an approved school within a prescribed distance or the child suffering from a physical or mental defect.

Section 11 allows the attendance authority to require a child with a physical or mental defect to attend a special school if there is one within a prescribed distance from the child's residence.

Section 12 permits the attendance authority to allow a child to attend an approved school on a part-time basis if the child is unable to attend full-time due to economic or other circumstances.

Section 13 outlines the procedure for attendance orders, which can be issued if a parent fails to comply with the obligation to cause their child to attend an approved school.

Section 14 prohibits the employment of a child in a manner that prevents them from attending an approved school.

Section 15 states that primary education must be free for children attending approved schools under the management of the State Government or a local authority.

Section 16 outlines how the age of a child is to be computed for the purposes of this Act.

Section 17 allows the State Government to appoint a person to prepare or implement a scheme if the local authority fails to do so.

Section 18 imposes penalties for the contravention of section 13, with fines for failing to comply with an attendance order and for failing to furnish information as required.

Section 19 imposes penalties for the contravention of section 14, with fines for employing a child in a manner that prevents them from attending an approved school.

Section 20 specifies the courts that are competent to try offences under this Act.

Section 21 states that no court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act except on the complaint of an attendance authority or any other person authorized in this behalf by the local authority.

Section 22 deems attendance authorities, their assistants, and persons authorized to make complaints as public servants.

Section 23 provides protection to the Government, authorities, or persons acting in good faith under this Act.

Section 24 allows the State Government to delegate its powers to an officer or authority subordinate to it.

Section 25 authorizes the State Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

Section 26 repeals the Punjab Primary Education Act, 1940 (Punjab Act XVIII of 1940) in any specified area where primary education becomes compulsory.