The Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (Act No. 11 of 1960) is an Act that provides for the reorganisation of the State of Bombay and related matters. The Act is divided into three parts.

Part I of the Act is the preliminary section, which includes the short title and definitions of terms used in the Act. The term "appointed day" refers to May 1, 1960, the day on which the reorganisation of the State of Bombay will take effect. The term "article" refers to an article of the Constitution, while "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of the State of Bombay. "Notified order" means an order published in the Official Gazette. "Population ratio" refers to the ratio of 66.31 to 33.69 in relation to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat. "Sitting member" refers to a person who is a member of either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State of Bombay immediately before the appointed day. "Transferred territory" refers to the territories that will become part of the State of Gujarat as of the appointed day. "Treasury" includes a sub-treasury.

Part II of the Act deals with the reorganisation of the State of Bombay. Section 3 of the Act states that as of the appointed day, there will be formed a new State to be known as the State of Gujarat, which will include certain territories of the State of Bombay. These territories include Banaskantha, Mehsana, Sabarkantha, Ahmedabad, Kaira, Panch-mahals, Baroda, Broach, Surat, Dangs, Amreli, Surendranagar, Rajkot, Jamnagar, Junagadh, Bhavnagar and Kutch districts, as well as certain villages in Umbergaon taluka of Thana district, Nawapur and Nandurbar talukas of West Khandesh district, and Akkalkuwa and Taloda talukas of West Khandesh district. The remaining territories of the State of Bombay will be known as the State of Maharashtra.

Section 4 of the Act deals with amendments to the First Schedule of the Constitution. As of the appointed day, entries 4, 8 to 14 in the First Schedule of the Constitution will be renumbered as entries 4, 9 to 15 respectively. Entry 4 will refer to the State of Gujarat and will be allotted 11 seats in the Council of States. Entry 8 will refer to the State of Maharashtra and will be allotted 19 seats in the Council of States.

Part III of the Act deals with representation in the legislatures. This part includes provisions for the allocation of seats in the Council of States, the House of the People, and the Legislative Assemblies of Maharashtra and Gujarat.

Section 6 of the Act deals with the amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. As of the appointed day, there will be allotted 19 seats to the State of Maharashtra and 11 seats to the State of Gujarat in the Council of States. The Fourth Schedule to the Constitution will be amended accordingly.

Section 7 of the Act deals with the allocation of sitting members. The 12 sitting members of the Council of States representing the State of Bombay, as well as six of the nine members elected at the biennial elections held for the purpose of filling vacancies, will be deemed to have been elected to fill 18 of the 19 seats allotted to the State of Maharashtra. The five sitting members of the Council of States representing the State of Bombay, as well as the remaining three of the nine members elected at the biennial elections, will be deemed to have been elected to fill eight of the 11 seats allotted to the State of Gujarat.

Section 8 of the Act deals with bye-elections to fill vacancies. As soon as possible after the appointed day, bye-elections will be held to fill the additional seats allotted to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat, as well as any existing casual vacancies.

Section 9 of the Act deals with the term of office. The term of office of the sitting members and of the member chosen to fill the casual vacancy will remain unaltered. The term of office of the member elected to fill the one additional seat allotted to the State of Maharashtra will expire on April 2, 1966. Out of the two members elected to fill the two additional seats allotted to the State of Gujarat, the term of office of one member will expire on April 2, 1964, and the term of office of the other member will expire on April 2, 1966.

Section 10 of the Act deals with representation in the House of the People. As of the appointed day, there will be allotted 44 seats to the State of Maharashtra and 22 seats to the State of Gujarat in the House of the People. The First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, will be amended accordingly.

Section 11 of the Act deals with delimitation of parliamentary constituencies. As of the appointed day, the First Schedule to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, will be amended as directed in the Third Schedule to this Act.

Section 12 of the Act deals with provision as to sitting members. Every sitting member of the House of the People representing a constituency that, on the appointed day, stands allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Maharashtra or to the State of Gujarat, will be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so allotted.

Section 13 of the Act deals with the strength of Legislative Assemblies. As of the appointed day, the total number of seats to be filled by persons chosen by direct election in the Legislative Assemblies of Maharashtra and Gujarat will be 264 and 132, respectively. The Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, will be amended accordingly.

Section 14 of the Act deals with delimitation of assembly constituencies. As of the appointed day, the Second Schedule to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, will be amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule to this Act.

Section 15 of the Act deals with allocation of members. (1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly representing a constituency that, on the appointed day, stands allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Maharashtra or to the State of Gujarat, will be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of the State to which such constituency is allotted. (2) The total number of members to be chosen by the voters of the State of Maharashtra at the first general election to the Legislative Assembly of the State shall be 264, and the total number of members to be chosen by the voters of the State of Gujarat at the first general election to the Legislative Assembly of the State shall be 132. (3) The Election Commission shall, as soon as may be after the appointed day, divide the State of Maharashtra and the State of Gujarat into territorial constituencies for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assemblies of the respective States and publish a notification in the Official Gazette containing a delimitation order in respect of each State. (4) The delimitation order shall come into force on such date as may be specified in the notification. (5) Upon the delimitation order coming into force, the territorial constituencies shall stand delimited in the manner provided in the said order and shall be the territorial constituencies for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assemblies of the respective States. (6) The Election Commission may, from time to time, alter the boundaries of any territorial constituency or the number of territorial constituencies in any State, whether in consequence of the alteration of the boundaries of any territorial division or otherwise, and shall, as soon as may be after any such alteration, publish a notification in the Official Gazette containing a delimitation order in respect of the State. (7) The delimitation order shall come into force on such date as may be specified in the notification. (8) Upon the delimitation order coming into force, the territorial constituencies shall stand delimited in the manner provided in the said order and shall be the territorial constituencies for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assemblies of the respective States.
Summary:

The Bombay Reorganisation Act of 1960 was enacted to reorganize the state of Bombay into the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat. This act led to significant changes in the composition of the Legislative Assemblies of Maharashtra and Gujarat, as well as the Legislative Council of Maharashtra.

Regarding the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra, all sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay, except those representing constituencies that were transferred to Gujarat, became members of the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra. Members representing transferred constituencies were deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Gujarat. The period of five years for the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra or Gujarat was deemed to have commenced on the date it commenced for the Legislative Assembly of Bombay. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay became the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, respectively, of the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra. The rules of procedure and conduct of business in force in the Legislative Assembly of Bombay continued to apply in the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra or Gujarat, subject to modifications and adaptations as may be made.

Regarding the Legislative Assembly of Gujarat, the total number of seats was increased from 132 to 154. The Election Commission was tasked with determining the number of seats to be reserved for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, the assembly constituencies into which the State would be divided, and the adjustments in the boundaries and description of parliamentary constituencies. The Election Commission associated with itself five persons as associate members to assist in this task. The proposals were published in the Official Gazette of the State, and objections and suggestions were considered before making an order.

Regarding the Legislative Council of Maharashtra, there were 78 seats, and the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bombay) Order, 1951, was amended accordingly. The sitting members of the Legislative Council of Bombay specified in the Sixth Schedule ceased to be members of that Council, and all other sitting members became members of the Legislative Council of Maharashtra. The term of office of the members referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) remained unaltered. The person who was the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of Bombay became the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of Maharashtra.

Regarding scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, was amended to include certain castes and tribes in the lists of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat.
Summary:

The document outlines the separation of the High Court for the State of Gujarat from the High Court of Bombay. The High Court of Gujarat shall have all the jurisdiction, powers, and authority that the High Court of Bombay had in respect of any part of the territories included in the State of Gujarat. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court of Bombay shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat. The High Court of Gujarat shall have the power to make rules and orders with respect to practice and procedure as are exercisable by the High Court of Bombay. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Bombay shall apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Gujarat. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Bombay shall apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Gujarat. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court of Bombay and with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Bombay and the Judges and division courts thereof shall apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat. The High Court at Bombay shall have jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court of Bombay before the appointed day. Any order made by the High Court of Bombay before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Gujarat shall have effect as an order made by the High Court of Gujarat. Any person who is an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to act, in the High Court of Bombay and was authorized to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Gujarat shall have the right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Gujarat in relation to those proceedings. The Governor of Bombay may authorize such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Gujarat as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State of Gujarat. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India referred to in clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the State of Bombay in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of Gujarat.
Summary:
The document outlines the apportionment of assets and liabilities of the State of Bombay between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat following the reorganization of the state in 1960. According to the provisions of this Part, all land and goods belonging to the State of Bombay will pass to the State of Gujarat if they are situated within the transferred territory, and remain the property of the State of Maharashtra in any other case. The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property, including arrears of land revenue, will belong to the State in which the property is situated. The right to recover arrears of any other tax or duty will belong to the State in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day. The right to recover any loans or advances made before the appointed day will belong to the State in which the area is included on that day, or to the State of Maharashtra if the loan or advance was made to a person or institution outside that State. The investments of the State of Bombay made before the appointed day in the cash balance investment account of the State will be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio, with certain securities passing to the State of Gujarat in connection with the construction of a capital for that State. The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before the appointed day in any private commercial or industrial undertaking will pass to the State in which the principal seat of business of the undertaking is located. The investments of the State of Bombay in any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the State of Bombay or any part thereof will be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the same proportion in which the assets of the body corporate are divided under the provisions of Part VII. Out of the investments in the cash balance investment account which remain with the State of Maharashtra after giving effect to the provisions of section 51, such securities of the value of 1,420 lakhs of rupees as the Central Government may by order specify will stand transferred to the State of Gujarat. There shall be constituted in the State of Gujarat a Fund to be called the Special Revenue Reserve Fund consisting of the securities transferred to that State under sub-section (1) and such other securities belonging to the State of Gujarat of the value of 1,419 lakhs of rupees as the Central Government may by order specify. From and out of the fund constituted under sub-section (2), there shall be transferred as receipts in the revenue account of the State of Gujarat in each of the financial years specified in column 1 of the following Table a sum set out against that year in column 2 thereof, and in the financial year 1969-70, the balance, if any, remaining in that fund. The assets and liabilities relating to any commercial or industrial undertaking of the State of Bombay will pass to the State in which the undertaking is located. Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the State of Bombay for any such commercial or industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of the fund will pass to the State in which the undertaking is located.
Summary:

The document outlines the division of debt and liabilities between the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat following the reorganization of the State of Bombay.

Under Section 54, the public debt of the State of Bombay attributable to loans raised by the issue of Government securities and outstanding with the public immediately before the appointed day becomes the debt of the State of Maharashtra. However, the State of Gujarat is liable to pay its share of the sums due for the servicing and repayment of the debt, as determined by the proportion of the debt assigned to each state.

The public debt attributable to loans taken from the Central Government, the National Co-operative Development and Warehousing Board, the Khadi and Village Industries Commission, or any other source for the express purpose of re-lending the same to a specific institution is divided between the states based on where the institution is located or where the local area is included on the appointed day.

The remaining public debt attributable to loans taken from the Central Government, the Reserve Bank of India, or any other body corporate is divided between the states in proportion to the total expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred up to the appointed day in the territories included respectively in each of those states.

Under Section 55, the liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any floating debt of a Merged State is the liability of the State in whose territories the area of the Merged State is included on the appointed day. The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any other floating loan to provide short-term finance to any commercial undertaking is the liability of the State in whose territories the undertaking is located.

Under Section 56, the liability of the State of Bombay to refund any tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess is the liability of the State in which the property is situated. The liability of the State of Bombay to refund any other tax or duty collected in excess is the liability of the State in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included.

Under Section 57, the liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any civil deposit or local fund deposit is the liability of the State in whose area the deposit has been made. The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any charitable or other endowment is the liability of the State in whose area the institution entitled to the benefit of the endowment is located or of the State to which the objects of the endowment, under the terms thereof, are confined.

Under Section 58, the liability of the State of Bombay in respect of the provident fund account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day is the liability of the State to which that Government servant is permanently allotted.

Under Section 59, the liability of the State of Bombay in respect of pensions is apportioned between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in accordance with the provisions contained in the Eleventh Schedule.

Under Section 60, where the State of Bombay has made any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract is deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power of the State of Maharashtra or the State of Gujarat, depending on whether the purposes are exclusively purposes of either state or not.

Under Section 61, where the State of Bombay is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than breach of contract, that liability is a liability of the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat, depending on where the cause of action arose.

Under Section 62, where the State of Bombay is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered cooperative society or other person, that liability is a liability of the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat, depending on where the area of operations of such society or person is located.

Under Section 63, if any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of the nature referred to in the preceding sections, it shall be dealt with in accordance with those sections.
Summary:

The document outlines provisions related to the division of assets and liabilities of the State of Bombay between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat, following the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960. According to Section 64, any asset or liability not specifically dealt with in previous provisions will pass to the State of Maharashtra, subject to financial adjustment with Gujarat. Section 65 allows for the apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement between the two states. Section 66 grants the Central Government the power to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases, following a reference made within three years from the appointed day. Section 67 states that all sums payable as a result of this Act will be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the relevant State or the Consolidated Fund of India.

Part VII of the document deals with provisions related to certain corporations. Section 68 states that the Bombay State Electricity Board and State Warehousing Corporation will continue to function in their respective areas, subject to directions from the Central Government. The Act under which the Board or Corporation was constituted will have effect subject to exceptions and modifications as the Central Government thinks fit. The Board or Corporation will cease to function on a date appointed by the Central Government, and its assets, rights, and liabilities will be apportioned between Maharashtra and Gujarat in a manner agreed upon by them or determined by the Central Government.

Section 69 allows the Central Government to give directions for the maintenance of previous arrangements in regard to the generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water, if it appears that the arrangement has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvantage of an area.

Section 70 deals with the Bombay State Financial Corporation, which will continue to function in the areas in which it was functioning immediately before the appointed day. The Central Government may issue directions in respect of the Corporation, and a general meeting of the Corporation shall be convened for the consideration of a scheme for the reconstitution or reorganisation or dissolution of the Corporation. The scheme shall be submitted to the Central Government for its sanction, and if sanctioned, it shall be binding on the corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof.

Finally, Section 71 amends the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950, to include provisions related to the reorganisation of States. The amendments include changes to the definition of "the Government" in Section 47A and the addition of a new clause (g) in Section 47A(3) to provide for the transfer of assets and liabilities of a Corporation in connection with the reorganisation of States.
Summary:

The Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, is a significant piece of Indian legislation that deals with the reorganization of the State of Bombay into the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat. This Act contains various provisions relating to the transfer of assets, rights, and liabilities of different bodies and organizations, including statutory corporations, co-operative societies, and commercial or industrial undertakings.

Section 48 of the Act provides a transitional provision relating to the Bombay State Road Transport Corporation, allowing the Government of the State of Bombay to frame a scheme for its reorganization before May 1, 1960.

Section 72 of the Act contains a special provision for the Bar Council of Gujarat. It amends the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, to provide for an explanation regarding the election of members to the Bar Council for the High Court of Gujarat and substitutes a new proviso to section 4(4) of the Act. Additionally, it introduces a new section 5A, which allows for the nomination of members of the first Bar Council for the High Court of Gujarat by the Chief Justice of the High Court of Gujarat.

Section 73 of the Act introduces a new section 5C in the Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 1942, which deals with transitional provisions relating to certain multi-unit co-operative societies. It allows for the certification of schemes for the reconstitution, reorganization, or dissolution of such societies, subject to financial adjustments as may be directed by the Attorney-General for India.

Section 74 of the Act provides for the continuance of certain existing road transport permits. It states that permits granted by the State Transport Authority of Bombay or any Regional Transport Authority in that State shall continue to be valid and effective in the transferred territory after the appointed day.

Section 76 of the Act contains temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits. It states that no tolls, entrance fees, or other charges shall be levied after the appointed day in respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in the State of Gujarat under any such permit.

Section 77 of the Act contains a special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases. It provides that where a workman employed by a body corporate, co-operative society, or commercial or industrial undertaking is transferred to or re-employed by any other body corporate or in any other co-operative society or undertaking, such transfer or re-employment shall not entitle him to any compensation under section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

Section 78 of the Act contains a special provision as to income-tax. It states that where the assets, rights, and liabilities of any body corporate carrying on any business are transferred to any other bodies corporate, the income-tax liability of such bodies corporate shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Summary:

The document summarizes various provisions related to Indian laws, specifically focusing on the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, and laws related to the division of the State of Bombay into the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat.

In relation to the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, section 78 provides that in the case of a body corporate that transfers its business to another body corporate and continues to carry on the same business, the losses of profits or gains sustained by the first body corporate can be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate. This apportionment is to be done in accordance with rules made by the Central Government, and the share of loss allotted to each transferee body corporate will be dealt with as if the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a business carried on by it in the years in which these losses were sustained.

In relation to the division of the State of Bombay, section 80 provides for the continuance of certain facilities in certain State institutions. The Government of the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat shall continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State, which shall not be less favourable than what were being provided to them before the appointed day, for such period and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the two State Governments. The Central Government may specify any other institution existing on the appointed day in the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat, and on the issue of such notification, the Schedule shall be deemed to be amended by the inclusion of the said institution therein.

Section 81 provides for the provisional and final allotment of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat. The Central Government shall determine the State to which every person provisionally allotted to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect. Every person who is finally allotted to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat shall, if he is not already serving therein, be made available for serving in that State from such date as may be agreed upon between the two State Governments or, in default of such agreement, as may be determined by the Central Government.

Section 82 provides that every person who is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay in any area which on that day falls within the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat shall continue to hold the same post or office in that State and shall be deemed, as from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or other appropriate authority in, that State.

Section 84 provides that the Public Service Commission for the State of Bombay shall, as from the appointed day, become the Public Service Commission for the State of Maharashtra. The report of the Bombay Public Service Commission as to the work done by the Commission in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be presented under clause (2) of article 323 to the Governors of Maharashtra and Gujarat, and the Governor of Maharashtra shall, on receipt of such report, cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as far as possible, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State of Maharashtra and it shall not be necessary to cause such report or any such memorandum to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State of Gujarat.

Section 85 amends article 371 of the Constitution by substituting the words “the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat” for the words “the State of Bombay” and adding the words “and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case may be,” after the words “the rest of Maharashtra”.

Section 86 amends section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, by substituting the words “Gujarat and Maharashtra” for the words “Bombay and Mysore” in clause (d) and adding the words “Mysore and” after the words “Madras and” in clause (e).

Section 87 provides that the provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have effected any change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Bombay shall, until otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed as meaning the territories within that State immediately before the appointed day.

Section 88 provides that for the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year from that day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient.
Summary:

The document outlines various provisions related to the reorganization of the State of Bombay into the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat. The Indian laws mentioned in the document include the following:

* The appropriate Government refers to the Central Government for laws related to matters in the Union List and the State Government for other laws.
* Section 89 allows courts, tribunals, or authorities to construe laws in a manner that facilitates their application in relation to the States of Maharashtra or Gujarat, without affecting the substance.
* Section 90 enables the Government of the State of Gujarat to specify the authority, officer, or person competent to exercise functions exercisable under any law in force on the appointed day.
* Section 91 deals with legal proceedings and states that where the State of Bombay is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights, or liabilities subject to apportionment between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat under this Act, the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be substituted for the State of Bombay as a party to those proceedings.
* Section 92 deals with the transfer of pending proceedings and states that every proceeding pending immediately before the appointed day before a court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority, or officer in any area which on that day falls within the State of Maharashtra shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the transferred territory, stand transferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority, or officer in the State of Gujarat.
* Section 93 states that any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate courts in the State of Bombay shall, for a period of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those courts has been transferred to the State of Gujarat.
* Section 94 states that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
* Section 95 enables the President to do anything necessary to remove difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
* Section 96 empowers the Central Government to make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.
* The First Schedule contains the territories transferred from the State of Bombay to the State of Gujarat.
* The Second Schedule contains the members of the Council of States whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1962.

Note: The summary does not include all the details of the document, but provides an overview of the key provisions and legal terms mentioned in the document.
Summary:

The document summarizes amendments to various legal orders related to the delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies in the Indian states of Gujarat and Maharashtra. The amendments include changes to the First Schedule of the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, which affects the allocation of seats in the Gujarat and Maharashtra Councils of States. The Third Schedule of the Order is also amended to include a note regarding the meaning of certain districts and talukas in Gujarat and Maharashtra.

The Fourth Schedule of the Order is amended to include changes to the Second Schedule of the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, which affects the delimitation of constituencies in Gujarat and Maharashtra. The amendments include changes to the names and boundaries of certain constituencies, as well as the addition of new constituencies.

The Fifth Schedule of the Order is amended to include changes to the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bombay) Order, 1951, which affects the delimitation of council constituencies in the state of Maharashtra. The amendments include changes to the names and boundaries of certain constituencies, as well as the deletion of certain constituencies.

The Seventh Schedule of the Order is amended to include changes to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, which affects the classification of certain communities as Scheduled Castes in the state of Gujarat. The amendments include changes to the list of communities classified as Scheduled Castes in the state.
This document is a portion of the Constitution of India (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, as amended in 1960. It lists the Scheduled Tribes in various states and districts of India. The Scheduled Tribes are groups of indigenous people who are recognized by the Constitution of India and are entitled to special protections and benefits.

The amendment made in 1960 adds a new Part VII-A to the Order, which applies to the state of Maharashtra except for certain districts. This new Part lists 24 Scheduled Tribes, including Bhil, Dhodia, Dubla, Gamit, Gond, Kathodi, Kokna, Naikda, Pardhi, Patelia, Pomla, Rathawa, Varli, and Vitolia.

The amendment also makes changes to Part IV of the Order, which applies to the state of Gujarat. It adds the Scheduled Tribe of Barda to the list and makes changes to the entries for Bhil, Dhodia, Dubla, Gamit, Gond, Kathodi, Kokna, Naikda, Pardhi, Patelia, Pomla, Rathawa, Varli, and Vitolia.

In addition, the amendment adds new entries to the Ninth Schedule of the Constitution of India. The Ninth Schedule lists laws that are exempt from judicial review, including laws related to the distribution of union duties of excise. The new entries relate to the distribution of union duties of excise between the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat.

Overall, this document is a legal text that specifies the Scheduled Tribes in various states and districts of India and makes changes to the distribution of union duties of excise between the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat. It uses legal terms such as "Scheduled Tribes," "amendment," "Part," "districts," "state," and "Ninth Schedule." It is written in formal and precise language and follows the structure and formatting of legal texts.
Summary:

The document summarizes the distribution of various taxes and duties between the Indian states of Maharashtra and Gujarat, which were formed from the former Bombay state on May 1, 1960.

Under the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenger Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, the distribution of estate duty and tax on railway passenger fares is modified as follows:

* Section 3 of the Act is modified to provide for the distribution of estate duty between Maharashtra and Gujarat. The amount payable to each state is calculated based on the total amount falling to be distributed for the financial year, which is deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the total amount for the first and remaining eleven months of the financial year.
* Section 5 of the Act is modified to provide for the distribution of tax on railway passenger fares between Maharashtra and Gujarat. The net proceeds of the tax are deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds for the first and remaining eleven months of the financial year.

Under the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, the distribution of additional duties on sugar, tobacco, and textiles is modified as follows:

* The distribution of additional duties on sugar between Maharashtra and Gujarat is modified in the Second Schedule of the Act. The net proceeds of the additional duties are deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds for the first and remaining eleven months of the financial year.
* The distribution of additional duties on tobacco between Maharashtra and Gujarat is modified in the Second Schedule of the Act. The net proceeds of the additional duties are deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds for the first and remaining eleven months of the financial year.
* The distribution of additional duties on textiles between Maharashtra and Gujarat is modified in the Second Schedule of the Act. The net proceeds of the additional duties are deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds for the first and remaining eleven months of the financial year.

Under the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) No. 2 Order, 1957, the distribution of net proceeds of taxes on income is modified as follows:

* The distribution of net proceeds of taxes on income between Maharashtra and Gujarat is modified in paragraph 3 of the Order. The net proceeds of taxes on income are deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds for the first and remaining eleven months of the financial year.

The Tenth Schedule of the document outlines the distribution of certain stores between Maharashtra and Gujarat. Stores held for specific purposes, such as for use or utilization in particular institutions, workshops, or undertakings or on particular works under construction, shall pass to the State in which such institutions, workshops, undertakings, or works are located on the appointed day. Stores relating to Sachivalaya and offices of Heads of Departments having jurisdiction over the whole of the State of Bombay shall remain the property of the State of Maharashtra. All other unissued stores, pooled stores, and stores purchased on or after the 1st July, 1959, of any class shall be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in proportion to the total stores of that class purchased in the period of three years ending with the 31st March, 1960 for the territories included respectively in each of those States.

The Eleventh Schedule of the document outlines the apportionment of liability in respect of pensions between Maharashtra and Gujarat. Subject to certain adjustments, each of the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat shall pay the pensions drawn in its treasuries in respect of pensions granted by the State of Bombay before the appointed day. The liability in respect of pensions of officers serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before the appointed day, but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the State of Maharashtra. The liability in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay and retiring on or after that day shall be that of the State which grants him the pension. However, the portion of the pension attributable to the service of any such officer before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay shall be allocated between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the population ratio. The liability in respect of pensions shall be apportioned between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the population ratio, and the Government which grants more than its due share shall be reimbursed the excess amount by the other State.
Summary:

The document contains provisions related to the pension of officers who have served in multiple states. According to section 6(1), if such an officer retires and is entitled to receive a pension from two or more governments, the government that is not granting the pension shall reimburse the government granting the pension for its share of the liability. Section 6(2) states that if an officer has served in two states for some period each, the government other than the one granting the pension shall reimburse the government granting the pension for a portion of the pension that is attributable to the officer's service after the appointed day. The portion of the pension to be reimbursed is determined by the ratio of the officer's qualifying service after the appointed day under the reimbursing state to the total qualifying service after the appointed day.

The Twelfth Schedule contains a list of cooperative societies that are exempt from the provisions of the Bombay Cooperative Societies Act. The Thirteenth Schedule contains a list of educational and other institutions that are exempt from the provisions of the Bombay Public Trusts Act. The document also includes amendments to various sections and schedules, as indicated by the footnotes.

In summary, the document outlines the provisions for the pension of officers who have served in multiple states, and lists cooperative societies and educational and other institutions that are exempt from certain provisions of the Bombay Cooperative Societies Act and the Bombay Public Trusts Act.