Summary:

The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960, is a law that consolidates and amends the law relating to land revenue in the Union territory of Tripura and provides for the acquisition of estates and certain other measures of land reform. The Act has 13 parts, including preliminary provisions, revenue divisions and officers, land revenue, tenancy, land reforms, and miscellaneous provisions.

The Act defines various terms related to land, such as agriculture, basic holding, family holding, family, holding, improvement, person under disability, personal cultivation, rent, standard acre, under-raiyat, village, and year. The Act also empowers the Administrator to create, alter, or abolish districts, sub-divisions, circles, and tehsils with the previous concurrence of the Government.

The Act provides for the appointment of various revenue officers, including Collector, director of settlement and land records, sub-divisional officers, survey and settlement officers, assistant survey and settlement officers, circle officers, revenue inspectors, tehsildars, village accountants, and other village officers and servants. The Collector is the head of the revenue administration in each district and exercises the powers and discharges the duties of the Collector under this Act or any other law for the time being in force. The sub-divisional officers, circle officers, and other revenue officers shall exercise such other powers of superintendence and control within the district and over the officers subordinate to them as may be prescribed.

The Act also provides for the appointment of settlement officers who shall be in charge of the settlement operations in the district and exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the settlement officer under this Act or any other law for the time being in force. The duties and powers of the settlement officers shall be such as may be imposed or conferred on them by or under this Act or any other law in force for the time being or any general or special order of the Administrator published in the Official Gazette.
Summary:

The Indian Land Revenue Act outlines the powers and duties of revenue officers, including the Administrator, Collector, and sub-divisional officer. These officers have the authority to take cognizance of all matters related to the survey of land, the settlement of revenue rates, and the preparation and maintenance of land records and other registers. They are also responsible for exercising any powers and performing any duties prescribed by this Act or by any general or special order of the Administrator. All revenue officers are subordinate to the Administrator and all officers in the district or a sub-division are subordinate to the Collector or the sub-divisional officer. The Administrator has the power to appoint one person to hold any two or more of the offices provided for in this Chapter, and to confer on any officer of the Government all or any of the powers and duties of any of the revenue officers. Appointments made under this Chapter, except appointments of revenue inspectors, tehsildars and village accountants and other village officers and servants, shall be notified in the Official Gazette. The Administrator shall also specify the revenue officers who shall use a seal and the size and description of the seal which each such officer shall use.

The Act also outlines the Government's title to lands, public roads, lanes and paths, bridges, ditches, dikes, and fences, the beds of rivers, streams, nallas, lakes and tanks, and all canals and water courses, and all standing and flowing water, and all rights in or over the same or appertaining thereto, which are not the property of any person. The Government also has the right to mines, quarries, minerals and mineral products including mineral oil, natural gas and petroleum. The Collector has the power to decide any dispute regarding the Government's claim to any property or any right in or over any property. Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (3) or in appeal or revision therefrom may institute a civil suit to contest the order within a period of six months from the date of such order and the decision of the civil court shall be binding on the parties.

The Act also provides for the right to all trees, jungles or other natural products growing on land set apart for forest reserves and to all trees, brush wood, jungle or other natural product, wherever growing, except in so far as the same may be the property of any person. The Administrator may set apart land belonging to the Government for pasturage for the village cattle, for forest reserves or for any other purpose. The Collector may allot land belonging to the Government for agricultural purposes or for construction of dwelling houses, in accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf under this Act; and such rules may provide for allotment of land to persons evicted under section 15. Any person who occupies or continues to occupy any land belonging to Government without lawful authority shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be summarily evicted therefrom by the competent authority and any building or other construction erected or anything deposited on such land, if not removed within such reasonable time as such authority may from time to time fix for the purpose, shall be liable to be forfeited to the Government and to be disposed of in such manner as the competent authority may direct.

All lands, to whatever purpose applied, are liable to payment of land revenue to the Government. The Administrator may exempt any land from the liability to such payment by means of a special grant or contract or in accordance with any law for the time being in force or the rules made under this Act. The assessment of land revenue on any land shall be made, or shall be deemed to have been made, with respect to the use of the land for purposes of agriculture, industrial or commercial purposes, as sites for dwelling houses, or for any other purpose. If any person holding land wishes to divert such land or any part thereof to any other purpose except agriculture, he shall apply for permission to the competent authority who may grant it on such conditions as it may think fit. If any land has been diverted without permission by the holder or by any other person with or without the consent of the holder, the competent authority may impose on the person responsible for the diversion a penalty not exceeding one hundred rupees.
Summary:

Chapter IV of the document pertains to the Survey and Settlement of Land Revenue. It begins with the definitions of 'revenue survey', 'settlement', and 'term of settlement' as the operations carried out to determine or revise the land revenue payable on lands in any local area, the results of the operations, and the period during which such results are to be in force, respectively. Section 25 of this chapter mandates an inquiry into the profits of agriculture and the value of land used for agricultural and non-agricultural purposes. The Administrator is required to institute and maintain an inquiry into the profits of agriculture and the value of land used for agricultural and non-agricultural purposes. The revenue survey is to be conducted by a survey officer, who may require the assistance of landholders to measure or classify the lands to which the revenue survey extends. The survey officer may divide the lands into villages and the villages into plots and survey numbers, and may recognise, reconstitute, or form new survey numbers. The survey officer may also sub-divide survey numbers into as many sub-divisions as may be required. The Administrator may at any time direct the determination or the revision of the revenue-rates for all lands in any area of which a revenue survey has been made. The settlement officer shall prepare a register showing the area and assessment of each survey number, and other records in accordance with such orders as may be made in this behalf by the Administrator. The revenue-rates are determined based on the physical features, agricultural and economic conditions and trade facilities and communications, and are published in the prescribed manner for the prescribed period. Any person objecting to any entry in the table of revenue-rates may present a petition in writing to the settlement officer within the prescribed period, and the settlement officer shall consider such objections after giving a hearing to the objector. The table of revenue-rates confirmed by the Administrator shall be finally published in the Official Gazette and incorporated in and form part of the settlement register of the village. The revenue-rates shall take effect from the beginning of the year next after the date of final publication of the table of revenue-rates under section 34. The rates specified in the table of revenue-rates shall remain in force for a period of thirty years, which may be extended by the Administrator if necessary.
Summary:

This document pertains to Indian laws related to land revenue, specifically focusing on the Bombay Land Revenue Code. The Code outlines the procedures for determining and collecting land revenue, including the calculation of assessments, the power to make additional assessments for water advantages, and the continuance of survey operations and rates in force at the commencement of the Act. The Code also grants the Collector the power to correct errors and provides for the preparation and publication of records of rights. Civil courts have jurisdiction to decide any dispute relating to any right or entry recorded in the record of rights. The register of mutations is maintained for every village, and any person acquiring any right in land is required to report it to the village accountant. The register of mutations is open to inspection by the public, and certified extracts may be given. The Code also allows for the transfer of the duty of maintaining maps and records to the settlement officer during a local area settlement.
Summary:
This document is a part of the Indian law which outlines the procedures for the settlement of boundaries, construction and repair of boundary marks, and the realization of land revenue and other public demands. The settlement of a boundary under this Chapter is determinative of the proper position of the boundary line or boundary marks and the rights of the landholders on either side of the boundary fixed in respect of the land appertaining or not appertaining to their respective holdings. The Collector may evict any landholder wrongfully in possession of any land which has been adjudged in the settlement of a boundary not to appertain to his holding or to the holding of any person through or under whom he claims. Section 54 allows the survey officer to specify, construct, lay out, maintain or repair boundary marks of villages or survey numbers or sub-divisions and assess all charges incurred thereby on the holders or others having an interest therein. Section 55 states that the boundary marks shall be of such description, constructed, laid out, maintained, or repaired in such manner, and shall be of such dimensions and materials as may be determined by the Collector or other officer appointed for the purpose. Section 56 states that every landholder shall be responsible for the maintenance and good repair of the boundary marks of his holding and for any charge reasonably incurred on account of the same by the revenue officers in case of alteration, removal, or disrepair. Section 57 states that after the introduction of survey and settlement in a district, the charge of the boundary marks shall devolve on the Collector and it shall be his duty to take measures for their construction, laying out, maintenance, and repair. Section 58 states that any person wilfully erasing, removing, or injuring a boundary mark shall be liable to such penalty not exceeding fifty rupees as the competent authority may impose.

This document also outlines the procedures for the realization of land revenue and other public demands. Land revenue assessed on any land shall be the first charge on that land and on the crops, rents, and profits thereof (Section 59). Land revenue shall be payable at such times, in such instalments, to such persons, and at such places, as may be prescribed (Section 60). Any instalment of land revenue or part thereof which is not paid on the due date shall become an arrear of land revenue and the person responsible for the payment shall become a defaulter (Section 61). An arrear of land revenue may be recovered by any one or more of the following processes, namely: by serving a written notice of demand on the defaulter, by distraint and sale of the defaulter’s movable property, including the produce of the land, and by the attachment and sale of the defaulter’s immovable property (Section 62). The form and contents of the notice of demand and the officers by whom such notices shall be issued shall be such as may be prescribed (Section 63). The distraint and sale of the movable property of a defaulter shall be made by such officers or class of officers, in such manner and in accordance with such procedure, as may be prescribed (Section 64). When the Collector is of opinion that the processes referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of section 62 are not sufficient for the recovery of an arrear, he may, in addition to or instead of any of those processes, cause the land in respect of which such arrear is due to be attached and sold in the prescribed manner (Section 65). Before effecting the sale of any land or other immovable property under the provisions of this Chapter, the Collector or other officer empowered in this behalf shall issue such notices and proclamations, in such form, in such manner and containing such particulars, as may be prescribed; the notices and proclamations shall also be published in such manner as may be prescribed (Section 66). All sales of property, movable or immovable, under this Chapter shall be by public auction held in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed (Section 67). No officer having any duty to perform in connection with any such sale and no person employed by or subordinate to such officer shall, either directly or indirectly, bid for or acquire any property except on behalf of the Government (Section 68). Perishable articles shall be sold by auction with the least possible delay and such sale shall be finally concluded by the officer conducting the sale (Section 69). Every sale of property, movable or immovable, under the provisions of this Chapter shall, as far as may be practicable, be proportionate to the amount of the arrear of land revenue to be recovered together with the interest thereon and the expenses of attachment and sale (Section 70). In all cases of sale of immovable property, the party who is declared to be the purchaser shall be required to deposit immediately 25 per cent. of the amount of his bid, and the balance within fifteen days of the date of sale (Section 71). In default of the payment of deposit referred to in section 71, the property shall be put up for re-sale and the expenses incurred in connection with the first sale shall be borne by the defaulting bidder (Section 72). Where the proceeds of the re-sale are less than the price bid by such defaulting purchaser, the difference shall also be recoverable from him in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue (Section 72).
In this document, various sections of Indian laws are discussed. These sections are part of the Revenue Recovery Act and pertain to the procedures and powers of revenue officers.

Section 75 outlines the circumstances under which a sale of land may be set aside. If the sale is not confirmed or is set aside, the Collector must order the refund and payment of all the moneys deposited under section 73 to the person who made the deposit. However, the Collector may set off any part of these moneys against any arrears of land revenue or any other arrear recoverable as an arrear of land revenue that may be outstanding against the person who made the deposit.

Section 76 states that when a sale held under this Chapter is confirmed, the Collector shall put the person declared to be the purchaser in possession of the property and shall grant him a certificate in the prescribed form to the effect that he has purchased the property specified therein. This certificate shall be deemed to be a valid transfer of such property.

Section 77 outlines how the proceeds of the sale of any property under this Chapter shall be applied. The proceeds shall first be used to defray the expenses of the sale, which shall be determined in the prescribed manner. The balance shall then be applied to the payment of the arrears on account of which the sale was held, and any surplus shall be paid to the person whose property has been sold.

Section 78 states that the person who has purchased any land and to whom a certificate of purchase has been granted shall not be liable for the land revenue in respect of the land for any period prior to the date of the sale.

Section 79 allows the Collector to prevent the removal of crops from the land until the demand for the current year in respect of the said land is paid, if necessary.

Section 80 states that certain moneys may be recovered under this Act in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. These include rent, fees, and royalties due to the Government for use or occupation of land or water or any product of land, all moneys falling due to the Government under any grant, lease, or contract which provides that they shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue, and all sums declared by this Act or any other law for the time being in force to be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.

Section 81 states that a revenue officer, while exercising power under this Act or any other law for the time being in force to inquire into or to decide any question arising for determination between the Government and any person or between parties to any proceedings, shall be a revenue court. A revenue court has the power to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent the abuse of the process of the revenue court.

Section 82 states that no revenue officer shall inquire into or hear any case at any place outside the local limits of his jurisdiction, except for reasons to be recorded in writing.

Section 83 allows revenue officers and persons acting under their orders to enter upon and survey any land and demarcate boundaries and do all other acts necessary for the purpose of discharging their duties under this Act or any other law for the time being in force. They shall cause no more damage than the circumstances of the case may require.

Section 84 allows the Administrator to transfer any case or class of cases arising under this Act or any other law for the time being in force from any revenue officer to any other revenue officer competent to deal with it. The Collector or a sub-divisional officer may also transfer any case or class of cases arising under this Act or any other law for the time being in force for inquiry or decision from his own file or from the file of any revenue officer subordinate to him to the file of any other revenue officer subordinate to him competent to deal with such case or class of cases.

Section 85 gives every revenue officer not lower in rank than a circle officer acting as a revenue court the power to take evidence and to summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary, either as a party or as a witness or to produce any document, for the purpose of any inquiry which such officer is legally empowered to make. All persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either in person or by an authorised agent as such officer may direct, and to produce such documents as may be required. Every summons shall be in writing, signed and sealed by the officer issuing it and shall be in such form and be served in such manner as may be prescribed.

Section 86 states that if any person on whom a summons to attend as witness or to produce any document has been served fails to comply with the summons, the officer by whom the summons has been issued under section 85 may issue a bailable warrant of arrest, order him to furnish security for appearance, or impose upon him a fine not exceeding rupees twenty.

Section 87 states that if, on the date fixed for hearing a case or proceeding, a revenue officer finds that a summons or notice was not served on any party due to the failure of the opposite party to pay the requisite process fees for such service, the case or proceeding may be dismissed for default of payment of such process fees. If any party to a case or proceeding before a revenue officer does not appear on the date fixed for hearing, the case may be heard and determined in his absence or may be dismissed for default. The party against whom any order is passed under sub-section (1) or (2) may apply, within thirty days from the date of such order, to have it set aside on the ground that he was prevented by sufficient cause from paying the requisite process fees or from appearing at the hearing; and the revenue officer may, after notice to the opposite party and after making such inquiry as he considers necessary, set aside the order passed.

Section 88 states that a revenue officer may, from time to time, for reasons to be recorded, adjourn the hearing of a case or proceeding before him. The date and place of an adjourned hearing shall be intimated at the time of the adjournment to such of the parties and witnesses as are present.

Section 89 states that a revenue officer may direct the parties to pay the cost incurred in any case before him and also apportion the cost among the parties in such manner and to such extent as he may think fit.

Section 90 states that where any order is passed under this Act directing any person to deliver possession of land or directing the eviction of any person from land, such order shall be executed by the competent authority in such manner as may be prescribed and it shall be lawful for such authority, in accordance with rules to be prescribed, to take such steps and use or cause to be used such force as may be reasonably necessary for securing compliance with the order.

Section 91 states that all appearances before, applications to, and acts to be done before, any revenue officer under this Act or any other law for the time being in force may be made or done by the parties themselves or by their authorised agents or by any legal practitioner. Any such appearance shall, if the revenue officer so directs, be made by the party in person.

Section 92 states that any revenue officer by whom an order was passed in a case or proceeding may, either on his own motion or on the application of a party, correct any error or omission not affecting a material part of the case or proceeding, after such notice to the parties as he may consider necessary.

Section 93 states that an appeal shall lie from every original order passed under this Act, subject to certain conditions and limitations.
cultivate, graze, pasture, reap, cut, carry away and dispose of the crops and other products of the land, to plant trees, flowers, creepers, shrubs and other vegetation, to dig wells, tanks, ponds, canals and other works for irrigation, to let out the land for cultivation or any other purpose on rent or on share or on lease, and to do all other things necessary for the cultivation of the land;', '2': '(c) the raiyat shall have the right to use and enjoy the land and all appurtenances thereto, including the standing crops, trees, shrubs, flowers, creepers, wells, tanks, ponds, canals and all other works for irrigation, and all other things attached to or forming part of the land, subject to the conditions, if any, on which the land has been granted to him;', '3': '(d) the raiyat shall have the right to recover the land from any person who may have forcibly taken possession of the same;', '4': '(e) the raiyat shall have the right to use and enjoy the water courses, roads, cart-roads, paths, ditches, drains, canals, tanks, ponds, rivers, sewers, wells and other public places and things in the village in which his land is situated, in such manner as may be prescribed;', '5': '(f) the raiyat shall have the right to have his land surveyed and measured and to have the boundaries of his land marked out, and to have the land revenue and other dues assessed and collected in accordance with law;', '6': '(g) the raiyat shall have the right to have his land included in the record of rights, and to have the entries relating to his land in the record of rights and the register of mutations corrected, altered or added to, in accordance with law;', '7': '(h) the raiyat shall have the right to receive, in accordance with law, the compensation that may be payable to him on account of any land acquired for public purposes or on account of any other public work;', '8': '(i) the raiyat shall have the right to receive compensation for any damage caused to him or to his crops, trees, buildings or other property by any public work or by any act or omission of any person for which he is responsible;', '9': '(j) the raiyat shall have the right to have his land cultivated in accordance with the rules of good husbandry, and to have the soil of his land preserved and improved;', '10': '(k) the raiyat shall have the right to receive, in accordance with law, the compensation that may be payable to him on account of any land acquired for public purposes or on account of any other public work;', '11': '(l) the raiyat shall have the right to receive compensation for any damage caused to him or to his crops, trees, buildings or other property by any public work or by any act or omission of any person for which he is responsible;', '12': '(m) the raiyat shall have the right to use and enjoy the land and all appurtenances thereto, including the standing crops, trees, shrubs, flowers, creepers, wells, tanks, ponds and all other works for irrigation, and all other things attached to or forming part of the land, subject to the conditions, if any, on which the land has been granted to him;', '13': '(n) the raiyat shall have the right to recover the land from any person who may have forcibly taken possession of the same;', '14': '(o) the raiyat shall have the right to use and enjoy the water courses, roads, cart-roads, paths, ditches, drains, canals, tanks, ponds, rivers, sewers, wells and other public places and things in the village in which his land is situated, in such manner as may be prescribed;', '15': '(p) the raiyat shall have the right to have his land surveyed and measured and to have the boundaries of his land marked out, and to have the land revenue and other dues assessed and collected in accordance with law;', '16': '(q) the raiyat shall have the right to have his land included in the record of rights, and to have the entries relating to his land in the record of rights and the register of mutations corrected, altered or added to, in accordance with law;', '17': '(r) the raiyat shall have the right to receive, in accordance with law, the compensation that may be payable to him on account of any land acquired for public purposes or on account of any other public work;', '18': '(s) the raiyat shall have the right to receive compensation for any damage caused to him or to his crops, trees, buildings or other property by any public work or by any act or omission of any person for which he is responsible;', '19': '(t) the raiyat shall have the right to use and enjoy the land and all appurtenances thereto, including the standing crops, trees, shrubs, flowers, creepers, wells, tanks, ponds and all other works for irrigation, and all other things attached to or forming part of the land, subject to the conditions, if any, on which the land has been granted to him;', '20': '(u) the raiyat shall have the right to recover the land from any person who may have forcibly taken possession of the same;', '21': '(v) the raiyat shall have the right to use and enjoy the water courses, roads, cart-roads, paths, ditches, drains, canals, tanks, ponds, rivers, sewers, wells and other public places and things in the village in which his land is situated, in such manner as may be prescribed;', '22': '(w) the raiyat shall have the right to have his land surveyed and measured and to have the boundaries of his land marked out, and to have the land revenue and other dues assessed and collected in accordance with law;', '23': '(x) the raiyat shall have the right to have his land included in the record of rights, and to have the entries relating to his land in the record of rights and the register of mutations corrected, altered or added to, in accordance with law;', '24': '(y) the raiyat shall have the right to receive, in accordance with law, the compensation that may be payable to him on account of any land acquired for public purposes or on account of any other public work;', '25': '(z) the raiyat shall have the right to receive compensation for any damage caused to him or to his crops, trees, buildings or other property by any public work or by any act or omission of any person for which he is responsible;', '26': '(aa) the raiyat shall have the right to have his land cultivated in accordance with the rules of good husbandry, and to have the soil of his land preserved and improved;', '27': '(ab) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him determined in accordance with law, and to have them assessed, collected and recovered in accordance with law;', '28': '(ac) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '29': '(ad) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '30': '(ae) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '31': '(af) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '32': '(ag) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '33': '(ah) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '34': '(ai) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '35': '(aj) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '36': '(ak) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '37': '(al) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '38': '(am) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '39': '(an) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '40': '(ao) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '41': '(ap) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '42': '(aq) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '43': '(ar) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '44': '(as) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '45': '(at) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '46': '(au) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '47': '(av) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '48': '(aw) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '49': '(ax) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '50': '(ay) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '51': '(az) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '52': '(ba) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '53': '(bb) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '54': '(bc) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '55': '(bd) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '56': '(be) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '57': '(bf) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '58': '(bg) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '59': '(bh) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '60': '(bi) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '61': '(bj) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '62': '(bk) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '63': '(bl) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '64': '(bm) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '65': '(bn) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '66': '(bo) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '67': '(bp) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '68': '(bq) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '69': '(br) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '70': '(bs) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '71': '(bt) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '72': '(bu) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '73': '(bv) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '74': '(bw) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '75': '(bx) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '76': '(by) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '77': '(bz) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '78': '(ca) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '79': '(cb) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him waived, in accordance with law, in cases of natural calamities or other special circumstances;', '80': '(cc) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him adjusted in accordance with law;', '81': '(cd) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him collected in accordance with law;', '82': '(ce) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him recovered in accordance with law;', '83': '(cf) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues payable by him remitted, reduced or suspended in accordance with law;', '84': '(cg) the raiyat shall have the right to have the land revenue and other dues pay
Summary:

The document summarizes Indian laws related to land ownership and use, specifically focusing on the rights and responsibilities of raiyats (landowners) and under-raiyats (tenants). Key concepts include:

* Section 99: A raiyat has the right to use their land for agricultural purposes, including building farm buildings, constructing wells or tanks, and planting trees. However, they cannot use their land in a way that harms adjacent land or violates other laws.
* Section 100: A raiyat who owns land in excess of a basic holding can apply to reserve land for their personal cultivation. This must be done within one year of the commencement of the Act, and the raiyat must consider any objections from under-raiyats holding leased land from them.
* Section 101: The competent authority will determine the land that can be reserved for the raiyat's personal cultivation, taking into account any objections from under-raiyats and making necessary inquiries.
* Section 102: The permissible limit for a raiyat to resume land from under-raiyats for personal cultivation depends on whether the raiyat is under disability, owns a basic holding or less, owns more than a basic holding but not exceeding a family holding, or owns more than a family holding.
* Section 103: If a raiyat does not own land in excess of a basic holding at the commencement of the Act, all land owned by them and held by under-raiyats will be deemed to have been reserved for their personal cultivation.
* Section 104: The competent authority will declare land that an under-raiyat is allowed to retain as non-resumable land for the under-raiyat.
* Section 105: A raiyat may lease out their land to another person, with the lease lasting for five years and subject to renewal. A raiyat who is a member of the Armed Forces of the Union may terminate the tenancy if they require the land for personal cultivation.
* Section 106: If land has remained uncultivated for a certain period of time, the Collector may lease it out to ensure full and efficient use of the land for agriculture.
* Section 107: A raiyat may relinquish their rights in respect of any land in their possession in favour of the government, subject to certain rules and procedures.

The document also discusses the rights and responsibilities of under-raiyats, including their heritable but non-transferable interest in leased land, their protection against eviction except as provided in the Act, and their right to create a mortgage or charge in favour of the government or a co-operative society. Under-raiyats may also make improvements to the land with permission from the raiyat or the competent authority, but they do not become liable to pay a higher rate of rent on account of any increase in production or any change.
Summary:

The Indian Law Document discusses the regulation of tenancy in agricultural lands. The document outlines the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960, which aims to ensure equitable distribution of land and prevent the concentration of land in the hands of a few individuals.

The Act defines various terms related to tenancy, such as raiyat, under-raiyat, and land revenue. The document specifies the maximum rent that an under-raiyat can be charged by a raiyat, which cannot exceed one-fifth of the produce of the land or four times the land revenue payable in respect of the land, depending on whether plough cattle is supplied by the raiyat or not.

The document also lays down the procedure for determining the reasonable rent for any land, which is based on factors such as the rental value of lands used for similar purposes in the locality, the profits of agriculture of similar lands in the locality, the price of crops and commodities in the locality, the improvements made to the land by the raiyat or the under-raiyat, and the land revenue payable in respect of the land. The reasonable rent for any land cannot be altered for a period of five years, except on certain grounds such as deterioration of the land due to natural causes, increase in the produce of the land due to improvements made to it, alteration of the extent of the land due to alluvion or diluvion, or the land being rendered unfit for cultivation.

The document also lays down provisions for commutation of rent payable in kind into money rent, and the procedure for determining the money rent payable for the land. The raiyat or the under-raiyat can apply for commutation of rent payable in kind into money rent, and the competent authority determines the money rent payable for the land based on factors such as the average money rent payable by under-raiyats for land of similar description and with similar advantages in the vicinity, the average value of the rent for the land actually received by the raiyat during the three years preceding the date of application, the average prices of crops and commodities in the locality during the three years preceding the date of application, the improvements made to the land by the raiyat or the under-raiyat, and any other factor which may be prescribed.

The document also specifies that every raiyat shall give or cause to be given a receipt for the rent received by him or on his behalf in such form as may be prescribed duly signed by him or his authorized agent. If any raiyat recovers from an under-raiyat rent in excess of the amount due under this Act, he shall forthwith refund the excess amount so recovered and shall also be liable to punishment as provided in this Act.

The document also lays down provisions for suspension or remission of rent, and specifies that no suit shall lie and no decree of a civil court shall be executed for the recovery by a raiyat of any rent the payment of which has been remitted, or during the period for which the payment of such rent has been suspended.

The document also specifies the grounds for eviction of under-raiyat, and specifies that no order for eviction of an under-raiyat shall be executed till the standing crops, if any, on the land are harvested.

The document also specifies that where a person who has taken possession of any land by evicting an under-raiyat therefrom on the ground that the land had been reserved for personal cultivation by him, fails to cultivate such land personally within one year from the date on which he took possession thereof or ceases to cultivate such land personally in any year during a period of four years next following, the under-raiyat shall be entitled to be restored to possession of the land from which he was evicted.

Overall, the document outlines the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960, which aims to ensure equitable distribution of land and prevent the concentration of land in the hands of a few individuals. The document specifies the maximum rent that an under-raiyat can be charged by a raiyat, lays down the procedure for determining the reasonable rent for any land, specifies the grounds for eviction of under-raiyat, and lays down provisions for commutation of rent payable in kind into money rent. The document also specifies the procedure for suspension or remission of rent, and specifies the grounds for restoration of possession of land to under-raiyat.
In summary, the document outlines various provisions related to Indian land laws. Section 121 discusses the conditions under which land may be declared as non-resumable land of the under-raiyat, including failure to apply for reservation, file a suit for eviction, or cultivate the land. Section 122 allows an under-raiyat to remove certain works or buildings before eviction. Section 123 provides for the restoration of possession of land in certain cases where surrender or eviction could not have taken place if the Act had been in force. Section 124 outlines the procedure for termination of tenancy for act of waste. Section 125 prohibits the surrender of land by an under-raiyat without the permission of the competent authority. Section 126 transfers the ownership of land to the under-raiyat in certain cases. Section 127 provides for compensation to the raiyat in case of transfer of ownership. Section 128 outlines the payment of compensation to the raiyat, while Section 129 requires the under-raiyat to pay compensation to the Government. Section 130 allows for the issuance of a certificate to the under-raiyat once the compensation has been paid. Finally, Section 131 provides for the first option to purchase the land by the under-raiyat.
Summary:

This document summarizes Part IV of a legal document, which pertains to the acquisition of estates and the rights of intermediaries in them. The key provisions include:

* Section 133: Definitions of terms used in this Part.
* Section 134: Notification vesting estates in the State, which declares that all estates and the rights of intermediaries in such estates shall vest in the Government free from all encumbrances.
* Section 135: Consequences of notification under section 134, which specifies that with effect from the vesting date, all estates and the rights of intermediaries in such estates shall vest in the Government free from all encumbrances.
* Section 136: Rights of intermediary to certain lands, which allows an intermediary to retain homesteads, buildings, and structures together with the lands appurtenant thereto in the occupation of the intermediary with effect from the vesting date, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2).

The terms defined in Section 133 include "estate", "homestead", "intermediary", "tenant", and "tenure holder". An "estate" refers to lands included under one entry in any of the general registers of revenue-paying and revenue-free lands, and includes revenue-free lands not entered in any register, a part of or a share in an estate, and land used for agricultural purposes. A "homestead" means a dwelling house together with any courtyard, compound, garden, or outhouse and includes any outbuildings used for purposes connected with agriculture and any family graveyard, library, office, guest house, grainstore, latrines, boundary walls, tanks, wells, or places of worship appertaining to such dwelling house. An "intermediary" means a person who holds in an estate the right, title, or interest of a talukdar and includes a person who holds land either revenue-free or at a concessional rate and a tenure holder. A "tenant" means a person who cultivates or holds the land of an intermediary under an agreement, express or implied, on condition of paying therefor rent in cash or in kind or delivering a share of the produce and includes a person who cultivates or holds land of an intermediary under the system generally known as "bhag", "adhi" or "barga". A "tenure holder" means a person who has acquired from an intermediary the right to hold lands for the purpose of collecting rents or bringing them under cultivation by establishing tenants thereon.

Under Section 134, the Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that with effect from the date specified in the notification, all estates situated in any area or areas and all rights, title, and interest of every intermediary in such estates shall vest in the Government free from all encumbrances. The publication of a notification in the manner provided in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be conclusive evidence of the notice of declaration to the intermediaries whose interests are affected by such notification.

Under Section 135, with effect from the vesting date, all estates and the rights of intermediaries in such estates shall vest in the Government free from all encumbrances. Every tenant holding any land under an intermediary shall hold the same directly under the Government as a raiyat thereof and shall be liable to pay to the Government land revenue equal to the rent payable by him to the intermediary on the vesting date, subject to a maximum of the value of one-eighth of the gross produce which value shall be determined in the manner prescribed. The tenant shall become the owner of any building or structure constructed on such land at the expense of the intermediary on payment of such compensation to the intermediary as is equivalent to its market value on the vesting date, which value shall be determined in accordance with the rules made in this behalf.

Under Section 136, an intermediary shall be entitled to retain with effect from the vesting date, homesteads, buildings, and structures together with the lands appurtenant thereto in the occupation of the intermediary, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2). The intermediary shall not be entitled to recover any arrears of rent or other dues from any tenant or sub-tenant in respect of any period before the vesting date. The intermediary shall be entitled to recover from the Government, by deduction from the compensation payable to the intermediary, all arrears of land revenue, local rates, cesses, and other dues lawfully payable to the Government by the intermediary on the vesting date in respect of the estate. The intermediary shall also be entitled to recover from the Government any arrears of rent or other dues in respect of the estate for any period after the vesting date which, but for this Act, would be payable to the intermediary. Any payment made in contravention of this provision shall not be valid discharge of the person liable to pay the same. Where under any agreement or contract made before the vesting date, any rent, cess, local rate, or other dues for any period after the said date has been paid to or compounded of or released by an intermediary, the same shall, notwithstanding such agreement or contract, be recoverable by the Government from the intermediary, and may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be realized by deduction from the compensation payable to the intermediary.
Summary:

The Land Reforms Act of 1960 vests certain lands in the Government, including those belonging to intermediaries, except for specific types of land that the intermediary is entitled to retain. These exceptions include buildings vested in the Government under section 135, lands under the intermediary's personal cultivation, lands leased by an intermediary who was under disability at the time of the lease, lands held by the intermediary as a mortgagor, lands used for orchards, live-stock breeding, poultry farming, or dairy farming, and so much of the lands comprised in a tea garden, mill, factory or workshop as are required for such tea garden, mill, factory or workshop. Intermediaries who are entitled to retain possession of any land under this section shall hold such land directly under the Government from the vesting date as a raiyat thereof and be liable to pay therefor land revenue at full rate applicable to similar lands in the locality. The Collector is responsible for taking charge of estates and interests of intermediaries which vest in the Government under section 135, and may require any intermediary or other person in possession to give up such possession or to deliver any documents, registers, or records connected with the management of such estate or interest. Intermediaries are entitled to make inspection of any documents, registers or records which have been delivered to or taken possession of by the Collector, to make notes therefrom or to have certified copies thereof granted to him. If there is any dispute as to the possession of any homestead or land or building, the Collector shall make such inquiry as he deems fit and pass such orders thereon as may appear to him just and proper. An appeal against an order of the Collector passed under section 138, if preferred within sixty days of such order, shall lie to the District Judge having jurisdiction. Every intermediary, whose right, title and interest in any estate vests in the Government under Chapter XI shall be entitled to receive and be paid therefor compensation as hereinafter provided. The compensation shall be due as from the vesting date and the portion remaining unpaid shall carry interest at the rate of 21/2 per cent. per annum. For the purpose of assessing compensation under this Chapter, every intermediary shall be treated as a separate unit. If two or more intermediaries hold an estate or any interest therein jointly, the share of each intermediary in such estate or interest shall be treated as a separate unit. If an intermediary holds shares or interest in two or more estates, the aggregate of his shares or interest in all such estates shall be treated as a single unit. The Administrator shall, as soon as possible after the publication of a notification under section 134, appoint one or more officers to be compensation officers to prepare compensation assessment rolls and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed. The compensation officer shall prepare a compensation assessment roll in respect of every estate vested in the Government under Chapter XI. The compensation assessment roll shall contain particulars of the gross income and the net income from the estate, the share of the net income of the intermediary or each of the intermediaries, the amount of compensation payable to him or them and such other particulars as may be prescribed. Where an intermediary has shares or interest in two or more estates either or any of which has not vested in the Government, the compensation payable to the intermediary shall be determined after all such estates have vested in the Government, on the basis of the aggregate of his shares or interest in the net income from all such estates. For the purpose of preparing the compensation assessment roll, the compensation officer may require an intermediary to submit such statements and furnish such particulars as may be prescribed. The gross income from the estate shall be taken to consist of the rents, cesses, local rates and other amounts payable or deemed to be payable to the intermediary or intermediaries by the tenants and tenure-holders for the previous year, including the commuted value of rents payable in kind which value shall be determined in the prescribed manner. The net income from the estate shall be computed by deducting from the gross income the following, namely: any sum which was payable by the intermediary or intermediaries during the previous year as land revenue, cesses, local rates or rent to the Government in respect of the interests to which the gross income relates; any sum payable under the Bengal Agricultural Income-tax Act 1944 (Ben. IV of 1944), as extended to Tripura or the Indian Income-tax Act 1922 (11 of 1922), during the previous year as defined in those Acts, in respect of the interests to which the gross income relates; charges on account of management and collection at the rate of 10 per cent. of the gross income; and any other expenses incurred in the management of the estate.
Summary:

The document summarizes various sections of Indian laws related to land acquisition and compensation.

Section 146 outlines the rates of compensation payable to intermediaries based on the net income from the estate or the aggregate of net incomes from all estates, with different multiples for different income ranges.

Section 147 establishes the appointment of a claims officer to dispose of the claims of creditors whose debts are secured by a mortgage of or charge on any estate vested in the Government. The claims officer shall inquire into the claims in accordance with prescribed rules and determine the amount to which each of the creditors is entitled.

Section 148 allows for an appeal to the District Judge by any person aggrieved by an order of the claims officer within sixty days of the date of the order, with the decision of the District Judge being final.

Section 149 outlines the process for preliminary publication of the compensation assessment roll and disposal of objections. The compensation officer shall cause a draft of the roll to be published in the prescribed manner and for the prescribed period, and consider any objections made within three months of the receipt of such copy.

Section 150 requires that every order of the compensation officer deciding an objection shall contain a concise statement of the case, the points for determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for such decision.

Section 151 allows for appeals against orders of the compensation officer to a Special Judge appointed for the purpose, and then to the court of the Judicial Commissioner. The decision of the Judicial Commissioner, or of the Special Judge where no second appeal is preferred, or of the compensation officer where no appeal to the Special Judge is preferred, shall be final.

Section 152 establishes the final publication of the compensation assessment roll, which shall be conclusive evidence that the roll has been duly made under this Chapter and every entry in such roll shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act, be conclusive evidence of the matters referred to in such entry.

Section 153 allows for the correction of bona fide mistakes in the compensation assessment roll after it has been finally published. No correction shall be made except as provided in this section.
Summary:

The document summarizes various sections of Indian laws related to compensation and land acquisition. Here is a summary of the main points:

* Section 153: This section outlines the procedure for making corrections to the compensation assessment roll before its final publication. The correction can be made by the compensation officer on his own motion or on the application of the person interested.
* Section 154: This section deals with ad interim payment of compensation to the outgoing intermediary before the final publication of the compensation assessment roll. The compensation officer calculates the probable amount of compensation payable and two and a half percent of such probable amount is paid ad interim to each intermediary in cash every year. If there is any dispute as to the title of any person to receive the amount or as to the apportionment of it, the amount is kept in deposit until the dispute is finally determined.
* Section 155: This section outlines the mode of payment of compensation after the compensation assessment roll has been finally published. The balance remaining after deducting ad interim payments, amounts payable to creditors, and the amount deducted under section 135 is given in cash, in one lump sum or in annual instalments not exceeding twenty, or in bonds. The bonds carry interest at the rate of two and a half per cent. per annum on the amount outstanding thereon.
* Section 156: This section deals with compensation due to maintenance holders. If any person claiming as maintenance holder to be entitled to any portion of the compensation applies to the compensation officer for payment of the same, the compensation officer may direct the payment to the applicant out of the compensation of such amount as the intermediary may have agreed to be paid to the applicant. If the intermediary does not give his consent, the compensation officer shall direct the applicant to file a suit or other proceeding in the court having jurisdiction to establish his claim.
* Section 157: This section deals with compensation due to a person incompetent to alienate. The compensation officer shall keep the amount of compensation payable, whether in cash or in bonds, in deposit with the Collector who shall arrange to invest the cash or the income from the bonds in the purchase of such Government or other approved securities as he thinks fit.
* Section 158: This section states that the Collector, the compensation officer, and the claims officer, for the purposes of any inquiries or proceedings under this Part, shall have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath or affirmation, compelling the production of documents, and issuing commission for the examination of witnesses.
* Section 159: This section lays down penalties for wilfully failing or neglecting to comply with any requirements made of him under this Part, contravening any lawful order passed under this Part, obstructing or resisting the taking by the Collector or any other officer authorized by him in writing of charge of any property which is vested in the Government under this Part, or furnishing information which he knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true.
* Section 160: This section states that the provisions of Part III shall apply to the determination of the right of any person acquiring the right to hold land either as a raiyat or an under-raiyat under Part IV.
* Section 161: This section empowers the Administrator to make rules for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this Part. The rules may provide for the manner of publication of a notification under section 134, the procedure to be followed and the forms to be adopted in inquiries and proceedings under this Part, the mode of service of any order, notice or other documents under this Part, the form of the statements to be furnished by intermediaries, the inspection of and making notes from documents, registers and records under section 137, the grant of certified copies thereof and the fee to be charged for such grant, the form and the manner in which compensation assessment rolls shall be prepared and the particulars to be mentioned therein, the manner of apportionment of net income among intermediaries, the procedure to be followed in the case of intermediaries having shares or interest in different estates, the manner in which the preliminary and the final publication of the compensation assessment roll shall be made, the manner of determining the amount of annuities payable to religious and charitable institutions and the procedure for making payments, the manner in which the income of the previous year shall be determined, the determination of the amount of ad interim compensation, the manner in which and the period within which creditors may prefer their claims before the claims officer and the procedure to be followed in the disposal of such claims, and the manner in which objections shall be submitted and dealt with.
Summary:

The Indian Land Reforms Act, 1963, aims to regulate land ownership and usage in India. The act sets a ceiling limit on the amount of land that can be owned by individuals, families, and companies. The ceiling limit for individuals and families is 25 standard acres, with an additional 5 standard acres for each family member in excess of five, up to a maximum of 50 standard acres. The limit for companies, associations, or any other body of individuals is also 25 standard acres.

The act requires all persons representing a family who hold land in excess of the ceiling limit to submit a return to the competent authority, indicating the parcels of land they wish to retain. The competent authority then determines the total area of land held by each person, the specific parcels of land they may retain, the land held in excess of the ceiling limit, and the rights of under-raiyats or mortgagees with possession in respect of excess land. The excess land is then determined and vests in the Government.

The act provides for the selection of excess land in cases of certain transfers. Where any person holding land in excess of the ceiling limit has transferred any part of his land to any other person under a registered deed for valuable consideration, the excess land is selected out of the land held at the commencement of this Act by the transferor in excess of a family holding, and no land is selected out of the land transferred. In other cases, the excess land is selected out of the lands held at the commencement of this Act by the transferor and the transferee in the same proportion as the land held by the transferor bears to the land transferred.

The act also provides for the payment of compensation to persons who acquire the rights of the raiyat or of the mortgagor in respect of excess land or part thereof. If the person refuses to pay such compensation, the excess land or part thereof shall vest in the Government. The act also provides for the restoration of excess land to the possession of the raiyat or the mortgagor in certain cases.

The act requires the publication of the final list of land holdings and the consequences thereof. Any person aggrieved by an entry in the list published under sub-section (3) of section 167 may file objections thereto before the Collector. The Collector or any other officer authorized in this behalf by the Administrator may, after considering the objections and after giving the objector or his representatives an opportunity of being heard in the matter, approve or modify the list.
The document summarizes key provisions of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961, which aims to reform and regulate the ownership and use of agricultural land in the Indian state of Karnataka. The Act defines various terms related to land ownership, such as raiyat (landowner), under-raiyat (tenant), and excess land (land exceeding the ceiling limit).

Under the Act, the competent authority (usually the Tahsildar or Deputy Tahsildar) is responsible for identifying excess land and determining the compensation payable to the landowner. Compensation is calculated based on the net annual income from the land and is paid to the landowner by the government. If the excess land is in possession of an under-raiyat, the compensation is apportioned between the landowner and the under-raiyat based on their respective shares in the net income from the land.

In addition to compensation for the land, the Act also provides for compensation for any structures or buildings constructed on the land and any trees planted thereon. This compensation is determined by the competent authority based on the market value of the structures, buildings, or trees.

The Act also includes provisions for the payment of compensation in the form of bonds, which may be made non-transferable or transferable by endorsement or in any other manner. Such bonds are redeemable within a period of not exceeding twenty years from the date of issue.

The Act imposes limits on the future acquisition of land by any person representing a family, and any land acquired in violation of this limit is treated as excess land and subject to the provisions of the Act. However, a person representing a family is not required to surrender any part of the land on the ground that it is excess land if such excess is due to any improvements effected in the land by the efforts of the family or to a decrease in the number of its members.

The Collector is authorized to take possession of any excess land and use force if necessary for the purpose. Failure to submit a return under the Act, submission of a false return, or contravention of any lawful order made under the Act or obstruction of any person from lawfully taking possession of any land is punishable with a fine.

The Act also provides for the finality of orders made under it, subject to the provisions of the Act. The Administrator may exempt certain categories of land from the operation of the Act, such as land used for growing tea, coffee, or rubber, sugarcane farms operated by a sugar factory, specialized farms used for cattle breeding, dairy or wool raising, and land held by a co-operative society. The Administrator may also grant exemption to a transferee of land in respect of which exemption has been granted to the transferor. The Administrator may also declare that the use of land for a specified purpose is expedient or necessary in the public interest and allow acquisition of land in excess of the ceiling limit for such purpose.
Summary:

Chapter XV of the document pertains to General and Miscellaneous provisions. It includes the following sections:

Section 185: Recovery of amount due as arrear of land revenue - This section states that any amount due to the government, whether by way of costs, penalty or otherwise, and any other amount which is ordered to be paid to or recovered by the government, under this Act shall be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.

Section 186: Protection against eviction or surrender in certain cases - This section provides protection to tenants and sub-tenants from eviction or surrender of land in certain cases. It also allows for the restoration of possession of land to tenants or sub-tenants who have surrendered or been evicted from their land before the commencement of this Act, under certain conditions.

Section 187: Special provision regarding Scheduled Tribes - This section states that no transfer of land by a person who is a member of the Scheduled Tribes shall be valid unless the transfer is to another member of the Scheduled Tribes, or it is made with the previous permission in writing of the Collector, or the transfer is by way of mortgage to a co-operative society.

Section 188: Jurisdiction of civil courts excluded - This section states that no suit or other proceeding shall, unless otherwise expressly provided in this Act, lie or be instituted in any civil court with respect to any matter arising under and provided for by this Act. However, a civil suit may be brought for the adjudication of a question of title if it is involved in a dispute between parties.

Section 189: Act to over-ride contracts and other laws - This section states that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, custom or usage or agreement or instrument.
The Indian Forest Act, 1927, is a law that governs the management and utilization of forests in India. The Act defines various legal terms related to forests, such as "forest officer," "reserve forest," and "protected forest." The Act also outlines the powers and duties of forest officers, as well as the penalties for violating the Act.

One key provision of the Act is the power of the government to declare any area as a reserve forest or protected forest, which prohibits the clearing or utilization of that area without permission from the government. The Act also establishes a system of permits for the use of forest resources, such as timber and fuelwood.

The Act also includes provisions for the protection of wildlife and their habitats, including the creation of national parks and wildlife sanctuaries. The Act also allows for the creation of village forests, which are managed by local communities for their own use.

The Act has been amended several times since it was first passed in 1927, most recently in 2019. The amendments have aimed to strengthen the conservation and management of forests and wildlife, as well as to promote the rights and participation of local communities in forest management.

Section 190 of the Act states that every application, appeal or other proceeding under this Act shall bear a court-fee stamp of such value as may be prescribed.

Section 191 states that every village accountant and every other village officer appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

Section 192 gives the Administrator the power to exempt any class of lands from all or any of the provisions of this Act with the previous approval of the Government.

Section 193 states that whoever contravenes any provision of this Act for which no penalty has been otherwise provided for therein shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

Section 194 provides protection of action taken in good faith, no suit, prosecution or other proceedings shall lie—

* against any officer of the Government for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act;
* against the Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused or any injury suffered or likely to be suffered by anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

Section 195 allows the Administrator to delegate to any officer or authority subordinate to him any of the powers conferred on him or on any officer subordinate to him by this Act, other than the power to make rules, to be exercised subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the said notification.

Section 196 gives the power to remove difficulties, if any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this Act, the Government may, as occasion requires, take any action not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act which may appear to it necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty.

Section 197 gives the General power to make rules, without prejudice to any power to make rules contained elsewhere in this Act, the Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.

Section 198 states that every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

Section 199 states that on and from the date on which any of the provisions of this Act are brought into force in any area in the Union territory of Tripura, the enactments specified in the Schedule or so much thereof as relate to the matters covered by the provisions so brought into force shall stand repealed in such area.

The Schedule lists the enactments that will be repealed upon the implementation of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 in the Union territory of Tripura, including the Praja Bhumyadhikari Sambandha Bishyak Ain (EK Ain, 1296 Tripurabda), the Rajdhani Agartala Sahar Bondobasta Sambandhiya Bidhan, 1346 T.E., the Jarip-o-Bondobasta Sambandhiya Niyamabali, 1309 Tripurabda, the Tripura Rajyer Jarip Bondobasta Sambandhyia Niyamabali Sansudhan Bishyak, 1336 Tripurabder Tin Ain, the Jarip-o-Bondobasta Sambandhiya Niyamabali (Prathem Khanda), the Jarip-o-Bondobasta Sambandhiya Niyamabali (Dwitiya Khanda), 1323 T.E., the 1290 Saner EK Ain Orthat Rajaswa Sambandhiya Niyamabali, the Sarkari Prapya Aday Sambandhiya 1326 Tripura Char Ain, and the Appendix which contains various forms.