Summary:
The Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 (Act No. 59 of 1961) declares certain institutions of technology to be institutions of national importance. These institutions include the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay; the College of Engineering and Technology, Delhi; the Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam; the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur; the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras; the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee; the Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar; the Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhi Nagar; the Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad; the Indian Institute of Technology, Indore; the Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur; the Indian Institute of Technology, Mandi; the Indian Institute of Technology, Patna; the Indian Institute of Technology, Ropar; and the Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), Varanasi.

The Act defines certain terms used throughout, including "Board", "Chairman", "Council", "Deputy Director", "Director", "Institute", "Registrar", "Senate", "society", and "Statutes" and "Ordinances".

Chapter II of the Act deals with the powers and duties of the Institutes. Each Institute is responsible for providing instruction and research in various branches of engineering, technology, science, and arts. The Institute can hold examinations, grant degrees, diplomas, and other academic distinctions, and institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes, and medals. The Institute can also fix, demand, and receive fees and other charges, establish and maintain halls and hostels for the residence of students, and supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students.

The Act also provides for the appointment of the Visitor, who is the President of India, and the powers and duties of the Visitor. The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of any Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs of the Institute. Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report.

Chapter III of the Act deals with the Council, which is responsible for co-ordinating the activities of all the Institutes. The Council consists of the Minister in charge of technical education in the Central Government, the Chairman of each Institute, the Director of each Institute, the Chairman of the University Grants Commission, the Director-General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, the Chairman of the Council of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, the Director of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, three persons nominated by the Central Government, one person nominated by the All-India Council for Technical Education, and not less than three but not more than five persons nominated by the Visitor who shall be persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of education, industry, science, or technology. The Council has the power to advise on matters relating to the duration of courses, the degrees and other academic distinctions to be conferred by the Institutes, admission standards, and other academic matters. The Council can also lay down policy regarding cadres, methods of recruitment and conditions of service of employees, institution of scholarships and freeships, levying of fees and other matters of common interest.

Chapter IV of the Act contains miscellaneous provisions, including the power to remove difficulties, transitional provisions, and repeal and savings. The Act repeals the Indian Institute of Technology (Kharagpur) Act, 1956, but the provisions of that Act set out in the Schedule continue to have effect. The Schedule declares the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, to be an institution of national importance.