Summary:

THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962

Title: The Atomic Energy Act, 1962

Act ID: ACT 33 OF 1962

Enactment Date: [15th September, 1962.]

Objective: The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 aims to provide for the development, control and use of atomic energy for the welfare of the people of India and for other peaceful purposes.

Key Sections:

Section 1: Short title, extent and commencement.

This section provides the name of the Act, its extent, and the date of its commencement.

Section 2: Definitions and interpretation.

This section defines various terms used in the Act, including atomic energy, fissile material, minerals, notification, plant, prescribed equipment, prescribed substance, radiation, and radioactive substance.

Section 3: General powers of the Central Government.

This section grants the Central Government the power to produce, develop, use, and dispose of atomic energy, carry out research into matters connected with atomic energy, manufacture or otherwise produce prescribed or radioactive substances, and dispose of such substances or articles manufactured or otherwise produced. The Central Government can also declare information as restricted information, declare any area or premises as a prohibited area, provide for control over radioactive substances or radiation generating plant, produce and supply electricity from atomic energy, and do all such things necessary for the exercise of the foregoing powers.

Section 4: Notification of discovery of uranium or thorium.

This section requires every person who discovers or has discovered uranium or thorium in India to report the discovery in writing to the Central Government or to any person or authority authorized by the Central Government within three months after the date of commencement of this Act or after the discovery, whichever is later. Any person who has reason to believe that uranium or thorium occurs at any place in India shall also send intimation of such belief and the reasons therefor to the Central Government or to any such person or authority.

Section 5: Control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium.

This section empowers the Central Government to require any person who is mining or is about to mine any substance from which uranium can be or may reasonably be expected to be isolated or extracted, or is engaged or is about to be engaged in treating or concentrating any substance from which uranium can be or may reasonably be expected to be isolated or extracted, to comply with certain terms and conditions and adopt certain processes. The Central Government may also totally prohibit any person from conducting such mining operations or treating or concentrating the substance.

Section 6: Disposal of uranium.

This section provides that no minerals, concentrates, and other materials which contain uranium in its natural state in excess of a certain proportion can be disposed of except with the previous permission in writing of the Central Government. The Central Government may also compulsorily acquire any such mineral, concentrate, or other material, and compensation shall be paid in accordance with section 21.

Section 7: Powers to obtain information regarding materials, plant, or processes.

This section authorizes the Central Government to require any person to make periodical and other returns, statements, plans, drawings, and other documents relating to prescribed substances, plants, contracts, or other information in his possession or under his control.

Section 8: Powers of entry and inspection.

This section authorizes any person authorized by the Central Government to enter any mine, premises, or land where work is being carried out for the purpose of or in connection with production and processing of any prescribed substances or substances from which a prescribed substance can be obtained, or where any such plant is situate. The person carrying out the inspection may make copies of or extracts from any drawing, plan, or other document found in the mine, premises, or land and for the purpose of making such copies or extracts, may remove any such drawing, plan, or other document.

Section 9: Power to do work for discovering minerals.

This section authorizes the Central Government to do on, over, or below the surface of any land such work as it considers necessary for the purpose of discovering whether there is present in or on the land any substance from which in its opinion any of the prescribed substances can be obtained.

Section 10: Compulsory acquisition of rights to work minerals.

This section empowers the Central Government to compulsorily acquire the exclusive right to work minerals and any other ancillary rights which appear to be necessary for the purpose of working the minerals.

Section 11: Compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals, and plants.

This section authorizes the Central Government to compulsorily acquire any prescribed substance, minerals, prescribed equipment, or plant designed or adapted for the mining or processing of any minerals referred to in clause (b) or substances obtained therefrom or for the production or use of any prescribed substance or a radioactive substance.

Section 11A: Removal of doubts.

This section clarifies that the compulsory acquisition of any mineral, concentrate, or other material under sub-section (2) of section 6, or of any substance, minerals, equipment, or plant under sub-section (1) of section 11, shall not be deemed to be a sale for any purpose whatsoever.

Section 12: Compensation in case of compulsory acquisition of a mine.

This section provides that compensation in respect of the acquisition of any mine or part of a mine from which in the opinion of the Central Government any of the prescribed substances can be obtained shall be paid in accordance with section 21, but no account shall be taken of the value of uranium which may be obtained from such mine or part of a mine.

Section 13: Novation of certain contracts.

This section authorizes the Central Government to serve a notice on the parties to a contract relating to prospecting or mining of any substance from which any of the prescribed substances can be obtained or to production or use of atomic energy or to research into matters connected therewith, not being a contract for the rendering of personal services, stating that on a specified date the rights and liabilities of any of the parties to the contract will be transferred to the Central Government.

Section 14: Control over production and use of atomic energy.

This section empowers the Central Government to prohibit except under a licence granted by it the working of any mine or minerals specified in the order, the acquisition, production, possession, use, disposal, export, or import of any of the prescribed substances or any minerals or other substances specified in the rules, from which in the opinion of the Central Government any of the prescribed substances can be obtained, or of any plant designed or adapted or manufactured for the production, development, and use of atomic energy or for research into matters connected therewith, or of any prescribed equipment.

Section 15: Requisitioning of any substance for extracting uranium or plutonium.

This section authorizes the Central Government to require that any substance which, in the opinion of the Central Government, contains uranium, plutonium, or any of their isotopes, shall be delivered to it, and the Central Government may extract from that substance the uranium, plutonium, or any of their isotopes contained therein and return the substance to the person concerned on payment of compensation which shall be determined in accordance with section 21.

Section 16: Control over radioactive substances.

This section authorizes the Central Government to prohibit the manufacture, possession, use, transfer by sale or otherwise, export and import, and in any emergency, transport and disposal, of any radioactive substances without its written consent.

Section 17: Special provisions as to safety.

This section empowers the Central Government to make rules as to the prevention of injury to the health of persons employed at any premises or places where radioactive substances are manufactured, produced, mined, treated, stored, or used, or any radiation generating plant, equipment, or appliance is used, and as to the safety of the public in relation to such premises or places.

Section 18: Restriction on disclosure of information.

This section empowers the Central Government to restrict the disclosure of information relating to atomic energy.

Section 19: Prevention of entry into prohibited areas.

This section authorizes the Central Government to prohibit entry into a prohibited area and the taking of any photograph, sketch, pictures, drawing, map, or other document from a prohibited area without permission.

Section 20: Special provisions as to inventions.

This section prohibits the grant of patents for inventions which in the opinion of the Central Government are useful for or relate to the production, control, use, or disposal of atomic energy or the prospecting, mining, extraction, production, physical and chemical treatment, fabrication, enrichment, canning, or use of any prescribed substance or radioactive substance or the ensuring of safety in atomic energy operations.

Section 21: Principles relating to payment of compensation.

This section provides for the determination of compensation in the event of any exercise of powers under this Act.

Section 22: Special provisions as to electricity.

This section empowers the Central Government to develop a sound and adequate national policy in regard to atomic power and to co-ordinate such policy with the Central Electricity Authority and the State Electricity Boards constituted under sections 3 and 5 respectively of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and other similar statutory corporations concerned with the control and utilization of other power resources.

Section 23: Administration of Factories Act, 1948.

This section vests in the Central Government the authority to administer the Factories Act, 1948 in relation to any factory owned by the Central Government and engaged in carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Section 24: Offences and penalties.

This section provides for penalties for contravention of the provisions of this Act.

Section 25: Offences by companies.

This section provides for the punishment of companies and their officers for offences under this Act.

Section 26: Cognizance of offences.

This section provides for the cognizance of offences under this Act.

Section 27: Delegation of powers.

This section empowers the Central Government to delegate its powers under this Act.

Section 28: Effect of other laws.

This section provides that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or any other instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.

Section 29: Protection of action taken in good faith.

This section provides for the protection of action taken in good faith under this Act.

Section 30: Power to make rules.

This section empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Section 31: Act binding on Government.

This section provides that the provisions of this Act shall be binding on Government.

Section 32: [Repealed.]

This section repeals the Atomic Energy Act, 1948.

Schedule:

The Schedule to the Act sets out the matters in respect of which the Central Government may, by notification, make rules.

Annexure:

The Annexure to the Act sets out the forms to be used for various purposes under the Act.

Appendix:

The Appendix to the Act sets out the forms of licences and permits to be granted under the Act.

Footnotes:

Page 2, footnote 1: 21st September, 1962.

Page 2, footnote 2: This clause shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 5 of 2016, s. 2, to read as under:—(bb) “Government company” means a company in which—(i) not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government; or(ii) the whole of the paid-up share capital is held by one or more of the companies specified in sub-clause (i) andwhich,  by  its  articles  of  association,  empowers  the  Central  Government  to  constitute  and  reconstitute    its  Board  ofDirectors.

Page 3, footnote 1: Ins. by Act 59 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-9-1962).

Page 4, footnote 1: The proviso omitted by Act 59 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-9-1962).

Page 4, footnote 2: Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 21-9-1962).

Page 7, footnote 1: Ins. by Act 59 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21-9-1962).

Page 8, footnote 1: Ins. by Act 5 of 2016, s. 3 (date to be notified).

Page 12, footnote 1: Ins. by Act 29 of 1987, s. 4 (w.e.f. 8-9-1987).

Page 12, footnote 2: Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “with the concurrence of” (w.e.f. 8-9-1987).

Page 12, footnote 3: Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 8-9-1987).

Page 14, footnote 1: Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid” (w.e.f. 15-5-1986).