Summary:

The State of Nagaland Act, 1962, was enacted on 4th September, 1962, to provide for the formation of the State of Nagaland and related matters. The Act consists of six parts, with the first part being the preliminary part that defines various terms used in the Act. The second part deals with the formation of the State of Nagaland, including the territories that will form part of the new state and the amendments to the First and Sixth Schedules of the Constitution.

The third part of the Act deals with representation in the legislatures, including the Council of States, the House of the People, and the Legislative Assembly. The Act specifies the number of seats allotted to the State of Nagaland in each of these legislatures and the manner in which elections are to be held. The fourth part of the Act deals with the common High Court for the State of Assam and the State of Nagaland, including provisions regarding advocates, practice and procedure, custody of the Seal of the common High Court, form of writs and other processes, powers of Judges, principal seat of the common High Court, procedure as to appeals to the Supreme Court, and pending suits, appeals and proceedings.

The fifth part of the Act deals with financial provisions, including the authorization of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature, allowances and privileges of the Governor of Nagaland, and the distribution of revenues. The sixth part of the Act deals with legal and miscellaneous provisions, including the continuance of existing laws and their adaptation, power to construe laws, provisions as to continuance of courts and of officers, amendment of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws, power to remove difficulties, and power to make rules.

The Schedule to the Act specifies the areas that will form part of the three districts of the State of Nagaland, namely, Kohima, Mokokchung, and Tuensang. The Appendix to the Act contains various forms that are required to be used for different purposes under the Act. The Footnotes to the Act contain amendments made to the Act since its enactment.