Summary:

The Extradition Act, 1962, is a law in India that governs the extradition of fugitive criminals to foreign states. The Act applies to the whole of India and came into force on a date appointed by the Central Government. The Act defines various terms such as "composite offence," "conviction," "extradition offence," "extradition treaty," "foreign state," "fugitive criminal," "magistrate," "notified order," "prescribed," and "treaty state." The Act sets out the procedure for making a requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal, the role of the magistrate in inquiring into the case, the issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the fugitive criminal, and the surrender of the fugitive criminal to the foreign state. The Act also provides for the reception in evidence of exhibits, depositions, and other documents and authentication thereof. The Act does not apply to fugitive criminals to which Chapter III applies. Chapter III applies only to any such foreign state to which, by reason of an extradition arrangement entered into with that state, it may seem expedient to the Central Government to apply the same. Every such application shall be by notified order, and the Central Government may, by the same or any subsequent notified order, direct that this Chapter and Chapters I, IV and V shall, in relation to any such foreign State, apply subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as it may think fit to specify in the order for the purpose of implementing the arrangement. Where a fugitive criminal of any foreign state to which this Chapter applies is found in India, he shall be liable to be apprehended and returned in the manner provided by this Chapter to that foreign state. The Act also sets out the procedure for the return of fugitive criminals to foreign states and the surrender or return of accused or convicted persons from foreign states. The Act contains provisions for the liability of fugitive criminals to be arrested and surrendered or returned, the jurisdiction as to offences committed at sea or in air, the discharge of a person apprehended if not surrendered or returned within two months, the release of persons arrested on bail, the abetment of extradition offences, the lawfulness of, and retaking on escape from, custody under warrants, the property found on fugitive criminal, the power of Central Government to discharge any fugitive criminal, simultaneous requisitions, restrictions on surrender, and the repeals and savings. The Act also empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.