Summary:

The Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 is an Act to provide for Legislative Assemblies and Councils of Ministers for certain Union territories and for certain other matters.

The Act is divided into five parts. Part I, titled "Preliminary," includes sections 1 and 2. The former is a short title and commencement section, while the latter provides definitions and interpretation.

Part II, titled "Legislative Assemblies," includes sections 3 to 12. Section 3 establishes Legislative Assemblies for Union territories and sets out their composition. Section 4 outlines the qualifications for membership of a Legislative Assembly, while Section 5 sets out the duration of Legislative Assemblies. Section 6 deals with sessions of Legislative Assemblies, prorogation, and dissolution, and Section 7 establishes the positions of Speaker and Deputy Speaker of a Legislative Assembly.

Part III, titled "Delimitation of Constituencies," includes sections 38 to 43D. Section 38 defines terms used in this part, while Section 39 establishes assembly constituencies. Section 40 sets out the representation of Pondicherry in the House of the People, and Section 41 outlines the duties of the Delimitation Commission. Section 42 establishes associate members to assist the Delimitation Commission, and Section 43 lays out the procedure for delimitation.

Part IV, titled "Council of Ministers," includes sections 44 to 46. Section 44 establishes a Council of Ministers in each Union territory with the Chief Minister at the head, while Section 45 outlines other provisions related to Ministers. Section 46 sets out the conduct of business.

Part V, titled "Miscellaneous and Transitional Provisions," includes sections 47 to 58. Section 47 establishes the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, while Section 48 establishes a Contingency Fund. Section 48A allows for borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, and Section 48B sets out the form of accounts of the Union territory.

Section 49 requires the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to submit reports relating to the accounts of the Union territory to the Administrator, who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislative Assembly.

Section 50 establishes the relationship between the Administrator and his Ministers and the President, while Section 51 sets out provisions for the failure of constitutional machinery. Section 52 authorizes the President to authorize expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory pending the sanction of such expenditure by Parliament.

Section 53 sets out provisions for election to Parliament from Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry, while Section 54 establishes transitional provisions for the administration of justice in certain areas in the Union territory of Mizoram. Section 54A establishes a provisional Legislative Assembly for Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 55 deals with contracts and suits, while Section 56 empowers the President to remove difficulties. Section 57 amends certain enactments, and Section 58 repeals and saves certain laws.

The First Schedule to the Act sets out forms of oaths or affirmations, while the Second Schedule amends certain enactments.