Summary:
The Specific Relief Act, 1963 (Act No. 47 of 1963) is an Act that defines and amends the law relating to certain kinds of specific relief. The Act is divided into three parts. Part I is the preliminary part, which includes the short title, extent, commencement, definitions, savings, and specific relief to be granted only for enforcing individual civil rights and not for enforcing penal laws. Part II is the specific relief part, which includes Chapter I on recovering possession of property, Chapter II on specific performance of contracts, Chapter III on rectification of instruments, Chapter IV on rescission of contracts, Chapter V on cancellation of instruments, Chapter VI on declaratory decrees, Chapter VII on injunctions generally, and Chapter VIII on perpetual injunctions. Part III is the preventive relief part, which includes Chapter IX on temporary and perpetual injunctions, and Chapter X on perpetual injunctions. The Act also includes a schedule that lists the category of projects and infrastructure sub-sectors.

Under Part II, Chapter II on specific performance of contracts, the Act states that specific performance of a contract shall be enforced by the court subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) of section 11, section 14, and section 16. The Act also states that specific performance of a contract cannot be enforced in favor of a person who has obtained substituted performance of the contract under section 20 or who has become incapable of performing, or violates any essential term of, the contract that remains to be performed, or acts in fraud of the contract, or wilfully acts at variance with or in subversion of the relation intended to be established by the contract. The Act also provides for the circumstances under which specific performance may be enforced, such as when the contract is in writing and signed by the party to be charged, when the party to be charged is able to perform the contract, and when the contract is not a contract for the sale of immovable property or for the supply of goods.

Under Part II, Chapter III on rectification of instruments, the Act states that when, through fraud or a mutual mistake of the parties, a contract or other instrument in writing does not express their real intention, either party or his representative in interest may institute a suit to have the instrument rectified. The court may, in its discretion, direct rectification of the instrument so as to express that intention, so far as this can be done without prejudice to rights acquired by third persons in good faith and for value.

Under Part II, Chapter IV on rescission of contracts, the Act states that any person interested in a contract may sue to have it rescinded, and such rescission may be adjudged by the court in any of the following cases, namely: (a) where the contract is voidable or terminable by the plaintiff; (b) where the contract is unlawful for causes not apparent on its face and the defendant is more to blame than the plaintiff. The Act also states that the court may refuse to rescind the contract if the plaintiff has expressly or impliedly ratified the contract, or if owing to the change of circumstances which has taken place since the making of the contract, the parties cannot be substantially restored to the position in which they stood when the contract was made, or if third parties have, during the subsistence of the contract, acquired rights in good faith without notice and for value, or if only a part of the contract is sought to be rescinded and such part is not severable from the rest of the contract.

Under Part II, Chapter V on cancellation of instruments, the Act states that any person against whom a written instrument is void or voidable, and who has reasonable apprehension that such instrument, if left outstanding, may cause him serious injury, may sue to have it adjudged void or voidable, and the court may, in its discretion, so adjudge it and order it to be delivered up and cancelled.

Under Part II, Chapter VI on declaratory decrees, the Act states that any person entitled to any legal character or to any right as to any property may institute a suit against any person denying, or interested to deny, his title to such character or right, and the court may, in its discretion, make therein a declaration that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief.

Under Part III, Chapter VII on injunctions generally, the Act states that preventive relief is granted at the discretion of the court by injunction, temporary or perpetual. Temporary injunctions are such as are to continue until a specific time or until the further order of the court, and they may be granted at any stage of a suit, and are regulated by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). A perpetual injunction can only be granted by the decree made at the hearing and upon the merits of the suit; the defendant is thereby perpetually enjoined from the assertion of a right, or from the commission of an act, which would be contrary to the rights of the plaintiff.

Under Part III, Chapter VIII on perpetual injunctions, the Act states that subject to the other provisions contained in or referred to by this Chapter, a perpetual injunction may be granted to the plaintiff to prevent the breach of an obligation existing in his favor, whether expressly or by implication. When any such obligation arises from contract, the court shall be guided by the rules and provisions contained in Chapter II. When the defendant invades or threatens to invade the plaintiff’s right to, or enjoyment of, property, the court may grant a perpetual injunction in the following cases, namely: (a) where the defendant is trustee of the property for the plaintiff; (b) where there exists no standard for ascertaining the actual damage caused, or likely to be caused, by the invasion; (c) where the invasion is such that compensation in money would not afford adequate relief; (d) where the injunction is necessary to prevent a multiplicity of judicial proceedings.

Under Part III, Chapter IX on temporary and perpetual injunctions, the Act states that temporary injunctions are such as are to continue until a specific time or until the further order of the court, and they may be granted at any stage of a suit, and are regulated by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). A perpetual injunction can only be granted by the decree made at the hearing and upon the merits of the suit; the defendant is thereby perpetually enjoined from the assertion of a right, or from the commission of an act, which would be contrary to the rights of the plaintiff.

Under Part III, Chapter X on perpetual injunctions, the Act states that subject to the other provisions contained in or referred to by this Chapter, a perpetual injunction may be granted to the plaintiff to prevent the breach of an obligation existing in his favor, whether expressly or by implication. When any such obligation arises from contract, the court shall be guided by the rules and provisions contained in Chapter II. When the defendant invades or threatens to invade the plaintiff’s right to, or enjoyment of, property, the court may grant a perpetual injunction in the following cases, namely: (a) where the defendant is trustee of the property for the plaintiff; (b) where there exists no standard for ascertaining the actual damage caused, or likely to be caused, by the invasion; (c) where the invasion is such that compensation in money would not afford adequate relief; (d) where the injunction is necessary to prevent a multiplicity of judicial proceedings.

The Act also includes a schedule that lists the category of projects and infrastructure sub-sectors. The schedule includes transport, energy, water and sanitation, communication, and social and commercial infrastructure sub-sectors. Each sub-sector includes a list of specific projects or activities that are covered by the sub-sector. For example, the transport sub-sector includes road and bridges, ports, shipyards, inland waterways, airports, railway track, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, terminal infrastructure including stations and adjoining commercial infrastructure, and urban public transport. The energy sub-sector includes electricity generation, electricity transmission, electricity distribution, oil pipelines, oil/gas/liquefied natural gas storage facility, and gas pipelines. The water and sanitation sub-sector includes solid waste management and sanitation, water supply pipelines, water treatment plants, sewage collection, treatment and disposal system, irrigation, storm water drainage system, and slurry pipelines. The communication sub-sector includes telecommunication, telecommunication towers, and telecommunications and telecom services. The social and commercial infrastructure sub-sector includes education institutions, sports infrastructure, hospitals, tourism infrastructure, common infrastructure for industrial parks and other parks with industrial activity, post-harvest storage infrastructure for agriculture and horticulture produce, terminal markets, soil-testing laboratories, cold chain, and affordable housing.