Summary:

THE FOOD CORPORATIONS ACT, 1964 is an Act to provide for the establishment of Food Corporations for the purpose of trading in foodgrains and other foodstuffs and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. The Act establishes a Food Corporation of India (FCI) and State Food Corporations (SFCs) as separate legal entities with perpetual succession and common seals.

The original capital of the FCI is fixed at not exceeding one hundred crores of rupees, which may be increased by the Central Government. The management of the FCI vests in a board of directors, which is responsible for the general superintendence, direction, and management of the affairs and business of the Corporation. The board of directors is guided by instructions on questions of policy given by the Central Government.

The Act defines "foodstuffs" to include edible oilseeds and oils. The FCI may establish offices or agencies at other places in or outside India, subject to the approval of the Central Government. The FCI may perform various functions, including promoting the production of foodgrains and other foodstuffs, setting up or assisting in the setting up of rice mills, flour mills, and other undertakings for the processing of foodgrains and other foodstuffs, and discharging such other functions as may be prescribed.

The FCI may also constitute an Executive Committee, which shall consist of the Chairman of the board, the managing director, and three other directors, of whom one shall be a non-official. The Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with any matter within the competence of the FCI, subject to the general control, direction, and superintendence of the board of directors.

The Act also provides for the establishment of Boards of Management for a State or two or more contiguous States, if no State Food Corporation is functioning in such State or States. The Board of Management shall consist of a Chairman, the senior-most executive officer of the FCI employed at the head office of the Board of Management, and not more than ten other members, appointed by the FCI.

The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a State Food Corporation for a State under such name as may be specified in the notification. The Capital of a State Food Corporation shall be such sum not exceeding ten crores of rupees as the Central Government may, after consultation with the FCI, fix.

The management of a State Food Corporation shall vest in a board of directors, which shall consist of a Chairman, a General Manager, and not more than ten other members, all of whom shall be appointed by the FCI after consultation with the Central Government and the State Government.

The board of directors, in discharging its functions, shall act on business principles having regard to the interests of the producer and consumer and shall be guided by such instructions on questions of policy as may be given to it by the FCI.

The members of the board of directors, other than the General Manager, shall be entitled to receive by way of remuneration or fees such sums as may be prescribed.

A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as, and for being, a member of the board of directors of a State Food Corporation if he is or at any time has been adjudicated insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with his creditors, or if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court, or if he is or has been convicted of any offence which in the opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude, or if he has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a corporation owned or controlled by the Government, or if he is a salaried official of the FCI or a State Food Corporation, except in the case of the Chairman or the General Manager.

The Food Corporation shall prepare a statement of programme of its activities during the forthcoming year as well as a financial estimate in respect thereof and submit the same for approval to the Central Government. The statement prepared under sub-section (1) shall not less than three months before the commencement of each year, be submitted for approval to the FCI in the case of a State Food Corporation.

A Food Corporation may borrow money from the Central Government, a scheduled bank, any other bank or financial institution approved by the Central Government, or any other authority, organization, or institution or from the public, on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Central Government. The Central Government may guarantee the loans and advances taken by a Food Corporation.

A Food Corporation may lend or advance money to any person engaged in the production of foodgrains upon the security of foodgrains or such other security as may be prescribed, for any purpose connected with such production.

A Food Corporation may enter into agreement with any grower of foodcrops for the purchase of foodgrains after the harvest of such crops and any such agreement may provide that any sum payable by the Corporation to the grower under such agreement shall be payable to any scheduled bank or other financing agency nominated by the grower in this behalf to such extent as may be specified in the agreement.

The Food Corporation may guarantee any loan referred to in sub-section (2) of section 29 and also any other loan raised by a grower of foodcrops, which is repayable within a period not exceeding five years.

A Food Corporation shall have its own fund and all receipts of the Corporation shall be credited thereto and all payments of the Corporation shall be met therefrom.

A Food Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the profit and loss account and the balance-sheet, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

The accounts of a Food Corporation shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Food Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of a Food Corporation shall have the same rights, privileges, and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any office of the Food Corporation.

Every director, member of an Advisory Committee or other committee, auditor, officer or other employee of a Food Corporation and every member of a Board of Management and its staff shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule.

Every member of the board of directors of a Food Corporation and of a Board of Management shall be indemnified by the Corporation against all losses and expenses incurred by him in the discharge of his duties except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default.

No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against a Food Corporation or any member of the board of directors thereof or any officer or other employee thereof or any member of a Board of Management or its staff or any other person authorised by a Food Corporation or a Board of Management to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.

Whoever, without the consent in writing of a Food Corporation, uses its name in any prospectus or advertisement, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

For the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to income-tax, super-tax, or any other tax on income, profits, or gains, a Food Corporation shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning of the Income-tax Act, 1961, and shall be liable to tax accordingly on its income, profits, and gains.

No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies or corporations shall apply to a Food Corporation, and it shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as that Government may direct.

The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

A Food Corporation may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.

No regulation made or purporting to have been made with retrospective effect, under section 45 before the commencement of the Food Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1982, shall be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been invalid merely on the ground that such regulation was made with retrospective effect and accordingly every such regulation and any action taken or thing done thereunder shall be as valid and effective as if the provisions of section 45, as amended by the Food Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1982 were in force at all material times when such regulation was made or action or thing was taken or done.

Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.