Summary:

THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH ACT, 1966 (Act No. 51 of 1966) is an Act to declare the institution known as the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, to be an institution of national importance and to provide for its incorporation and matters connected therewith. The Act was enacted on 17th December, 1966.

The Act declares the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, as an institution of national importance and establishes its composition, term of office of members, vacancies, and other related matters. The Act also provides for the appointment of a President, who is the Chairman of the Governing Body and exercises such powers and discharges such functions as are laid down in the Act or as may be prescribed by rules or regulations. The Act also provides for the allowances of the President and other members.

The Act lays down the objects of the Institute, which include developing patterns of teaching in undergraduate and post-graduate medical education, bringing together in one place educational facilities of the highest order for the training of personnel in all important branches of health activity, and attaining self-sufficiency in post-graduate medical education to meet the country's needs for specialists and medical teachers. The Act also provides for the functions of the Institute, including providing for undergraduate and post-graduate teaching, providing facilities for research, providing for the teaching of humanities, and conducting experiments in new methods of medical education.

The Act provides for the establishment and maintenance of medical colleges, hospitals, dental colleges, nursing colleges, rural and urban health organizations, and other institutions for the training of different types of health workers. The Act also provides for the appointment of a chief executive officer, who is designated as the Director of the Institute and exercises such powers and discharges such functions as may be prescribed by regulations or as may be delegated to him by the Institute or the President of the Institute or by the Governing Body or the Chairman of the Governing Body.

The Act provides for the payment of sums of money to the Institute by the Central Government, the maintenance of a Fund to which shall be credited all moneys provided by the Central Government, all fees and other charges received by the Institute, all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers, and all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source. The Act also provides for the preparation of a budget and the audit of the accounts of the Institute by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

The Act provides for the submission of an annual report of the activities of the Institute to the Central Government, the constitution of pension and provident funds for the benefit of its officers, teachers and other employees, and the authentication of orders and instruments of the Institute. The Act also provides for the Acts and proceedings of the Institute, Governing Body, and any standing or ad hoc committee not to be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in or defect in the constitution of the Institute, Governing Body or such standing or ad hoc committee.

The Act provides for the grant of medical degrees, diplomas, and other academic distinctions and titles by the Institute and the recognition of medical qualifications granted by the Institute. The Act also provides for the control of the Institute by the Central Government and the resolution of disputes between the Institute and the Central Government. The Act also provides for the submission of returns and information by the Institute and the transfer of service of existing employees.

The Act provides for the continuance of facilities at the Institute for the Governments of the States of Haryana and Punjab and the Central Government in relation to the Union territories of Chandigarh and Himachal Pradesh and the people of the States and territories aforesaid. The Act also provides for the removal of difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act and the making of rules and regulations. The Act also provides for the laying of rules and regulations before each House of Parliament.