Summary:

THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) ACT, 1967 (ACT NO.37 OF 1967) was enacted on the 30th December, 1967, to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations, and for dealing with terrorist activities. The Act defines 'association' as any combination or body of individuals, 'unlawful activity' as any action taken by an individual or association that supports any claim to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union or disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India or causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India, and 'unlawful association' as any association that has for its object any unlawful activity or encourages or aids persons to undertake any unlawful activity or of which the members undertake such activity. The Act also defines 'terrorist act', 'terrorism', and 'terrorist' and specifies the punishments for committing or advocating, abetting, advising, or inciting the commission of a terrorist act. The Act provides for the establishment of a Tribunal to adjudicate whether there is sufficient cause for declaring an association unlawful, and the procedure for the seizure and attachment of property of an unlawful association. The Act also includes provisions for the forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism and the denotification of terrorist organizations or individuals. The Act applies to citizens of India outside India, persons in the service of the Government, wherever they may be, and persons on ships and aircrafts registered in India, wherever they may be. The Act includes provisions for the protection of witnesses and the bar of jurisdiction, and the effect of the Act and rules, etc., inconsistent with other enactments. The Act also includes saving and impounding of passport and arms license of a person charge-sheeted under the Act. The Act also confers certain powers on the Central Government for the prevention of, and for coping with, terrorist activities. The Act also empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. The Act extends to the whole of India.