Summary:

THE BIHAR AND UTTAR PRADESH (ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES) ACT, 1968

The Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968 is an Act that provides for the alteration of boundaries of the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and for matters connected therewith. The Act is divided into six parts, with Part I containing preliminary provisions, Part II containing provisions related to the transfer of territories, Part III containing provisions related to representation in the legislatures, Part IV containing provisions related to high courts, Part V containing provisions related to the authorization of expenditure, and Part VI containing miscellaneous provisions.

Part I contains preliminary provisions, including definitions of various terms used in the Act. Section 1 provides that the Act may be called the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968. Section 2 provides definitions of various terms used in the Act, including "appointed day," "assembly constituency," "council constituency," "deep stream," "fixed boundary," "law," "notified order," "prescribed," "sitting member," "transferred territories," and "village."

Part II contains provisions related to the transfer of territories. Section 3 provides for the transfer of territories between Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Under this section, certain territories of Ballia district of Uttar Pradesh lying between the fixed boundary and the deep stream of the river Ghaghra, and certain territories of Ballia district lying between the fixed boundary and the deep stream of the river Ganga, shall be transferred to Bihar. Similarly, certain territories of Saran district of Bihar lying between the fixed boundary and the deep stream of the river Ghaghra, and certain territories of Shahabad district of Bihar lying between the fixed boundary and the deep stream of the river Ganga, shall be transferred to Uttar Pradesh. The fixed boundary in relation to each of the rivers Ganga and Ghaghra shall be demarcated by an authority appointed in this behalf by the Central Government so as to be generally in conformity with the boundary line described in the Schedule in relation to that river.

Part III contains provisions related to representation in the legislatures. Section 5 provides for the construction of delimitation orders. Under this section, any reference in any order relating to delimitation of parliamentary constituencies, assembly constituencies, or council constituencies to the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh shall be construed as including or excluding the territories transferred to that State under Section 3, as the case may be. Section 6 provides for the provision as to sitting members, and Section 9 provides for the right to appear in any proceedings transferred under Section 7 or Section 8.

Part IV contains provisions related to high courts. Section 7 provides for the extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, the High Court at Patna. Under this section, the jurisdiction of the High Court at Patna shall extend to the territories transferred by this Act from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Bihar, and the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall have no jurisdiction in respect of the said territories. Section 8 provides for the extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, the High Court at Allahabad. Under this section, the jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall extend to the territories transferred by this Act from the State of Bihar to the State of Uttar Pradesh, and the High Court at Patna shall have no jurisdiction in respect of the said territories.

Part V contains provisions related to the authorization of expenditure. Section 11 provides for the appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing appropriation Acts. Under this section, any Act passed by the Legislature of the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh before the appointed day for the appropriation of any moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year in which the appointed day falls shall have effect also in relation to the territories transferred to that State by the provisions of Part II.

Part VI contains miscellaneous provisions. Section 22 provides for apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement. Under this section, where the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned between them in a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the manner agreed upon.

The Schedule to the Act contains a description of the boundary line between the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh in relation to the rivers Ganga and Ghaghra. The description is divided into two parts, one for each river, and is accompanied by an explanatory note that explains the meaning of various terms used in the description.

In conclusion, the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968 is an Act that provides for the alteration of boundaries of the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and for matters connected therewith. The Act is divided into six parts, with Part I containing preliminary provisions, Part II containing provisions related to the transfer of territories, Part III containing provisions related to representation in the legislatures, Part IV containing provisions related to high courts, Part V containing provisions related to the authorization of expenditure, and Part VI containing miscellaneous provisions. The Act includes definitions of various terms used in the Act, provisions related to the transfer of territories, provisions related to representation in the legislatures, provisions related to high courts, provisions related to the authorization of expenditure, and miscellaneous provisions. The Schedule to the Act contains a description of the boundary line between the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh in relation to the rivers Ganga and Ghaghra.