Summary:

THE OATHS ACT, 1969 (ACT NO. 44 OF 1969) is an Act that consolidates and amends the law relating to judicial oaths and for certain other purposes. It applies to the entire country of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

The Act grants the power to administer oaths and affirmations to certain courts and individuals, including all courts and persons with authority to receive evidence, as well as the commanding officer of any military, naval, or air force station or ship occupied by the Armed Forces of the Union. The Act also allows for the administration of oaths and affirmations for the purpose of affidavits, if empowered by the High Court or the State Government.

The Act specifies that oaths or affirmations shall be made by all witnesses, interpreters, and jurors, with the exception of children under the age of twelve who do not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation. The Act also allows for witnesses, interpreters, and jurors to make an affirmation instead of an oath.

The Act specifies the forms of oaths and affirmations to be used, with the option for a witness in a judicial proceeding to give evidence on oath or solemn affirmation in a form common amongst or held binding by persons of the class to which he belongs, as long as it is not repugnant to justice or decency and does not affect any third person.

The Act states that no omission to take any oath or make any affirmation, no substitution of any one for any other of them, and no irregularity whatever in the administration of any oath or affirmation or in the form in which it is administered, shall invalidate any proceeding or render inadmissible any evidence. The Act also states that every person giving evidence on any subject before any court or person authorized to administer oaths and affirmations shall be bound to state the truth on such subject.

The Act repeals the Indian Oaths Act, 1873, but continues to apply the provisions of sections 9 to 12 of the said Act in relation to any agreement made before the commencement of this Act to be bound by any such oath or affirmation as is specified in section 8 of the said Act. The Schedule provides the forms of oaths and affirmations.