Summary:

The State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 is an Act to provide for the establishment of the State of Himachal Pradesh and for matters connected therewith. The Act is divided into eight parts. Part I, Preliminary, contains two sections that provide the short title and definitions of various terms used in the Act. Part II, Establishment of the State of Himachal Pradesh, contains two sections that establish the State of Himachal Pradesh and amend the First Schedule to the Constitution. Part III, Representation in the Legislatures, contains six sections that deal with the representation of Himachal Pradesh in the Council of States, the House of the People, and the Legislative Assembly. Part IV, High Court, contains four sections that establish a separate High Court for Himachal Pradesh, provide for the jurisdiction of the High Court, and regulate the practice and procedure in the High Court. Part V, Authorisation of Expenditure and Distribution of Revenues, contains four sections that authorise expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature, provide for reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, and determine the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Himachal Pradesh. Part VI, Assets and Liabilities, contains one section that deals with the property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc., of the Union in relation to the territories transferred to the State of Himachal Pradesh. Part VII, Provisions as to Services, contains four sections that deal with the provisions relating to All-India Services, the provision relating to certain Services, the provisions relating to other services, and other provisions as to services. Part VIII, Legal and Miscellaneous Provisions, contains six sections that deal with the amendment of article 210 and article 239A of the Constitution, the amendment of Act 37 of 1956, the amendment of Act 20 of 1963, the continuance of existing laws and their adaptation, the power to construe laws, the provisions as to continuance of courts, etc., the effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws, the power to remove difficulties, and the power to make rules. The Act also contains four schedules that amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951. The Act also contains an annexure and appendix that contain forms and footnotes.