Summary:

THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970

This document establishes two independent Agricultural Universities, the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University, in place of the Punjab Agricultural University constituted by the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961. The Act defines various terms used in the document and divides the Act into chapters.

Chapter I, Preliminary, contains the short title and commencement of the Act, as well as definitions of terms used throughout the Act.

Chapter II, Establishment of Corresponding Universities, outlines the dissolution of the existing University and the establishment of the two new Universities, their incorporation, territorial limits, headquarters, and objects.

Chapter III, Management of a Corresponding University, details the authorities and officers of a corresponding University, including the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, Dean of Post-Graduate Studies, Deans of the colleges, Director of Research, Director of Agricultural Extension Education, Director of Students Welfare, Registrar, Comptroller, Estate Officer, and Librarian.

Chapter IV, Colleges, lists the colleges that will be constituent colleges of the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University, and details the powers and duties of the Boards of Studies, Deans, Heads of Departments, and the Librarian.

Chapter V, Services, outlines the retirement and other conditions of service, provident fund, appointment of salaried officers, and temporary arrangements for officers of a corresponding University.

Chapter VI, Statutes and Regulations, provides for the making of Statutes and Regulations by the corresponding Universities, and sets out the procedures for making and amending Statutes.

Chapter VII, Accounts and Audit, requires each corresponding University to have a general fund and a Finance Committee, and sets out the powers and duties of the Finance Committee.

Chapter VIII, Miscellaneous, deals with the division of assets and liabilities, legal proceedings, transfer of employees, membership of corresponding University bodies, annual report, construction of references to existing University in any document, obligations to be discharged by the Punjab Agricultural University, settlement of unresolved disputes, power to remove difficulties, and repeals and savings.

The Act includes a schedule that lists the Acts that are repealed by this Act.