Summary:
The Delhi Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1971, is an Act of the Indian parliament that provides for the proper management of the Sikh Gurdwaras and Gurdwara property in Delhi and for matters connected therewith. The Act establishes a Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee (DSGMC) for the proper management and control of the Gurdwaras and Gurdwara property. The DSGMC is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall by such name sue and be sued. The Committee shall have its head office in Delhi.

The Act defines various terms such as 'appointed day', 'Board', 'Committee', 'Director Gurdwara Elections', 'Gurdwaras', 'Gurdwara property', 'local Gurdwara', 'patit', 'registered Singh Sabha', 'regulation', 'rule', 'Sikh', 'Amritdhari Sikh' etc.

The Act is divided into six parts. Part I deals with preliminary matters, such as the short title, extent and commencement of the Act, and definitions of terms used in the Act. Part II deals with the composition and term of office of the Committee, as well as the delimitation of wards, electoral roll, qualifications of elector, right to vote, qualifications of member, and election of members. Part III deals with the powers and functions of the Committee. Part IV deals with the Gurdwara Fund, accounts and audit. Part V deals with settlement of elections and other disputes. Part VI deals with miscellaneous matters.

The Act also provides for the appointment of a Director Gurdwara Elections, who shall have the superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, elections of members of the Committee. The Director Gurdwara Elections shall be a suitable person to be appointed by the Central Government, who is a citizen of India and possesses judicial or administrative experience for a period of not less than ten years.

The Act also provides for the first meeting of the elected members, first meeting of the Committee, election of office-bearers, vacation, resignation and removal of members and office-bearers, fees and allowances of members, meetings of the Committee and the Executive Board, sub-committees, powers of the Executive Board and its office-bearers, validity of acts of Committee, Executive Board or sub-committees not to be questioned by reason of vacancy, etc., officers and other employees of the Committee, powers and functions of the Committee, Gurdwara Fund, budget, maintenance of accounts, audit of accounts, consideration of the auditor’s report by the Committee, election disputes, electoral offences etc., jurisdiction of District Court in other matters, appeals, procedure for affiliation of local Gurdwaras, act not to affect rites and practices of Sikh religion, members, officers and other employees to be public servants, salary, etc., of the Director Gurdwara Elections to be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India in the first instance, protection of action taken, power to make rules, power of Committee to make regulations, repeal and saving.

The Schedule of the Act contains the form of oath to be made by members of the DSGMC. The Appendix contains forms and footnotes.