Summary:
The Manipur (Hill Areas) District Councils Act, 1971 is an Act to provide for the establishment of District Councils in the Hill Areas in the Union territory of Manipur. The Act consists of eight chapters, with Chapter I defining the preliminary provisions and Chapter II detailing the constitution of District Councils and their composition. Chapter III outlines the functions of District Councils, while Chapter IV deals with the procedure and staff of District Councils. Chapter V focuses on the finance of District Councils and the vesting of property, while Chapter VI outlines the control of District Councils. Chapter VII deals with offences and penalties, and Chapter VIII provides for rules and bye-laws.
The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "Administrator," "autonomous district," "building," "constituency," "Deputy Commissioner," "Hill Areas," "Hill Areas Committee," "market," "member," "Official Gazette," "person," "prescribed," "Scheduled Tribes," and "vehicle."
Chapter II of the Act deals with the constitution of District Councils and their composition. The Administrator is required to divide the Hill Areas into not more than six autonomous districts and may alter the boundaries or name of any autonomous district with the consultation of the Hill Areas Committee. For each autonomous district, there shall be a District Council consisting of not more than eighteen members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies and not more than two members nominated by the Administrator.
Chapter III outlines the functions of District Councils, which include the maintenance and management of property and institutions, the construction, repair, and maintenance of roads, bridges, channels, and buildings, the establishment and management of schools and dispensaries, the regulation of the practice of Jhum or other forms of shifting cultivation, and any other matter which the Administrator may entrust to the District Council in the field of agriculture, animal husbandry, community development, social and tribal welfare, village planning, or any other matter referred to in section 52 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963).
Chapter IV deals with the procedure and staff of District Councils. A District Council shall conduct its business in such manner and in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. The Chief Executive Officer is appointed by the Administrator and may be removed by the District Council if a resolution for removal is passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the Council. The District Council may appoint such officers and staff as may be necessary for the proper and efficient execution of its duties and make regulations for their conditions of service.
Chapter V focuses on the finance of District Councils and the vesting of property. A District Council shall have the power to levy all or any of the following taxes within the autonomous district for which the Council is constituted: taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments; taxes on animals, vehicles (other than mechanically propelled vehicles) and boats; taxes on entry of goods into a market for sale therein and tolls on passengers and goods carried in ferries; taxes for the maintenance of schools, dispensaries or roads; and any other tax falling under List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution which the Legislature of the Union territory of Manipur may, by law, empower the District Council to levy.
Chapter VI outlines the control of District Councils. The Deputy Commissioner shall have the power to give directions to any District Council in respect of subjects, curricula, text books and standards of teaching in schools vested wholly or partly in the Council and in schools wholly or partly maintained by grants payable from the Council Fund. The Deputy Commissioner may, by order, suspend the execution of any resolution or order of any District Council or prohibit the doing of any act which is about to be done, or is being done, in pursuance of or under cover of any provision of the law relating to the constitution or functions of the District Council, if, in his opinion, the resolution, order or act is in excess of the powers conferred by law or the execution of the resolution or order or the doing of the act is likely to lead to a breach of the peace, or to cause annoyance or injury to the public or to any class or body of persons.
Chapter VII deals with offences and penalties. If any person wilfully obstructs a District Council or any officer or servant of a District Council or any person authorized by the District Council in the exercise of its powers, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. If any member, officer or other employee of a District Council enters into any contract with the Council, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Chapter VIII provides for rules and bye-laws. The Administrator may, after previous publication, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. A District Council may make bye-laws to provide for all or any of the following matters in the autonomous district for which it is constituted or in any part thereof, namely: the maintenance and management of schools and grants of stipends and scholarships; control and administration of dispensaries, their construction and repairs, the supply of medicines and the measures to be taken during the prevalence of diseases; the protection from pollution of such tanks, springs, wells or parts of rivers, streams, channels or water courses as are set apart for drinking or culinary purposes; and any other matter which is necessary for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
Overall, the Manipur (Hill Areas) District Councils Act, 1971 provides for the establishment of District Councils in the Hill Areas of the Union territory of Manipur and outlines their composition, functions, procedure, staff, finance, and control. The Act aims to promote the welfare and development of the Scheduled Tribes in the Hill Areas of Manipur and provides for the devolution of powers to the District Councils for the administration and management of the Hill Areas.