Summary:
The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (Act No. 81 of 1971) was enacted on the 30th of December, 1971. The Act's primary objective is to establish the States of Manipur and Tripura and form the State of Meghalaya and the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh by reorganizing the existing State of Assam. The Act comprises three parts: Part I - Preliminary, Part II - Establishment of the States of Manipur and Tripura and Formation of the State of Meghalaya and of the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh, and Part III - Representation in the Legislatures.

Part I of the Act defines the short title and provides definitions for various terms used throughout the Act. The definitions include terms such as 'Administrator,' 'appointed day,' 'article,' 'common High Court,' 'Election Commission,' 'existing State of Assam,' 'law,' 'sitting member,' 'successor State,' and 'treasury.'

Part II of the Act deals with the formation of new States and Union territories. Section 3 establishes the State of Manipur, which comprises the territories that were part of the Union territory of Manipur before the appointed day. Similarly, Section 4 establishes the State of Tripura, which comprises the territories that were part of the Union territory of Tripura before the appointed day.

Section 5 forms the State of Meghalaya, which comprises the territories that were part of the autonomous State of Meghalaya formed under section 3 of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969, and the territories within the cantonment and municipality of Shillong that did not form part of that autonomous State. These territories cease to form part of the existing State of Assam.

Section 6 forms the Union territory of Mizoram, which comprises the territories that were part of the Mizo District in the existing State of Assam before the appointed day. These territories also cease to form part of the existing State of Assam.

Section 7 forms the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh, which comprises the territories that were part of the tribal areas specified in Part B of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and known as the North-East Frontier Agency. These territories also cease to form part of the existing State of Assam.

Section 8 deals with the territories of the State of Assam, which comprises the territories of the existing State of Assam other than those specified in sections 5, 6, and 7.

Part III of the Act deals with representation in the legislatures. Section 10 amends the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, which deals with the allocation of seats in the Council of States. The amendment substitutes entries 19 to 22 with new entries that allocate seats to the States of Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, Delhi, Pondicherry, Mizoram, and Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 11 deals with the allocation of sitting members representing the existing Union territories of Manipur and Tripura. The sitting members of the Council of States representing the existing Union territories of Manipur and Tripura are deemed to have been duly elected under clause (4) of article 80 to fill the seats allotted to each of the States of Manipur and Tripura, respectively, in that Council. The term of office of such sitting members remains unaltered.

Section 12 deals with the election to fill the seats allotted to the State of Meghalaya and the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. Steps shall be taken as soon as possible after the appointed day to fill the seats in the Council of States allotted to the State of Meghalaya and the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 13 amends section 27A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950. The amendment substitutes the words 'For the purpose of filling any seat' with 'Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), for the purpose of filling any seat' in sub-section (1). Sub-section (4) is amended to replace 'The electoral college for each of the Union territories of Manipur, Tripura and Pondicherry' with 'The electoral college for the Union territory of Pondicherry.' Sub-section (5) is inserted, which states that the seat allotted in the Council of State to each of the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh shall be filled by a person nominated by the President in this behalf.

Section 14 deals with the allocation of seats in the existing House of the People. The allocation of seats to the States of Assam, Manipur, Tripura, and Meghalaya is increased to 14, 2, 2, and 2 seats, respectively.

Section 15 deals with the delimitation of constituencies. The Delimitation Commission constituted under the Delimitation Act, 1972, shall delimit the constituencies in the States of Assam, Manipur, Tripura, and Meghalaya.

Section 16 provides for the continuance of existing laws. All laws in force in the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya immediately before the appointed day shall continue in force in the successor States and Union territories until amended or repealed.

Section 17 provides for the transfer of assets and liabilities. All assets and liabilities of the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 18 provides for the transfer of officers and servants. All officers and servants of the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 19 provides for the transfer of courts. All courts in the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 20 provides for the transfer of public records. All public records in the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 21 provides for the transfer of institutions and establishments. All institutions and establishments in the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 22 provides for the continuance of existing agreements and contracts. All agreements and contracts entered into by the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall continue in force in the successor States and Union territories.

Section 23 provides for the transfer of funds. All funds in the treasuries in the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 24 provides for the continuance of existing tax laws. All tax laws in force in the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall continue in force in the successor States and Union territories.

Section 25 provides for the transfer of tax demands and arrears. All tax demands and arrears due to the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 26 provides for the transfer of licenses and permits. All licenses and permits granted by the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 27 provides for the transfer of judicial and revenue proceedings. All judicial and revenue proceedings in the existing State of Assam, Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, and autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be transferred to the successor States and Union territories.

Section 28 provides for the continuance of the common High Court. The common High Court shall continue to be the High Court for the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura and for the Union territory of Mizoram.

Section 29 provides for the continuance of the Election Commission. The Election Commission shall continue to function in the successor States and Union territories.

Section 30 provides for the continuance of the Governor. The Governor of the existing State of Assam shall be the Governor of the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 31 provides for the continuance of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the existing Legislative Assembly of Assam shall be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Assam.

Section 32 provides for the continuance of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the existing Legislative Council of Assam shall be the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of Assam.

Section 33 provides for the continuance of the Advocate-General. The Advocate-General of the existing State of Assam shall be the Advocate-General of the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 34 provides for the continuance of the State Public Service Commission. The State Public Service Commission of the existing State of Assam shall be the State Public Service Commission of the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 35 provides for the continuance of the District and Sessions Judges. The District and Sessions Judges in the existing State of Assam shall be the District and Sessions Judges in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 36 provides for the continuance of the Subordinate Judges. The Subordinate Judges in the existing State of Assam shall be the Subordinate Judges in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 37 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the High Court. The officers and servants of the High Court in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the High Court in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 38 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the Election Commission. The officers and servants of the Election Commission in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the Election Commission in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 39 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the Governor. The officers and servants of the Governor in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the Governor in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 40 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. The officers and servants of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in the existing Legislative Assembly of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in the Legislative Assembly of Assam.

Section 41 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman. The officers and servants of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman in the existing Legislative Council of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman in the Legislative Council of Assam.

Section 42 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the Advocate-General. The officers and servants of the Advocate-General in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the Advocate-General in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 43 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the State Public Service Commission. The officers and servants of the State Public Service Commission in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the State Public Service Commission in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 44 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the District and Sessions Judges. The officers and servants of the District and Sessions Judges in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the District and Sessions Judges in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 45 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the Subordinate Judges. The officers and servants of the Subordinate Judges in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the Subordinate Judges in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 46 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the High Court. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the High Court in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the High Court in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 47 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Election Commission. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Election Commission in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Election Commission in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 48 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Governor. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Governor in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Governor in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 49 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in the existing Legislative Assembly of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in the Legislative Assembly of Assam.

Section 50 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman in the existing Legislative Council of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman in the Legislative Council of Assam.

Section 51 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Advocate-General. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Advocate-General in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Advocate-General in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 52 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the State Public Service Commission. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the State Public Service Commission in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the State Public Service Commission in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 53 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the District and Sessions Judges. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the District and Sessions Judges in the existing State of Assam shall be the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the District and Sessions Judges in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram and the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

Section 54 provides for the continuance of the officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Subordinate Judges. The officers and servants of the officers and servants of the Subordinate Judges in the existing State of Assam shall be
Summary:

The document discusses changes to the Indian Parliament and state legislative assemblies, specifically for the states of Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya, and the union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh.

In the House of the People, the two parliamentary constituencies in Manipur and Tripura will be deemed to be the two parliamentary constituencies of the respective states. The sitting members of the House of the People representing these constituencies will be deemed to have been elected from the new constituencies.

For the Diphu parliamentary constituency in Assam, an election will be held as if the seat of the member elected to the House of the People from that constituency has become vacant.

In the State of Meghalaya, there will be two parliamentary constituencies - the Shillong and Tura parliamentary constituencies. The sitting member of the House of the People representing the Autonomous Districts parliamentary constituency will be deemed to have been elected from the Shillong parliamentary constituency. An election will be held for the Tura parliamentary constituency.

The Union territory of Mizoram will have one parliamentary constituency - the Mizoram parliamentary constituency. An election will be held for this constituency.

The sitting member nominated to fill the seat allotted in the House of the People to the Tribal Areas of Assam specified in Part B of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, known as the North-East Frontier Agency, will be deemed to have been nominated to fill the seat allotted to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the People.

The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam, to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies, will be reduced from one hundred and twenty-six to one hundred and fourteen. The total number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Manipur, Tripura, and Meghalaya, to be constituted at any time after the appointed day, to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies, will be sixty for Manipur and Tripura, and sixty for Meghalaya, out of which a certain number of seats will be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

The Election Commission will distribute the seats assigned to the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Manipur, Tripura, and Meghalaya in the manner provided in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1966.

The amendments made to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1966, will have effect on and after the appointed day.
This document outlines the process for delimiting single-member territorial constituencies for the Legislative Assemblies of the Indian states of Manipur, Tripura, and Meghalaya. The Election Commission is responsible for this task, with the assistance of associate members who are nominated from the sitting members of the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of each state. The Election Commission must consider physical features, existing boundaries, communication facilities, and public convenience when delimiting constituencies. Constituencies reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes must be distributed throughout the state and located in areas where their population is highest. The document also specifies the process for correcting errors in the delimitation orders and validating acts done prior to the commencement of the Act. Additionally, the document amends the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 to include the states of Manipur, Tripura, and Meghalaya. Finally, the document outlines the rules of procedure and conduct of business for the Provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Meghalaya and the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura.
Summary:

The document outlines the establishment of a common High Court for the states of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura, which will be called the Gauhati High Court. This change will take effect on the appointed day. The High Court of Assam and Nagaland will cease to function, and its Judges will become Judges of the common High Court unless they have elected otherwise. Any notices, injunctions, directions, or proceedings taken before the appointed day by the High Court of Assam and Nagaland will continue to operate. The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, will establish separate High Courts for the States of Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura, to be called the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur, and the High Court of Tripura, respectively. The principal seat of these High Courts will be at a place appointed by the President. The Judges and division courts of these High Courts may sit at other places in their respective states with the approval of the Chief Justice and the Governor of the State concerned. The Judges of the common High Court holding office immediately before the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, will cease to be Judges of the common High Court and become Judges of the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur, or the High Court of Tripura, as determined by the President. These Judges will rank in their respective High Courts according to the priority of their respective appointments as Judges of the common High Court. The High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur, and the High Court of Tripura will have all such jurisdiction, powers, and authority as the common High Court had in respect of the territories included in their respective states. The law in force immediately before the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, with respect to the custody of the seal of the common High Court, practice and procedure, forms of writs and other processes, powers of Judges, procedure as to appeals to the Supreme Court, and transfer of proceedings from the common High Court to the High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura, will apply with necessary modifications.
Summary:

The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, deals with the transfer of certain proceedings, orders, and jurisdiction to the High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura. Section 3 of the Act specifies that any proceedings entertained by the common High Court may be transferred to the High Court of Meghalaya, Manipur, or Tripura if it appears that they ought to be. Section 4 states that any order made by the common High Court in transferred proceedings or in proceedings where it retains jurisdiction shall have effect as an order made by the High Court of Meghalaya, Manipur, or Tripura.

Section 28J provides an interpretation of the term "proceedings" to include appeals, applications for leave to appeal, applications for review, petitions for revision, and petitions for writs, among others. It also includes references to a High Court as including references to a Judge or division court thereof, and references to an order made by a Court or a Judge as including references to a sentence, judgment, or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.

Section 28K states that nothing in Sections 28A to 28J shall affect the application of any provisions of the Constitution to the High Court of Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura. The provisions of these sections shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made by any Legislature or other authority having power to make such provisions.

Section 29 states that on and from the appointed day, the common High Court shall have all such jurisdiction, powers, and authority as under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of those territories by the High Court of Assam and Nagaland or the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur or the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Tripura, as the case may be.

Section 30 abolishes the Courts of the Judicial Commissioners for Manipur and Tripura on and from the appointed day, while Section 31 establishes the principal seat of the common High Court at the same place as the principal seat of the High Court of Assam and Nagaland. The President may provide for the establishment of a permanent bench or benches of the common High Court at one or more places within the territories to which the jurisdiction of the High Court extends, other than the principal seat of the High Court.

Section 32 extends the jurisdiction of the common High Court to the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh, while Section 33 allocates the expenditure in respect of salaries and allowances of the Judges of the common High Court amongst the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, and Nagaland and the Union.

Section 34 contains special provisions relating to advocates and the Bar Council. It provides that any person who is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Assam and Nagaland or in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur or in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Tripura shall be entitled to practise as an advocate in the common High Court. The right of audience in the common High Court shall be regulated in accordance with the principles in force with respect to the right of audience in the High Court of Assam and Nagaland. The provisions of the Advocates Act, 1961, shall have effect in respect of the roll of the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura subject to the modifications specified in the Act.

Overall, the Act aims to streamline the judicial process and ensure the smooth transfer of proceedings, orders, and jurisdiction to the High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura. It also provides for the interpretation and application of certain provisions of the Constitution and the Advocates Act to these High Courts.
Summary:
The document outlines various provisions related to Indian laws, specifically in the context of the states of Bengal, Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, and the common High Court.

Here are the key points from the document:

1. The Advocates Act: The document refers to the Advocates Act and mentions provisions related to the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura. It explains that any proceedings pending or instituted against any person before the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland or by the Bar Council of West Bengal can be continued or instituted before or by the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura.
2. Transfer of assets and liabilities: The document also mentions that the assets and liabilities of the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland shall pass to the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura, while the assets and liabilities of the Bar Council of West Bengal shall be apportioned between that Bar Council and the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, and Tripura in such manner and proportion as may be agreed upon by the Bar Councils.
3. Practice and procedure in the common High Court: The document outlines the law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court of Assam and Nagaland and mentions that it shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common High Court.
4. Authorisation of expenditure: The document mentions that the President may authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur or of the State of Tripura as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Manipur or of the State of Tripura, as the case may be.
5. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh: The document mentions that any Act passed by Parliament for the appropriation of any money out of the Consolidated Fund of India to meet the expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year 1971-72 in, or for the purposes of, the tribal areas of Assam specified in Part B of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall, on and from the appointed day, have effect also in relation to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

In summary, the document outlines various provisions related to Indian laws, including the Advocates Act, practice and procedure in the common High Court, authorisation of expenditure, and appropriation of moneys for expenditure to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.
Summary:
This document contains sections of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971, which deals with the distribution of revenues, assets, and liabilities of the newly formed states of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, and Tripura. Section 46 focuses on the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of the Union territories of Manipur and Tripura, which shall be submitted to the Governor of Manipur or Tripura, respectively, and laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State of Manipur or Tripura. The Governor may declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to have been duly authorized and provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the reports. Section 47 deals with the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of the autonomous State of Meghalaya, which shall be submitted to the Governor of Meghalaya and laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State of Meghalaya. The Governor may declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of the autonomous State to have been duly authorized and provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the reports. Section 48 states that the allowances and privileges of the Governors of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, and Tripura shall be such as the President may determine until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament. Section 49 states that the President shall determine the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, and Tripura and the share of each such State in the Union duties of excise, estate duty, and taxes on income, and for that purpose, amend the relevant provisions of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1962, the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962, and the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1969. Section 50 deals with the property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc., of the States of Manipur and Tripura. All such property and assets within the Union territory of Manipur or Tripura as are held immediately before the appointed day by the Union for purposes of governance of that Union territory shall, on and from that day, pass to the State of Manipur or Tripura, respectively. All rights, liabilities, and obligations (other than those relatable to, or in connection with, a Union purpose) shall, on and from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities, and obligations of the Government of the State of Manipur or Tripura, respectively. The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty being a tax or duty enumerated in the state List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, any duty referred to in article 268, or any tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, which has fallen due in the Union territory of Manipur or Tripura immediately before the appointed day, shall pass to the State of Manipur or Tripura, respectively. Section 51 deals with the assets and liabilities of the State of Meghalaya. All rights, liabilities, and obligations, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, which are, immediately before the appointed day, the rights, liabilities, and obligations of the autonomous State of Meghalaya, including the rights, liabilities, and obligations apportioned or to be apportioned to the share of the autonomous State of Meghalaya by virtue of section 58 of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969, shall, on and from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities, and obligations of the State of Meghalaya. All property and assets held by the autonomous State of Meghalaya immediately before the appointed day, including the property and assets apportioned or to be apportioned to the share of the autonomous State of Meghalaya by virtue of section 58 of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969, shall, on and from that day, pass to the State of Meghalaya. Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section and section 52, all rights, liabilities, and obligations, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, which are, immediately before the appointed day, the rights, liabilities, and obligations of the existing State of Assam and all property and assets held by the existing State of Assam immediately before the appointed day shall be apportioned between the State of Assam and the State of Meghalaya in accordance with the provisions contained in the Sixth Schedule. Section 52 deals with the assets and liabilities relating to the Mizo District. All property and assets within the Mizo District which are, immediately before the appointed day, vested in the existing State of Assam shall, as from that day, vest in the Union. All rights, liabilities, and obligations of the existing State of Assam in relation to the Mizo District shall, as from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities, and obligations of the Union. The liability of the existing State of Assam to the Union in respect of the loans taken by that State from the Central Government shall be reduced by an amount which bears such proportion to the total public debt of that State immediately before the appointed day as the total expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred up to that day by the existing State of Assam in the Mizo District bears to the total expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred by the existing State of Assam up to the appointed day.
Summary:

The document outlines provisions related to certain corporations in the context of the reorganization of the state of Assam in India. Specifically, it discusses the State Electricity Board, the State Warehousing Corporation, and the Assam State Financial Corporation. These corporations will continue to function in their respective areas after the reorganization, subject to directions from the Central Government. These directions may include exceptions and modifications to the Acts under which the corporations were constituted. The document also discusses the possibility of new State Electricity Boards or State Warehousing Corporations being constituted in the successor states, and the transfer of assets, rights, and liabilities in such cases. Additionally, the document outlines provisions for the continuance of certain existing road transport permits after the reorganization. The Central Government may add to, amend, or vary the conditions attached to these permits in consultation with the State Government or Governments concerned. No tolls, entrance fees, or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor States under any such permit.
The document discusses provisions related to services in India. The first provision mentioned is Section 58 of the act, which deals with the payment of tolls, entrance fees, or other charges for operations within the existing State of Assam. The central government may authorize the levy of any such tolls, entrance fees, or other charges after consultation with the state government or governments concerned.

The next provision is Section 59, which deals with special provisions as to income-tax. Where the assets, rights, and liabilities of a body corporate carrying on business are transferred to other bodies corporate, the losses or profits or gains sustained by the body corporate would have been allowed to be carried forward and set-off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income-tax Act, 1961. These losses or profits or gains shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf.

The following provision is Section 60, which deals with the continuance of facilities in certain State institutions. The Government of the State of Assam or Meghalaya or, as the case may be, the Central Government in relation to the Union territory of Mizoram shall continue to provide facilities to any other Government and the people of the States and Union territory which shall not, in any respect, be less favourable to such Government and people than what were being provided to them before the appointed day.

The next provision is Section 61, which deals with provisions relating to All-India Services. On and from the appointed day, there shall be constituted for the States of Assam and Meghalaya a joint cadre of the Indian Administrative Service, a joint cadre of the Indian Police Service and a joint cadre of the Indian Forest Service.

Section 62 deals with the provision relating to Services in Manipur and Tripura. Every person who immediately before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administrative control of the Administrator of the Union territory of Manipur, or the Administrator of the Union territory of Tripura (including a person who has been placed on deputation by the Administrator concerned with any other authority), shall be deemed to have been allocated for service as from that day in connection with the affairs of the State of Manipur or, as the case may be, of the State of Tripura.

Lastly, Section 63 deals with special provisions relating to members of Central Health Service. Every member of the Central Health Service who immediately before the appointed day is holding any post in the Union territory of Manipur or the Union territory of Tripura, being a post included in the authorised strength of that Service, shall be deemed to be on deputation on and from the appointed day, to the Government of the State of Manipur or, as the case may be, of the State of Tripura on the same terms and conditions of service as are applicable to him under the Central Health Service Rules, 1963, but without any deputation allowance. The period of such deputation shall in no case extend beyond a period of three years from the appointed day.
Summary:
The Central Health Service, constituted under the Central Health Service Rules, 1963, has provisions relating to services in the existing State of Assam. These provisions allow for the transfer of certain individuals serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Assam, including those on deputation to other governments or authorities, to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Meghalaya or the Union territory of Mizoram. These transfers can be made by agreement between the governments of the existing State of Assam and the autonomous State of Meghalaya or the Government of the State of Assam and the Government of the State of Meghalaya, or in default of any such agreement, by the Central Government. The effective date of the transfer is specified in the order. Additionally, every person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the autonomous State of Meghalaya, not including those to whom section 64 applies, is deemed to have been allocated to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Meghalaya as of the appointed day. Other provisions relating to services, including the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to determination of conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Manipur, Meghalaya or Tripura or the Union territory of Mizoram, are also outlined. The provisions do not apply to members of any All-India Service.
Summary:
The document outlines various amendments to Indian laws, specifically those affecting the states of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, and Tripura, as well as the Union territories of Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh. These amendments include substituting certain words and phrases, such as replacing "Part A" with "Part I" in various articles, and removing references to specific territories. The document also outlines transitional provisions, such as the continuation of existing District Councils and the Regional Council, and the adaptation and construction of laws to facilitate their application in the affected territories. Additionally, the document specifies that legal proceedings relating to property, rights, or liabilities that devolve upon a state or Union territory under the Act shall be deemed to be substituted for the Union or autonomous State of Meghalaya as a party to those proceedings, and that any person who is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practice in any subordinate courts in the existing State of Assam shall continue to be entitled to practice in those courts for a period of one year from the appointed day.
Summary:
The document consists of various sections and schedules related to the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971. The Act aims to reorganize the states and union territories of the North-Eastern region of India.

Section 84 of the Act deals with the transfer of certain proceedings to the common High Court. Any question regarding the transfer of a proceeding shall be referred to the common High Court, and its decision shall be final. The term "proceeding" includes any suit, case, or appeal.

Section 85 provides for the continuance of courts, tribunals, authorities, and functions throughout the existing State of Assam or the Union territories of Manipur or Tripura or any part of such State or Union territory immediately before the appointed day.

Section 86 states that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.

Section 87 provides for the removal of difficulties. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President may, by order, do anything necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty. Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

Section 87A provides for the removal of difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act as amended by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012. The Central Government may, by order, make such provisions as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. No such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012.

Section 88 empowers the Central Government to make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.

The First Schedule amends the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1966. It provides for the substitution of certain serial numbers and entries relating to parliamentary constituencies and the omission of certain serial numbers and entries relating to assembly constituencies in the State of Assam.

The Second Schedule amends the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950. It provides for the substitution of certain figures in paragraph 2, the addition of certain words and figures in paragraph 4, and the insertion of certain parts in the Schedule. The amendments relate to the inclusion of certain castes in the list of Scheduled Castes in the States of Manipur, Meghalaya, and Tripura.

The Third Schedule amends the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951. It provides for the substitution of certain paragraphs and the insertion of certain parts in the Schedule. The amendments relate to the inclusion of certain castes in the list of Scheduled Castes in the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh.

The Fourth Schedule amends the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. It provides for the substitution of certain figures in paragraph 2, the addition of certain words and figures in paragraph 3, and the insertion of certain parts in the Schedule. The amendments relate to the inclusion of certain tribes in the list of Scheduled Tribes in the States of Manipur, Meghalaya, and Tripura.
Summary:
The document summarizes various Indian laws, specifically focusing on the Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Constitution of India. The Fifth Schedule outlines the amendments to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951. It includes changes to paragraph 2, substitution of paragraph 3, and omissions and renumbering of certain parts of the Schedule. The Sixth Schedule deals with the apportionment of assets and liabilities between the States of Assam and Meghalaya. It includes definitions, provisions for apportionment of land, stores, and other goods, arrears of taxes, right to recover loans and advances, and investments. The Schedule also includes provisions for the division of stores relating to the Secretariat and the offices of Heads of departments having jurisdiction over the areas comprised partly in the transferred territories and partly in the State of Assam, and unissued stores. The Schedule also includes an explanation of the term "land" and "goods."
Summary:

The document outlines the division of assets and liabilities between the State of Assam and the State of Meghalaya, which was formed by the reorganization of the existing State of Assam. According to paragraph 1, any investments made by the existing State of Assam in any company or private commercial or industrial undertaking located outside the territories of the existing State of Assam on or after April 2, 1970, are excluded from the division. Paragraph 2 states that investments in, or loans or advances to, any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the existing State of Assam or any part thereof by the existing State of Assam made before the appointed day shall be divided between the State of Assam and Meghalaya in the same proportion in which the assets of the body corporate are divided under the provisions of Part VII. Paragraph 7 outlines the division of assets and liabilities relating to any commercial or industrial undertaking of the existing State of Assam. Paragraph 8 deals with the division of public debt between the two states. Paragraph 9 states that it is the liability of the State of Meghalaya to refund any tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess on any property situate in the transferred territories or any other tax or duty collected in excess, if the place of assessment of that tax or duty is situate in the transferred territories. Paragraph 14 states that contracts made by the existing State of Assam before the appointed day for any purposes of that State shall be deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power of the State of Assam or the State of Meghalaya, depending on whether the purposes are exclusively those of either state or are shared by both states.
The document provided is a schedule from the Constitution of India, specifically the Seventh Schedule, which lists the apportionment of assets and liabilities between the States of Assam and Meghalaya. The Seventh Schedule is divided into three lists: List I (Union List), List II (State List), and List III (Concurrent List). List I contains subjects on which the central government has exclusive power to legislate, List II contains subjects on which the state governments have exclusive power to legislate, and List III contains subjects on which both the central and state governments have the power to legislate.

In this schedule, the focus is on List II and the allocation of assets and liabilities between the States of Assam and Meghalaya. The schedule outlines the distribution of assets and liabilities in the event of the creation of a new state or the alteration of the boundaries of an existing state. The schedule specifies that any assets or liabilities of the existing State of Assam, as it existed before the appointed day (the day on which Meghalaya was carved out of Assam), shall be allocated to either the State of Assam or the State of Meghalaya.

The schedule provides detailed rules for the allocation of assets and liabilities, including the treatment of contractual liabilities, actionable wrongs, guarantees, and items in suspense. For example, any liability in respect of an actionable wrong, other than breach of contract, shall be the liability of the State of Assam or Meghalaya, depending on where the cause of action arose. Similarly, any liability as guarantor in respect of a registered co-operative society or other person shall be the liability of the State of Assam or Meghalaya, depending on the area of operation of such society or person.

The schedule also provides residuary provisions for the allocation of any assets or liabilities of the existing State of Assam not dealt with in the foregoing paragraphs. In such cases, the benefit or burden of the asset or liability shall pass to the State of Assam in the first instance, subject to financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Assam and Meghalaya or, in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may direct.

Overall, the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India provides a clear framework for the allocation of assets and liabilities between the States of Assam and Meghalaya, ensuring that the allocation is fair and equitable.
Summary:

The text outlines various provisions related to Indian laws, specifically focusing on the Sixth Schedule and the Ninth and Tenth Schedules of the Constitution. The Sixth Schedule details the provisions for the administration of tribal areas in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, and Mizoram. It includes provisions for the creation of autonomous districts and regions, the powers and functions of district councils and regional councils, and the application of Acts of Parliament and other Acts to autonomous districts and regions. The Ninth Schedule lists amendments to the Manipur (Courts) Act, 1955, while the Tenth Schedule lists amendments to the Tripura (Courts) Order, 1950. These amendments include changes to the definitions of certain terms, the omission of certain sections and chapters, and the substitution of new sections. The text also includes provisions for the administration of the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments and revisions to the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971, and the All-India Services Act, 1951. The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Act, 2012, includes several changes, such as the creation of separate cadres for the Indian Administrative Service, the Indian Police Service, and the Indian Forest Service in the States of Manipur and Tripura. The initial strength and composition of these State cadres will be determined by the Central Government. Members of each of these services borne on the joint cadre for the States of Manipur and Tripura will be allocated to the State cadres of the same service constituted under sub-section (1) in such manner and with effect from such date or dates as the Central Government may, by order, specify. Additionally, the document includes amendments to section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the omission of certain paragraphs and provisions in the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971. The document also includes various amendments to the All-India Services Act, 1951, such as the substitution of sub-section (3) of section 11 and the insertion of sub-section (3A) and (3B) in section 11. The amendments to the All-India Services Act, 1951, will take effect on a date to be notified. The document also includes various notifications and effective dates of the amendments.