Summary:

The Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 is an act that provides for the acquisition and transfer of the sick textile undertakings, and the right, title and interest of the owners in respect of the sick textile undertakings, specified in the First Schedule. The objective of the act is to re-organise and rehabilitate such sick textile undertakings in order to augment the production and distribution, at fair prices, of different varieties of cloth and yarn. The act defines various terms used in the act, including 'appointed day', 'bank', 'Commissioner', 'Custodian', 'National Textile Corporation', 'notification', 'Ordinance', 'owner', 'prescribed', 'sick textile undertaking', 'specified date', 'Subsidiary Textile Corporation', 'textile', 'textile company', and 'textile undertaking'.

The act is divided into six chapters. Chapter I, titled 'Preliminary', deals with the short title and commencement of the act, and definitions of various terms used in the act. Chapter II, titled 'Acquisition of the Rights of Owners of Sick Textile Undertakings', specifies the acquisition of the rights of owners of sick textile undertakings and the general effect of vesting. Chapter III, titled 'Payment of Amount', deals with the payment of amount to owners of sick textile undertakings, payment of further amount, and accounts to be rendered by the owners of sick textile undertakings. Chapter IV, titled 'Management, Etc., of Sick Textile Undertakings', deals with the management, etc., of sick textile undertakings, special provision for disposal of assets of the sick textile undertakings in certain circumstances, duty of persons in charge of management of sick textile undertakings to deliver all assets, etc., and accounts to be maintained by the National Textile Corporation. Chapter V, titled 'Provisions Relating to Employees of Sick Textile Undertakings', deals with the employment of certain employees to continue, provident and other funds, and transfer of employees to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation. Chapter VI, titled 'Commissioners of Payments', deals with the appointment of Commissioners of Payments, payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner, certain powers of the National Textile Corporation, disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants, disbursement of amounts to the owners of sick textile undertakings, undisbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general revenue account, and protection of action taken in good faith.

The act also includes a First Schedule, which lists the sick textile undertakings that are to be acquired and transferred, and a Second Schedule, which sets out the order of priorities for the discharge of liabilities in respect of a sick textile undertaking. The act includes various provisions for the appointment of Commissioners of Payments, the payment of amounts to owners of sick textile undertakings, and the disbursement of amounts to the owners of sick textile undertakings. The act also includes provisions for the protection of action taken in good faith, and the repeal and savings of the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1974.

In summary, the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 is an act that provides for the acquisition and transfer of the sick textile undertakings, and the right, title and interest of the owners in respect of the sick textile undertakings, specified in the First Schedule. The act defines various terms used in the act, and is divided into six chapters that deal with various aspects of the acquisition and transfer of the sick textile undertakings. The act includes a First Schedule that lists the sick textile undertakings that are to be acquired and transferred, and a Second Schedule that sets out the order of priorities for the discharge of liabilities in respect of a sick textile undertaking. The act includes various provisions for the appointment of Commissioners of Payments, the payment of amounts to owners of sick textile undertakings, and the disbursement of amounts to the owners of sick textile undertakings. The act also includes provisions for the protection of action taken in good faith, and the repeal and savings of the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1974.