The Customs Tariff Act, 1975, is an Act that consolidates and amends the law relating to Customs Duties in India. The Act is divided into several sections that outline the duties and taxes that are to be levied on imported goods.

Section 1 of the Act specifies the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. The Act may be called the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and it extends to the whole of India. The Act will come into force on such date as the Central Government may appoint by notification in the Official Gazette.

Section 2 of the Act specifies the duties that are to be levied on imported goods. The rates at which duties of customs are to be levied under the Customs Act, 1962, are specified in the First and Second Schedules.

Section 3 of the Act specifies the levy of additional duty equal to excise duty, sales tax, local taxes, and other charges. Any article that is imported into India will be liable to an additional duty equal to the excise duty that is leviable on a like article if produced or manufactured in India. The additional duty is calculated at the percentage of the value of the imported article. In the case of alcoholic liquor for human consumption, the Central Government may specify the rate of additional duty having regard to the excise duty that is leviable on a like alcoholic liquor produced or manufactured in different States.

Section 4 of the Act specifies the levy of anti-dumping duty. If the Central Government is satisfied that an article is being imported into India at a price less than its normal value, it may impose an anti-dumping duty on such article.

Section 5 of the Act specifies the levy of countervailing duty. If the Central Government is satisfied that an article is being imported into India with the benefit of a subsidy, it may impose a countervailing duty on such article.

Section 6 of the Act specifies the levy of safeguard duty. If the Central Government is satisfied that an increase in imports of an article is likely to cause serious injury to domestic industry, it may impose a safeguard duty on such article.

Section 7 of the Act specifies the power to exempt or reduce duties. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt or reduce any duty that is leviable under this Act.

Section 8 of the Act specifies the power to make rules. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

In summary, the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, is an Act that consolidates and amends the law relating to Customs Duties in India. The Act specifies the duties and taxes that are to be levied on imported goods, including additional duty equal to excise duty, sales tax, local taxes, and other charges, anti-dumping duty, countervailing duty, and safeguard duty. The Act also provides for the power to exempt or reduce duties and the power to make rules.
Summary:

The Customs Tariff Act, 1975, outlines the rates and types of duties and taxes that are to be levied on imported goods in India. The Act includes provisions for special additional duties, standard and preferential rates of revenue duty, and protective duties in certain cases. The Act also specifies the value of imported goods for the purpose of calculating duties, which includes the value of the imported article as determined under the Customs Act, 1962, and any duty of customs or addition to a duty of customs that is chargeable on the article. The Act also includes provisions for determining if an article is the produce or manufacture of a preferential area or foreign country or territory, and for claiming a preferential or lower rate of duty under a trade agreement. The Act also grants the Central Government the power to impose protective duties on certain goods in order to protect domestic industries. These provisions are subject to the rules and regulations made under the Customs Act, 1962. The Act also provides for the levy of goods and services tax compensation cess on imported goods at a rate that is leviable on a like article on its supply in India. The value of the imported article for the purpose of calculating the cess is determined under sub-section (10) or sub-section (10A) of the Act. The Act also states that the duty or tax or cess chargeable under this section is in addition to any other duty or tax or cess imposed under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force.
Summary:

This document summarizes various sections of Indian laws related to the imposition and alteration of protective and export duties, emergency power to increase or levy export duties, emergency power of Central Government to increase import duties, power of Central Government to impose safeguard duty, and countervailing duty on subsidized articles.

Section 7 outlines the duration of protective duties and the power of the Central Government to alter them. If a duty specified in respect of any article in the First Schedule is characterized as protective, that duty shall have effect only up to and inclusive of the date specified in that Schedule. The Central Government may increase or reduce such duty if it becomes ineffective or excessive for the intended protection of a similar article manufactured in India. Any increase in duty must be laid before each House of Parliament if it is sitting, and if it is not sitting within seven days of its re-assembly. The Central Government shall seek the approval of Parliament to the notification by a resolution moved within a period of fifteen days. If Parliament makes any modification in the notification or directs that the notification should cease to have effect, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be.

Section 8 provides the Central Government with emergency power to increase or levy export duties on any article, whether included in the Second Schedule or not, if it is satisfied that the export duty leviable thereon should be increased or that an export duty should be levied, and that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action. The provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 7 shall apply to any notification issued under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to any notification increasing duty issued under sub-section (2) of Section 7.

Section 8A provides the Central Government with emergency power to increase import duties on any article included in the First Schedule if it is satisfied that the import duty leviable thereon under section 12 of the Customs Act, 1962 should be increased and that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action. The provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 7 shall apply to any notification issued under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to any notification increasing duty issued under sub-section (2) of section 7.

Section 8B provides the Central Government with the power to impose a safeguard duty on any article imported into India if it is satisfied that such article is imported into India in such increased quantities and under such conditions so as to cause or threatening to cause serious injury to domestic industry. No such duty shall be imposed on an article originating from a developing country so long as the share of imports of that article from that country does not exceed three per cent. or where the article is originating from more than one developing countries, then, so long as the aggregate of the imports from developing Countries each with less than three per cent. import share taken together does not exceed nine per cent. of the total imports of that article into India.

Section 9 outlines the countervailing duty on subsidized articles. Where any country or territory pays, bestows, directly or indirectly, any subsidy upon the manufacture or production therein or the exportation therefrom of any article, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct an amendment of the First Schedule to be made so as to provide for a countervailing duty on that article. The provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 7 shall apply to any notification issued under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to any notification increasing duty issued under sub-section (2) of Section 7.
Summary:

The document summarizes relevant sections of the Customs Tariff Act of India, specifically focusing on laws related to countervailing duties and anti-dumping duties.

Countervailing Duties:

Countervailing duties are imposed by the Central Government to counteract the effect of subsidies granted, or maintained, by a government, or any public body, in the exporting or producing country or territory. These subsidies can take various forms, including direct transfers of funds, foregone government revenue, or the provision of goods or services. The Central Government may impose a countervailing duty not exceeding the amount of such subsidy upon the importation of any article that has received a subsidy.

The Central Government may also provisionally estimate the amount of subsidy and impose a countervailing duty pending the determination of the actual subsidy amount. If the provisional countervailing duty exceeds the subsidy as determined, the excess amount will be refunded.

Countervailing duties will not be levied unless the subsidy relates to export performance, the use of domestic goods over imported goods in the export article, or has been conferred on a limited number of persons engaged in the manufacture, production, or export of articles. The Central Government may also levy countervailing duties retrospectively in certain circumstances to prevent the recurrence of injury to the domestic industry.

Anti-dumping Duties:

Anti-dumping duties are imposed by the Central Government to counteract the effect of dumping, which occurs when an article is exported from any country or territory to India at less than its normal value. The margin of dumping is the difference between the export price and the normal value.

The normal value is determined based on the comparable price of the like article when destined for consumption in the exporting country or territory, or when there are no sales of the like article in the ordinary course of trade in the domestic market of the exporting country or territory, the normal value is determined based on the cost of production of the said article in the country of origin.

The Central Government may extend the anti-dumping duty to an article or an article originating in or exported from such country, where circumvention of anti-dumping duty has taken place.

Every notification issued under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Summary:

The document summarizes the Anti-dumping Duties Act in India. The Act imposes anti-dumping duties on imported articles that are dumped in India at prices lower than their normal value, causing injury to domestic industries. The Central Government determines the normal value and margin of dumping through an inquiry and may impose provisional anti-dumping duties. If the anti-dumping duty exceeds the margin of dumping, the Central Government must reduce the duty, and a refund must be made of the excess amount. The Act also provides for the levy of anti-dumping duties retrospectively in certain cases. The anti-dumping duty is in addition to any other duty imposed under the Act or any other law for the time being in force. The duty ceases to have effect after five years, but it may be extended for a further period of five years if the Central Government determines that the cessation of such duty is likely to lead to continuation or recurrence of dumping and injury. The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of this section, including the manner of identifying articles liable for anti-dumping duty, determining the export price and normal value, and assessing and collecting such duty. The margin of dumping is determined based on records and information provided by the exporter or producer. Every notification issued under this section must be laid before each House of Parliament. The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules and regulations made thereunder apply to the duty chargeable under this section. Section 9AA provides for the refund of anti-dumping duty in certain cases where the importer proves that the anti-dumping duty paid is in excess of the actual margin of dumping. The Central Government may make rules to provide for the manner and time within which the importer may make an application for the purposes of sub-section (1), authorize the officer of the Central Government to dispose of such application, and provide for the determination and refund of the excess duty. Section 9B provides that no article shall be subjected to both countervailing duty and anti-dumping duty to compensate for the same situation of dumping or export subsidization. The Central Government shall not levy any countervailing duty or anti-dumping duty under section 9 or section 9A in certain cases, including where there is an exemption of such articles from duties or taxes borne by the like article when meant for consumption in the country of origin or exportation or by reasons of refund of such duties or taxes. The Central Government may not levy any countervailing duty under section 9 or any anti-dumping duty under section 9A at any time upon receipt of satisfactory voluntary undertakings from the Government of the exporting country or territory or the exporter.
Summary:

The document discusses various sections of Indian laws related to customs, import tariffs, and appeals.

Section 9A of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, outlines the procedure for anti-dumping duties on imported goods. The section allows the Central Government to impose anti-dumping duties if it is satisfied that the injurious effect of dumping is eliminated by such action. The section also provides for the investigation process and factors to be considered during such investigations.

Section 9C of the Act deals with appeals against the order of determination or review under Section 9A. An appeal against such order shall lie to the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal. The section specifies the fee for filing an appeal and provides for the composition of the Bench hearing such appeals.

Section 10 of the Act provides for the rules to be laid before Parliament. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament for a total period of thirty days.

Section 11 of the Act provides for the power of the Central Government to alter duties under certain circumstances. The section allows the Central Government to increase or reduce the duties referred to in Section 2 to such extent as each case may require. However, no notification increasing or reducing the duties as aforesaid shall be issued by the Central Government after the expiration of a period of one year from the commencement of this Act.

Section 11A of the Act provides for the power of the Central Government to amend the First Schedule. The section allows the Central Government to amend the First Schedule in the public interest. However, such amendment shall not alter or affect in any manner the rates specified in that Schedule in respect of goods at which duties of customs shall be leviable on the goods under the Customs Act, 1962.

Section 12 of the Act deals with the repeal and saving. The Indian Tariff Act, 1934, and the Indian Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1949, are hereby repealed. However, anything done or any action taken under the repealed Acts shall continue in force until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.

Section 13 of the Act provides for the consequential amendment of the Customs Act, 1962. The section substitutes the words and figures “Customs Tariff Act, 1975” for the words and figures “Indian Tariff Act, 1934” in the Customs Act, 1962.

The First Schedule of the Act provides for the import tariff rates for various goods. The Schedule also provides for the general rules for the interpretation of the Schedule. The rules provide for the classification of goods based on their essential character, specific description, and numerical order. The Schedule also provides for the classification of goods which cannot be classified in accordance with the above rules.
Summary:
The document outlines the classification of goods under the Harmonized System of Nomenclature (HSN) for the purpose of customs duties in India. The HSN is a globally recognized system for classifying goods, and India is a signatory to the International Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System. The document provides detailed rules and explanatory notes for the classification of goods, including the hierarchy of headings, sub-headings, and tariff items. The classification of goods is determined by the terms of the sub-headings and any related subheading notes, and the relative Section and Chapter Notes also apply. The document also includes a list of abbreviations used in the HSN.

The document covers live animals, animal products, and meat and edible meat offal. For live animals, the document specifies that any reference to a particular genus or species of an animal includes a reference to the young of that genus or species, except where the context otherwise requires. The document also notes that throughout the Schedule, any reference to "dried" products also covers products which have been dehydrated, evaporated, or freeze-dried. The document also includes a list of abbreviations used in the HSN, such as "CIF" for Cost, Insurance, and Freight, "kg" for kilogram, and "US$" for US Dollar.

The document is divided into sections and chapters, with each chapter covering a specific category of goods. For example, Chapter 1 covers live animals, and Chapter 2 covers meat and edible meat offal. Each chapter includes a list of tariff items, which provide a detailed description of the goods and the corresponding rate of customs duty. For example, tariff item 0201 covers meat of bovine animals, fresh or chilled, and the corresponding rate of customs duty is 30%.

In addition to the HSN, the document also refers to the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, which defines "wild animal" for the purpose of the HSN. The Act aims to ensure the conservation of wildlife and to control the trade and commerce in wildlife and wildlife products. The HSN classification of goods is an important tool for implementing the Act, as it allows for the regulation of the import and export of wildlife and wildlife products based on their scientific classification.

In summary, the document outlines the classification of goods under the Harmonized System of Nomenclature for the purpose of customs duties in India. The HSN is a globally recognized system for classifying goods, and India is a signatory to the International Convention on the Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System. The document provides detailed rules and explanatory notes for the classification of goods, including the hierarchy of headings, sub-headings, and tariff items. The classification of goods is determined by the terms of the sub-headings and any related subheading notes, and the relative Section and Chapter Notes also apply. The document also includes a list of abbreviations used in the HSN and refers to the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, which defines "wild animal" for the purpose of the HSN.
Summary:

This document appears to be a list of customs tariff items for various food products, specifically meat and fish. The tariff items are organized by type of product and species, with specific codes assigned to each item. The document includes tariff items for meat of various animals, including bovine animals, swine, sheep, goats, horses, asses, mules, hinnies, rabbits, hares, primates, whales, dolphins, porpoises, manatees, dugongs, seals, sea lions, walruses, reptiles, camels, and other camelids. It also includes tariff items for poultry meat, pig fat, and poultry fat. The tariff items for meat and poultry specify whether the product is fresh, chilled, or frozen, and whether it contains bones or is boneless. The tariff items for fish and crustaceans specify whether the product is fresh, chilled, or frozen, and include various species of fish, crustaceans, molluscs, and other aquatic invertebrates. The document also includes notes that provide additional guidance on how to classify certain products. It is important to note that this document is a tariff schedule, which is a list of goods and the rates of duty that will be applied to those goods when they are imported into a country. This particular tariff schedule appears to be for India, as it includes references to Indian laws and regulations.
This document lists several types of fish and their corresponding tariff codes under the Indian Customs Tariff (Harmonized System of Nomenclature). The list includes both fresh and frozen fish, as well as specific types of fish such as salmon, trout, and flatfish. The tariff codes are organized into various headings and subheadings, each representing a different category of fish or fish product.

For example, heading 0302 includes various types of frozen fish, such as cod, haddock, coal fish, hake, and Alaska pollack. Each of these types of fish has a specific tariff code listed under the heading, such as 0302 51 00 for cod.

Heading 0303 includes various types of fish fillets and other fish meat, whether fresh, chilled, or frozen. This heading includes Pacific salmon, Atlantic salmon, trout, and flat fish, among others. Each of these types of fish fillets and meat has a specific tariff code listed under the heading, such as 0303 11 00 for sockeye salmon and 0303 31 00 for halibut.

Heading 0304 includes various types of fish offal, such as livers, roes, milt, fish fins, heads, tails, maws, and other edible fish offal. This heading includes shark fins, fish fins other than shark fins, heads, tails, and maws, and other edible fish offal. Each of these types of fish offal has a specific tariff code listed under the heading, such as 0303 91 10 for egg or egg yolk of fish and 0303 92 10 for shark fins.

In summary, this document provides a comprehensive list of tariff codes for various types of fish and fish products under the Indian Customs Tariff (Harmonized System of Nomenclature). The tariff codes are organized into various headings and subheadings, each representing a different category of fish or fish product.
The document provided is a list of various types of fish and their corresponding HS codes. HS codes are used to classify traded products and are essential for international trade. The list includes fresh or chilled fish, frozen fillets of fish, and dried, salted or in brine; smoked fish, whether or not cooked before or during the smoking process; flours, meals and pellets of fish fit for human consumption.

The list of fresh or chilled fish includes various types of fish such as swordfish, tooth fish, dogfish and other sharks, rays and skates, hilsa, seer, tuna, and other fish. Each type of fish has a specific HS code, and the quantity is mentioned in kilograms, with a percentage breakdown for each type of fish.

The list of frozen fillets of fish includes various types of fish such as tilapias, catfish, carp, eels, Nile perch, and snakeheads. Each type of fish has a specific HS code, and the quantity is mentioned in kilograms, with a percentage breakdown for each type of fish.

The list of dried, salted or in brine; smoked fish includes various types of fish such as tilapias, catfish, carp, eels, Nile perch, and snakeheads. Each type of fish has a specific HS code, and the quantity is mentioned in kilograms, with a percentage breakdown for each type of fish.

The list also includes flours, meals, and pellets of fish fit for human consumption, with a specific HS code and quantity mentioned in kilograms.

It is important to note that the HS codes mentioned in the document are specific to India, and the percentage breakdown is for the specific consignment being classified. The HS codes may differ in other countries, and the percentage breakdown may also differ based on the specific consignment being classified.
Summary:
The document provides a detailed list of various crustaceans and molluscs, along with their classifications under the Harmonized System (HS) of tariff nomenclature. The classification is based on factors such as whether the organisms are live, fresh, chilled, frozen, dried, salted, or in brine; whether they are smoked and cooked before or during the smoking process; and whether they are in shell or not. The HS codes for each classification are provided, along with the rate of duty for standard and preferential areas.

Under the crustaceans category, the document lists rock lobsters and other sea crawfish, lobsters, crabs, Norway lobsters, cold-water shrimps and prawns, and other shrimps and prawns. Each category is further broken down into subcategories based on factors such as whether the organisms are whole, cooked, other, accelerated freeze-dried, or contain specific types of shrimps and prawns.

Under the molluscs category, the document lists oysters, scallops, mussels, clams, cuttlefish and squid, and octopus. Each category is further broken down into subcategories based on factors such as whether the organisms are live, fresh, chilled, frozen, or dried.

The document also provides notes on the classification of dairy produce, birds' eggs, natural honey, and edible products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included. These notes provide definitions and clarifications on terms such as "milk," "butter," "dairy spreads," and "modified whey."

Finally, the document provides a supplementary note on the definition of "wild animal" under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (53 of 1972).

In summary, the document provides a comprehensive list of various crustaceans and molluscs, along with their classifications under the HS system of tariff nomenclature. The classifications are based on various factors such as whether the organisms are live, fresh, chilled, frozen, dried, salted, or in brine, and the rates of duty for each classification are provided for standard and preferential areas. The document also provides notes on the classification of dairy produce, birds' eggs, natural honey, and edible products of animal origin, as well as a supplementary note on the definition of "wild animal" under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (53 of 1972).
Summary:

The document outlines the classification of various food products and animal by-products under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The classification focuses on dairy products, eggs, honey, and other edible animal products.

Under Chapter 4, the Act covers dairy products, including milk and cream, condensed milk, butter and other fats and oils derived from milk, dairy spreads, cheese, curd, and whey. The classification specifies the rate of duty for each product. For example, butter and dairy spreads are subject to a 40% duty rate, while fresh cheese and curd have a 30% duty rate.

Chapter 4 also covers eggs and egg yolks, whether fresh, dried, cooked by steaming or boiling in water, molded, frozen, or otherwise preserved. The duty rate for eggs and egg yolks is 30%.

Chapter 4 further covers natural honey and edible products of animal origin, not elsewhere specified or included. The duty rate for natural honey is not specified in the document. However, for edible products of animal origin, the duty rate is 30%.

Chapter 5 covers products of animal origin not elsewhere specified or included. The Act specifies that this chapter does not cover edible products (other than guts, bladders, and stomachs of animals, whole and pieces thereof, and animal blood, liquid or dried), hides or skins (including fur skins) other than goods of heading 0505 and parings and similar waste of raw hides or skins of heading 0511 (Chapter 41 or 43), animal textile materials, other than horsehair and horsehair waste (Section XI), or prepared knots or tufts for broom or brush making (heading 9603).

The Act also includes notes and supplementary notes that provide definitions and explanations for certain terms used in the classification. For example, the term "wild animal" has the meaning assigned to it in clause (36) of section 2 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (53 of 1972), and the expression "wild bird" means any bird specified in Schedules to that Act.
Summary:
The document outlines the classification and rates of duty for various animal and vegetable products used in pharmaceuticals, as well as live trees, plants, bulbs, roots, cut flowers, and edible vegetables. The animal products include ambergris, castoreum, civet and musk; cantharides; bile; bezoar, cow (goolochan); ox gallstone; placenta; wild animal glands; bovine semen; fish nails, tails, and other waste; and silkworm pupae. The vegetable products include live trees and other plants; bulbs, roots, and the like; cut flowers and ornamental foliage; mushroom spawn; cut flowers and flower buds; foliage, branches, and other parts of plants; edible vegetables and certain roots and tubers. The rates of duty vary for each product and are provided in the document. It is important to note that the rates of duty may be subject to change and should be verified with the appropriate authorities. Additionally, the document includes specific notes and chapters that provide further guidance on the classification of these products. For example, the term "pellets" refers to products that have been agglomerated either directly by compression or by the addition of a binder in a proportion not exceeding 3 per cent by weight. The chapter on edible vegetables also notes that forage products are not covered and that certain vegetables, such as tomatoes, onions, and garlic, are included in headings 0702, 0703, and 0704, respectively. Overall, the document provides a comprehensive list of animal and vegetable products and their corresponding rates of duty, as well as guidelines for their classification.
Summary:
This document appears to be a list of food items, including vegetables, nuts, and fruits, along with their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and other related information. The items are classified under various headings and subheadings, which are organized under the Harmonized System (HS) of tariff nomenclature. The HS is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers used to classify traded products.

Some of the Indian laws and legal terms that are relevant to this document include the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Harmonized System of tariff nomenclature. The Customs Tariff Act, 1975, is a law that governs the imposition and collection of customs duties on imported and exported goods in India. The Act specifies the rates of duty for different categories of goods, which are classified under the HS system.

The HS system is a hierarchical classification system that consists of 21 sections, which are divided into 96 chapters, which are further divided into approximately 5,000 headings and subheadings. Each heading or subheading is assigned a unique 8-digit code, which is used to identify the product for tariff purposes. The first 6 digits of the code are common to all countries that use the HS system, while the last 2 digits are country-specific and are used to define the product at a more detailed level.

In this document, the food items are classified under various headings and subheadings of the HS system. For example, coconuts, Brazil nuts, and cashew nuts are classified under heading 0801, while almonds, hazelnuts or filberts, walnuts, chestnuts, pistachios, macadamia nuts, kola nuts, and areca nuts are classified under heading 0802. Dates, figs, pineapples, avocados, guavas, mangoes, and mangosteens are classified under heading 0804, while citrus fruit, grapes, melons, papaws, apples, pears, and quinces are classified under headings 0805, 0806, 0807, and 0808, respectively.

The document also provides the rates of duty for each tariff item, which are expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the goods. The customs value is the total amount of money that is paid or payable for the goods, including the price of the goods, the cost of freight, insurance, and any other charges related to the importation of the goods. The rates of duty vary depending on the type of goods and their country of origin.

In addition to the rates of duty, the document also provides other related information, such as the unit of measurement, the standard preferential rate, and the preferential rate for certain countries or regions. The standard preferential rate is the rate of duty that is applicable to goods that are imported from countries or regions with which India has a preferential trade agreement. The preferential rate is lower than the standard rate and is intended to promote trade and economic cooperation between India and its partner countries or regions.

Overall, this document is an important resource for understanding the classification and taxation of food items in India. It provides a detailed list of food items, along with their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and other related information. The document is organized under the Harmonized System of tariff nomenclature, which is a standardized system of names and numbers used to classify traded products. The document is also governed by the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, which specifies the rates of duty for different categories of goods and governs the imposition and collection of customs duties in India.
Summary:

The document outlines the Indian laws and tariffs for various food products, specifically fruits and nuts, coffee, tea, and spices. Here are some key points:

1. Fruits and Nuts: The document provides a list of various fruits and nuts, including raspberries, blackberries, mulberries, loganberries, currants, gooseberries, cherries, mango slices in brine, and dried fruits like apricots, prunes, apples, tamarind, and singoda. The tariff rates vary based on the type of fruit, its condition (e.g., fresh, frozen, dried, provisionally preserved), and the presence of added sugar.
2. Coffee: The document outlines the tariff rates for coffee, including coffee not roasted, coffee husks and skins, coffee substitutes containing coffee, and decaffeinated coffee. The rates vary based on the type of coffee (e.g., Arabica or Robusta), the grade (e.g., A, B, or C), and the packaging (e.g., in bulk or in packets).
3. Tea: The document provides the tariff rates for tea, including green tea (not fermented) and black tea (fermented) in various forms, such as in immediate packings, in bulk, agglomerated, and as waste. The rates vary based on the content of the packings and the type of tea.
4. Spices: The document outlines the tariff rates for various spices, including pepper, fruits of the genus Capsicum or of the genus Pimenta, vanilla, cinnamon and cinnamon-tree flowers, and cloves. The rates vary based on the type of spice, its condition (e.g., crushed or ground), and the presence of added substances.

It is important to note that the tariff rates provided in the document are subject to change and may vary based on various factors, including trade agreements and government policies. Therefore, it is recommended to consult the latest version of the Indian Customs Tariff for the most accurate and up-to-date information.
Summary:

This document provides detailed information about various spices, cereals, and their classification under Indian laws. It includes Acts, Articles, and other legal terms related to these commodities.

Spices:

The document outlines the classification of various spices such as nutmeg, mace, cardamoms, anise, badian, fennel, coriander, cumin, caraway, juniper berries, ginger, saffron, turmeric, thyme, bay leaves, curry, and other spices. These spices are classified under different headings and subheadings based on their quality, whether they are crushed or ground, or neither. For example, nutmeg and mace are classified under heading 0908, while cardamoms are classified under heading 0908 and subheading 0908 31. The subheading 0908 31 is further divided into large cardamoms (amomum) and small cardamoms (ellettaria). The small cardamoms are further divided into different qualities such as unbleached, bleached, half-bleached, or bleachable. Similarly, coriander seeds are classified under heading 0909, and cumin seeds are classified under heading 0909 and subheading 0909 31. The subheading 0909 31 is further divided into black cumin and other than black cumin. Anise, badian, caraway, fennel, and juniper berries are classified under heading 0909 and subheading 0909 61. The subheading 0909 61 is further divided into anise, badian, caraway, fennel, and juniper berries of seed quality and other.

Cereals:

The document also provides information about the classification of cereals such as wheat, rye, barley, oats, maize (corn), rice, grain sorghum, buckwheat, millet, canary seeds, and other cereals. These cereals are classified under different headings and subheadings based on their quality, whether they are husked or otherwise worked, and whether they are seed, powder, or husk. For example, wheat is classified under heading 1001, and durum wheat is classified under subheading 1001 11. The subheading 1001 11 is further divided into seed, seed quality, and other. Similarly, rice is classified under heading 1006, and husked (brown) rice is classified under subheading 1006 20. The subheading 1006 20 is further divided into semi-milled or wholly milled rice, whether or not polished or glazed, parboiled rice, basmati rice, and other.

Legal Terms:

The document uses various legal terms such as Acts, Articles, and subheadings. For example, the term "Acts" refers to the legal rules and regulations passed by the Indian government. The term "Articles" refers to the provisions of the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The term "subheadings" refers to the specific categories under which the commodities are classified.

Overall, the document provides detailed information about the classification of various spices and cereals under Indian laws. It uses clear and straightforward English to explain these legal concepts, avoiding any abbreviations or shorthand.
The document appears to be a table listing various types of agricultural products and their corresponding tariff codes, along with the rate of duty for each product. The table includes a wide range of products, including cereal grains, pulses, oil seeds, fruits, vegetables, and medicinal plants.

The table is organized into several sections, each with its own set of tariff codes and rates of duty. The first section covers cereal grains, including maize (corn), oats, and other cereals. The tariff codes for these products are listed under headings 355, 358, and 359, and the rate of duty ranges from 20% to 30%.

The second section covers pulses, including soya beans, ground-nuts, linseed, and rape or colza seeds. The tariff codes for these products are listed under headings 1201, 1202, 1204, and 1205, and the rate of duty ranges from 20% to 60%.

The third section covers oil seeds, including copra, cotton seeds, castor oil seeds, sesamum seeds, and other oil seeds. The tariff codes for these products are listed under headings 1203, 1207, and 1208, and the rate of duty ranges from 20% to 30%.

The fourth section covers fruits, including sugar beet seeds, seeds of forage plants, seeds of herbaceous plants cultivated primarily for their flowers, and fruit seeds for planting or sowing. The tariff codes for these products are listed under headings 1209, 1209, 1209, and 1209, respectively, and the rate of duty ranges from 10% to 30%.

The fifth section covers hop cones, hops, and lupulin. The tariff codes for these products are listed under headings 1210 and 1210, and the rate of duty ranges from 30% to 40%.

The sixth section covers plants and parts of plants used primarily in perfumery, pharmacy, or for insecticidal, fungicidal, or similar purposes. The tariff codes for these products are listed under heading 1211, and the rate of duty ranges from 30% to 40%.

It is important to note that the rates of duty listed in this table are subject to change and may vary depending on the country of origin and other factors. Additionally, the table may not include all applicable tariff codes and rates of duty for the products listed. It is always recommended to consult with a trade professional or legal expert for the most up-to-date and accurate information on tariffs and trade regulations.
Summary:

The document provided appears to be a list of various plant products, along with their corresponding tariff codes and rates of duty. These products include roots, rhizomes, herbs, seeds, and other vegetable materials, which are classified under different headings and subheadings.

Under Heading 1301, natural gums, resins, gum-resins, and oleoresins are listed, including gum arabic, asian gum, african gum, asafoetida, benjamin ras, benjamin cowrie, karaya gum, tragacanth, storax, copal, dammar batu, and various gum resins.

Heading 1302 covers vegetable saps and extracts, pectic substances, pectinates, pectates, agar-agar, and other mucilages and thickeners. This includes opium, liquorice, hops, ephedra, belladonna, cascara sagrada, nuxvomica, ginseng, neem, gymnema, garacenia or cambodge, cashew shell liquid (CNSL), purified and distilled CNSL (Cardanol), and other extracts.

Heading 1401 covers vegetable materials of a kind used primarily for plaiting, such as bamboos, rattans, reeds, rushes, osier, raffia, cleaned, bleached or dyed cereal straw, and lime bark.

Heading 1404 covers vegetable products not elsewhere specified or included, such as cotton linters, bidi wrapper leaves (tendu), soap-nuts, hard seeds, pips, hulls and nuts used primarily for carving, betel leaves, Indian katha, coconut shell, unworked, rudraksha seeds, and other products.

Section III of the document covers animal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products; prepared edible fats; animal or vegetable waxes. However, the specific details of this section are not provided in the document.

It is important to note that this summary is based solely on the provided document and does not include any legal interpretation or analysis of the listed products or tariff codes. The actual classification and rates of duty may vary depending on the specific circumstances of each case.
Summary:
This document is a list of fats, oils, and their fractions, classified under various headings in the Indian Customs Tariff. The headings specify the type of fat or oil, its origin (animal or vegetable), and the degree of processing it has undergone. The document includes both refined and unrefined fats and oils, as well as fractions obtained through various processes such as hydrogenation, inter-esterification, re-esterification, or elaidinization.

The headings include:

* Pig fat, poultry fat, and tallow from bovine animals, sheep, or goats (heading 1501)
* Fats and oils of bovine animals, sheep, or goats (heading 1502)
* Oils, not emulsified or mixed, of fish or marine mammals (heading 1504)
* Wool grease and fatty substances derived therefrom (heading 1505)
* Other animal fats and oils and their fractions (heading 1506)
* Soya-bean oil and its fractions (heading 1507)
* Ground-nut oil and its fractions (heading 1508)
* Olive oil and its fractions (heading 1509)
* Other oils and their fractions obtained solely from olives (heading 1510)
* Palm oil and its fractions (heading 1511)
* Sunflower-seed, safflower, or cotton-seed oil and fractions thereof (heading 1512)
* Coconut (copra), palm kernel, or babassu oil and fractions (heading 1513)
* Rape, colza, or mustard oil and fractions thereof (heading 1514)
* Other fixed vegetable fats and oils (including jojoba oil) and their fractions (heading 1515)
* Animal or vegetable fats and oils and their fractions, partly or wholly hydrogenated, inter-esterified, re-esterified or elaidinised (heading 1516)

Under each heading, the document specifies the rate of duty for the goods, which varies depending on the type of fat or oil and its origin. For example, the rate of duty for pig fat and poultry fat is 30%, while the rate of duty for tallow from bovine animals is 15%. The rate of duty for fish liver oils is 30%, while the rate of duty for other fats and oils of fish is 30%.

The document also includes legal terms and definitions, such as "low erucic acid rape or colza oil" and "edible grade". Low erucic acid rape or colza oil is defined as the fixed oil which has an erucic acid content of less than 2% by weight. Edible grade, in respect of a good specified in Appendix B to the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955, means the standard of quality specified for such goods in that Appendix.

Overall, this document is a comprehensive list of fats, oils, and their fractions classified under various headings in the Indian Customs Tariff, with specific rates of duty and legal definitions provided for each heading.
Summary:

The document outlines the classification of various food items under the Indian Tariff Act. The Act categorizes edible substances into different chapters and headings, each with specific descriptions and rates of duty. The summary of the relevant sections is as follows:

Chapter 15: Vegetable fats and oils, their fractions and mixtures or preparations of animal or vegetable fats or oils are classified under this chapter. Margarine, edible mixtures or preparations of animal or vegetable fats, and lard of animal or vegetable origin are some examples. The rate of duty varies depending on the type of product.

Chapter 16: Preparations of meat, fish, or crustaceans, molluscs, or other aquatic invertebrates are classified under this chapter. Food preparations containing more than 20% by weight of sausage, meat, meat offal, blood, fish, or crustaceans are included. The sub-heading notes provide further clarification on the classification of certain products.

Chapter 17: Sugars and sugar confectionery are classified under this chapter, with the exception of sugar confectionery containing cocoa, chemically pure sugars, and medicaments or other products of Chapter 30. Raw sugar, cane sugar, beet sugar, and other cane sugar are some examples of products classified under this chapter.

The document also includes sub-heading notes that provide further clarification on the classification of certain products. These notes define terms such as "homogenised preparations," "pellets," "fish," and "crustaceans, molluscs, and other aquatic invertebrates." The notes also specify the rate of duty for certain products.

In summary, the Indian Tariff Act classifies various food items into different chapters and headings, with specific descriptions and rates of duty. The document includes sub-heading notes that provide further clarification on the classification of certain products.
Summary:

The document outlines the tariff items and rates of duty for various goods under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The goods are categorized under different chapters, and each chapter has its own set of notes and headings. The chapters covered in this document include Chapter 17 (Sugars and Sugar Confectionery), Chapter 18 (Cocoa and Cocoa Preparations), and Chapter 19 (Preparations of Cereals, Flour, Starch or Milk; Pastry Cooks' Products).

Under Chapter 17, the tariff items and rates of duty are provided for various types of sugars, sugar syrups, and sugar confectionery. The chapter also includes notes on the classification of goods.

Chapter 18 covers cocoa beans, cocoa paste, cocoa butter, cocoa powder, and chocolate. The chapter includes notes on the classification of goods and the calculation of cocoa content.

Chapter 19 includes preparations of cereals, flour, starch, or milk, as well as pastry cooks' products. The chapter includes notes on the classification of goods, including exceptions for certain types of food preparations. The tariff items and rates of duty are provided for various types of pasta, malt extract, and bakers' wares.

In summary, this document provides the tariff items and rates of duty for various goods under the Indian Customs Tariff Act, with a focus on Chapters 17, 18, and 19. The document includes notes on the classification of goods and exceptions for certain types of food preparations.
Summary:

This document outlines the tariff items and rates for various food products under Chapter 20 and 21 of the Indian Customs Tariff. Chapter 20 covers vegetables, fruit, nuts, and other edible parts of plants that are prepared or preserved by vinegar or acetic acid. The rates of duty range from 0% to 30%, with some products, such as cucumbers and gherkins, having a specific rate of duty. Chapter 21 covers miscellaneous edible preparations, including homogenised composite food preparations, which are subject to a rate of duty of 30%. The chapter also includes notes that specify what is not covered under this chapter, such as mixed vegetables, roasted coffee substitutes containing coffee, and prepared enzymes. Additionally, there are sub-heading notes that provide further clarification on certain products, such as homogenised vegetables and preparations. Overall, this document outlines the specific rates of duty for various food products under Indian Customs Tariff.
Summary:

The document provided is a table listing various food products and their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and descriptions. It includes a variety of items such as extracts, essences, and concentrates of coffee, tea, or mate; yeasts; sauces and preparations thereof; mustard flour and meal and prepared mustard; soups and broths and preparations therefor; homogenised composite food preparations; ice cream and other edible ice; food preparations not elsewhere specified or included; protein concentrates and textured protein substances; soft drink concentrates; compound preparations for making non-alcoholic beverages; food flavouring material; churna for pan; custard powder; diabetic foods; sterilized or pasteurized millstone; and beverages, spirits and vinegar.

The tariff items are organized into different headings and subheadings, and the rates of duty vary depending on the item and its origin. For example, the rate of duty for active yeasts is 30%, while the rate of duty for inactive yeasts, other single-cell microorganisms, and prepared baking powders is also 30%. The rate of duty for sauces and preparations thereof varies depending on the specific product, with soya sauce having a rate of 30%, tomato ketchup and other tomato sauces having a rate of 30%, and mustard flour and meal and prepared mustard having a rate of 30%.

The document also includes notes that provide additional context and definitions for certain terms used in the table. For example, the note for Chapter 22 states that the chapter does not cover products prepared for culinary purposes and thereby rendered unsuitable for consumption as beverages, sea water, distilled or conductivity water or water of similar purity, acetic acid of a concentration exceeding 10 per cent by weight of acetic acid, medicaments of heading 3003 or 3004, or perfumery or toilet preparations. The note also defines the "alcoholic strength by volume" as the alcoholic content of a beverage determined at a temperature of 20o C.

Overall, the document is a detailed list of food products and their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and descriptions, with additional notes providing context and definitions for certain terms. It is organized in a clear and concise manner, making it easy to understand and use as a reference.
Summary:
The document outlines various Indian laws related to the importation of alcoholic beverages, specifically wines and spirits. The laws are organized under specific headings and subheadings in the Indian Customs Tariff. The tariff rates for each category of alcoholic beverage are listed, along with any applicable preferential rates for certain countries or regions.

Under Chapter 22 of the tariff, there are several headings related to alcoholic beverages. Heading 2204 covers still wines, including sherry and port, with a tariff rate of 150%. Heading 2205 covers vermouth and other wine of fresh grapes flavored with plants or aromatic substances, with a tariff rate of 150%. Heading 2207 covers undenatured ethyl alcohol of an alcoholic strength by volume of 80% vol. or higher and ethyl alcohol and other spirits, denatured, of any strength, with a tariff rate of 150%.

Under Heading 2208, there are several subheadings related to spirits obtained by distilling grape wine or grape marc, whiskies, rum and other spirits obtained by distilling fermented sugarcane products, gin and geneva, vodka, liqueurs and cordials, and other. The tariff rate for each subheading is 150%.

Under Chapter 23, there are several headings related to residues and waste from the food industries, prepared animal fodder, vinegar and substitutes for vinegar obtained from acetic acid. The tariff rates for these categories vary.

It is important to note that the tariff rates listed in this document are subject to change and may vary depending on the country of origin of the goods. Additionally, preferential rates may apply for certain countries or regions as per the Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) or Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) that India has signed. It is recommended to consult the latest version of the Indian Customs Tariff for the most accurate and up-to-date information.
The document provided appears to be a list of customs tariff items for various products related to tobacco, mineral products, and vegetable materials and waste. The tariff items are organized into chapters and headings, with descriptions of the goods and rates of duty for each item. The document also includes notes and supplementary notes that provide additional guidance on how to classify certain products.

In Chapter 24, which covers tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes, the tariff items include unmanufactured tobacco, tobacco refuse, cigars, cigarettes, and other manufactured tobacco and tobacco substitutes. The tariff items specify the type of tobacco or tobacco substitute, the form it is in (e.g. unmanufactured, cut-tobacco, smoking mixtures), and the rate of duty. For example, the tariff item for flue cured virginia tobacco, not stemmed or stripped, is 2401 10 10 with a rate of duty of 30%.

Chapter 25 covers salt, sulphur, earths and stone, plastering materials, lime and cement. The tariff items in this chapter include salt (including table salt and denatured salt), unroasted iron pyrites, sulphur of all kinds, natural graphite, natural sands, and other mineral products. The tariff items specify the type of mineral product, the form it is in (e.g. powder, flakes, unroasted), and the rate of duty. For example, the tariff item for silica sands and other natural sands is 2505 10 with a rate of duty of 10%.

Chapter 30, which is not included in the document, covers medicaments and other products of the chemical or allied industries. This chapter would likely include tariff items for tobacco products that are used for medicinal purposes, such as nicotine replacement therapy products.

In summary, the document provides a list of customs tariff items for various products related to tobacco, mineral products, and vegetable materials and waste. The tariff items are organized into chapters and headings, with descriptions of the goods and rates of duty for each item. The notes and supplementary notes provide additional guidance on how to classify certain products.
This document lists various minerals, rocks, and other natural materials, along with their corresponding tariff codes and rates under the Harmonized System (HS). The HS is an international nomenclature for the classification of products that is used by customs authorities around the world to determine the applicable tariffs for imported goods. The document includes a wide range of materials, such as quartz sands, silica sands, chalk, marble, granite, and asbestos, among others. Each material is assigned a unique 12-digit code, with the first six digits being the HS code and the remaining six digits being the country-specific code. The document also specifies the rate of duty for each material, which is expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the goods. In some cases, the rate of duty may be subject to certain conditions or restrictions, such as a minimum or maximum value, a specific origin, or a particular use. It is important to note that the tariff rates listed in this document are subject to change and may vary depending on the country of importation.
This document contains a list of various minerals and their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and descriptions. The minerals listed include iron ores and concentrates, manganese ores and concentrates, copper ores and concentrates, nickel ores and concentrates, cobalt ores and concentrates, aluminum ores and concentrates, lead ores and concentrates, zinc ores and concentrates, tin ores and concentrates, chromium ores and concentrates, tungsten ores and concentrates, uranium or thorium ores and concentrates, molybdenum ores and concentrates, titanium ores and concentrates, and vanadium ores and concentrates.

Each mineral has a specific tariff item number and a corresponding rate of duty. The rate of duty is given as a percentage and applies to goods imported from standard, preferential areas, and other specified areas. For example, iron ores and concentrates have a tariff item number of 2601 and a rate of duty of 10% for goods imported from standard and preferential areas.

The descriptions of the minerals provide more information about their physical properties and uses. For instance, iron ores and concentrates are described as non-agglomerated or agglomerated, with different rates of duty for each type. Non-agglomerated iron ores and concentrates are further divided into subcategories based on their iron content, such as lumps with 60% Fe or more, fines with 62% Fe or more, and concentrates. Agglomerated iron ores and concentrates, on the other hand, include iron ore pellets and other types with a rate of duty of 5%.

Similarly, manganese ores and concentrates are described as having a manganese content of 20% or more, calculated on the dry weight. They are further divided into subcategories based on their manganese content, such as manganese ore (46% or more) and ferruginous manganese ores and concentrates with a manganese content of 10% or more but below 30%.

Other minerals listed in the document include copper ores and concentrates, nickel ores and concentrates, cobalt ores and concentrates, aluminum ores and concentrates, lead ores and concentrates, zinc ores and concentrates, tin ores and concentrates, chromium ores and concentrates, tungsten ores and concentrates, uranium or thorium ores and concentrates, molybdenum ores and concentrates, titanium ores and concentrates, and vanadium ores and concentrates. Each mineral has a specific tariff item number and a corresponding rate of duty, as well as a description of its physical properties and uses.

In summary, this document is a list of various minerals and their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and descriptions. The minerals listed include iron ores and concentrates, manganese ores and concentrates, copper ores and concentrates, nickel ores and concentrates, cobalt ores and concentrates, aluminum ores and concentrates, lead ores and concentrates, zinc ores and concentrates, tin ores and concentrates, chromium ores and concentrates, tungsten ores and concentrates, uranium or thorium ores and concentrates, molybdenum ores and concentrates, titanium ores and concentrates, and vanadium ores and concentrates. Each mineral has a specific tariff item number and a corresponding rate of duty, as well as a description of its physical properties and uses.
Summary:

The document lists various types of ores, concentrates, and other materials, along with their corresponding HS codes and rates of duty. The materials are categorized into different sections, including titanium ores and concentrates, ilmenite, rare earth oxides, niobium, tantalum, vanadium, and zirconium ores and concentrates, precious metal ores and concentrates, other ores and concentrates, granulated slag from the manufacture of iron or steel, slag, dross, scaling and other waste from the manufacture of iron or steel, slag, ash and residues containing arsenic, metals or their compounds, other slag and ash, and other mineral fuels, mineral oils and products of their distillation; bituminous substances; mineral waxes. The document also includes notes and sub-heading notes that provide additional information on the classification of certain goods.

In the context of Indian laws, the HS codes are used to classify goods for the purpose of customs duty and other regulatory purposes. The rates of duty mentioned in the document are applicable under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of Anti-dumping Duty on Dumped Articles and for Determination of Injury) Rules, 1995. The Customs Tariff Act, 1975, provides the legal framework for the imposition and collection of customs duties in India, while the Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of Anti-dumping Duty on Dumped Articles and for Determination of Injury) Rules, 1995, provide the procedures for the determination and collection of anti-dumping duties.

It is important to note that the rates of duty mentioned in the document are subject to change and may vary depending on the applicable customs notifications, trade agreements, and other factors. Therefore, it is recommended to refer to the latest customs notifications and other relevant legal provisions for the most accurate and up-to-date information on the classification and duty rates of goods in India.
Summary:

The document discusses the constituents of various preparations in India, including light oils and preparations, motor spirits, naphtha, solvent 60/80, solvent 50/120, solvent 145/205, motor gasoline, aviation gasoline, kerosene intermediate and oils obtained from kerosene intermediate, gas oil and oils obtained from gas oil, light diesel oil, fuel oils, base oil and lubricating oil, engine oil, automotive gear oil, industrial gear oil, general purpose machinery and spindle oils, turbine lubricating oil, other lubricating oil, cutting oil, hydraulic oil, insulating oil for transformer and circuit-breaker, jute batching oil, mineral oil for cosmetic industry, and transformer oil. The document specifies the percentage of each constituent in the preparation, as well as the relevant standards that the constituents must conform to. The document also includes provisions for preparations containing biodiesel and waste oils, as well as those containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polychlorinated terphenyls (PCTs) or polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs). The document is organized into sections and chapters, with specific headings for each type of preparation. The document also includes notes and provisions for the classification of goods within the Schedule.
Summary:

The document outlines the classification of various chemical products under the Indian Customs Tariff. The classification is based on the nature of the products, their composition, and their intended use. The tariff includes headings for chemical elements, inorganic acids and oxygen compounds of non-metals, halogen or sulphur compounds of non-metals, and organic compounds.

Under heading 2801, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and sublimed sulphur are classified. Hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and other gases are classified under heading 2804. Boron, tellurium, silicon, phosphorus, arsenic, selenium, and alkali or alkaline-earth metals are classified under heading 2805. Inorganic acids and inorganic oxygen compounds of non-metals are classified under headings 2806 to 2809. Oxides of boron and boric acids are classified under heading 2810. Other inorganic acids and other inorganic oxygen compounds of non-metals are classified under heading 2811. Carbon dioxide, silicon dioxide, and other inorganic oxygen compounds of non-metals are classified under heading 2811. Halides and halide oxides of non-metals are classified under heading 2812.

The tariff also includes provisions for the classification of chemically defined complex acids consisting of a non-metal acid of Sub-Chapter II and a metal acid of Sub-Chapter IV, which are to be classified in heading 2811. Headings 2826 to 2842 apply only to metal or ammonium salts or peroxysalts. Double or complex salts are to be classified in heading 2842. Heading 2844 applies to radioactive isotopes, compounds, alloys, dispersions, ceramic products, and mixtures containing these elements or isotopes or inorganic or organic compounds thereof and having a specific radioactivity exceeding 74 Bq/g (0.002 µci/g).

The tariff includes sub-heading notes and supplementary notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of certain products. For example, Sub-heading 2804 40 includes liquefied or solidified gas, and Sub-heading 2852 10 includes chemically defined organic or inorganic compounds of mercury.

In summary, the Indian Customs Tariff includes detailed provisions for the classification of various chemical products based on their nature, composition, and intended use. The tariff includes headings for chemical elements, inorganic acids and oxygen compounds of non-metals, halogen or sulphur compounds of non-metals, and organic compounds. The tariff also includes provisions for the classification of radioactive isotopes and chemically defined complex acids. Sub-heading and supplementary notes provide additional guidance on the classification of certain products.
This document appears to be a list of various chemicals and their corresponding tariff codes under the Indian Customs Tariff. The tariff codes are used for the classification of goods for the purpose of customs duty. The list includes chemicals such as phosphorous trichloride, phosphorous pentachloride, sulphur monochloride, sulphur dichloride, thionyl chloride, silicon tetrachloride, arsenous trichloride, sulphides of non-metals, commercial phosphorus trisulphide, carbon disulphide, arsenic disulphide, ammonia, anhydrous or in aqueous solution, sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, peroxides of sodium or potassium, hydroxide and peroxide of magnesium, oxides, hydroxides and peroxides of strontium or barium, zinc oxide and zinc peroxide, artificial corundum, aluminium oxide, aluminium hydroxide, chromium oxides and hydroxides, manganese oxides, iron oxides and hydroxides, earth colours containing 70% or more by weight of combined iron evaluated as Fe2O3, cobalt oxides and hydroxides, commercial cobalt oxides, titanium oxides, lead oxides, red lead and orange lead, hydrazine and hydroxylamine and their inorganic salts, other inorganic bases, other metal oxides, hydroxides and peroxides, fluorides, fluorosilicates, fluoroaluminates and other complex fluorine salts, chlorides, chloride oxides and chloride hydroxides, bromides and bromide oxides, iodides and iodide oxides, hypochlorites, commercial calcium hypochlorites, chlorites, chlorates and perchlorates, bromates and perbromates, iodates and periodates, sulphides, polysulphides, dithionites and sulphoxylates, sulphites, thiosulphates, sulphates, alums, peroxosulphates (persulphates), and other chemicals.

Under Indian law, the import and export of goods is regulated by the Customs Act, 1962 and the Indian Customs Tariff. The Customs Act, 1962 provides for the levy and collection of customs duty on goods imported or exported from India. The Indian Customs Tariff is a document that lists the tariff codes and the rates of customs duty applicable to various goods. The tariff codes are used for the classification of goods for the purpose of customs duty. The rates of customs duty are determined by the Central Government and are subject to change from time to time.

In addition to customs duty, goods imported into India may also be subject to other taxes and charges, such as the Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) and the Compensation Cess. The IGST is a tax on the supply of goods and services within the country, and is levied on the import of goods at the rate of 18%. The Compensation Cess is a tax on certain luxury and demerit goods, and is levied on the import of these goods at the rate of 5%.

It is important to note that the import and export of certain goods may be subject to restrictions or prohibitions under Indian law. For example, the import of certain hazardous chemicals is prohibited under the Environment Protection Act, 1986. It is the responsibility of the importer or exporter to ensure that they comply with all applicable laws and regulations.

In summary, this document is a list of various chemicals and their corresponding tariff codes under the Indian Customs Tariff. The tariff codes are used for the classification of goods for the purpose of customs duty. The import and export of goods is regulated by the Customs Act, 1962 and the Indian Customs Tariff. In addition to customs duty, goods imported into India may also be subject to other taxes and charges, such as the IGST and the Compensation Cess. The import and export of certain goods may be subject to restrictions or prohibitions under Indian law. It is the responsibility of the importer or exporter to ensure that they comply with all applicable laws and regulations.
Summary:

The document appears to be a list of various chemical substances, their units of measurement, and associated taxes or fees. Many of the substances are inorganic chemicals, such as nitrites, nitrates, phosphates, carbonates, silicates, borates, and chromates, among others. Some of the substances are complex cyanides, such as ammonium sulphocyanide, potassium ferrocyanide, and sodium nitroprusside.

The document also includes a few organic compounds, such as sodium aurous thiosulphate, which is a compound of gold. There are also some precious metal compounds, such as silver nitrate and various silver compounds, as well as colloidal gold and silver.

The document also includes a section on radioactive elements and isotopes, such as uranium depleted in U235 or thorium, as well as spent (irradiated) fuel elements of nuclear reactors. There are also isotopes other than those of heading 2844, compounds of such isotopes, whether or not chemically defined, and nuclear fuels not elsewhere included or specified.

Finally, the document includes compounds of rare-earth metals, yttrium, scandium, or mixtures of these metals, such as cerium compounds and rare-earth oxides, fluorides, and chlorides not elsewhere included or specified.

The document includes a tax or fee of 10% for most of the substances, with a few exceptions. The tax or fee is indicated by the notation "kg. 1[10%]" following the substance name and unit of measurement.
Summary:

Chapter 29 of the Indian Tariff Act covers Organic Chemicals. This chapter applies to separate chemically defined organic compounds, mixtures of isomers of the same organic compound, products of headings 2936 to 2939 or sugar ethers, sugar acetals and sugar esters, and their salts, of heading 2940, or the products of heading 2941, whether or not chemically defined. It also covers these products dissolved in water or other solvents, with added stabilizers, anti-dusting agents, coloring or odoriferous substances, or diluted to standard strengths for the production of azo dyes. This chapter does not cover goods of heading 1504 or crude glycerol of heading 1520, ethyl alcohol, methane or propane, the compounds of carbon mentioned in Note 2 to Chapter 28, immunological products of heading 3002, urea, coloring matter of vegetable or animal origin, synthetic organic coloring matter, synthetic organic products of a kind used as fluorescent brightening agents or as luminophores, or dyes or other coloring matter put up in forms or packings for retail sale, enzymes, metaldehyde, hexamethylenetetramine or similar substances, products put up as charges for fire-extinguishers or put up in fire-extinguishing grenades, ink removers put up in packings for retail sale, or optical elements. Goods which could be included in two or more of the headings of this Chapter are to be classified in that one of those headings which occurs last in numerical order. In headings 2904 to 2906, 2908 to 2911 and 2913 to 2920, any reference to halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives includes a reference to compound derivatives, such as sulphohalogenated, nitrohalogenated, nitrosulphonated or nitrosulphohalogenated derivatives. Nitro or nitroso groups are not to be taken as “nitrogen-functions” for the purposes of heading 2929. For the purposes of headings 2911, 2912, 2914, 2918 and 2922, “oxygen-function” is to be restricted to the functions (the characteristic organic oxygen-containing groups) referred to in headings 2905 to 2920. The esters of acid-function organic compounds of Sub-Chapters I to VII with organic compounds of these Sub-Chapters are to be classified with that compound which is classified in the heading which occurs last in numerical order in these Sub-Chapters. Esters of ethyl alcohol with acid-function organic compounds of Sub-Chapters I to VII are to be classified in the same heading as the corresponding acid-function compounds. Subject to Note 1 to Section VI and Note 2 to Chapter 28, inorganic salts of organic compounds such as acid-, phenol- or enol-function compounds or organic bases, of Sub-Chapters I to X or heading 2942, are to be classified in the heading appropriate to the organic compound; salts formed between organic compounds of Sub-Chapters I to X or heading 2942 are to be classified in the heading appropriate to the base or to the acid (including phenol-or enol-function compounds) from which they are formed, whichever occurs last in numerical order in the Chapter; co-ordination compounds, other than products classifiable in Sub-Chapter XI or heading 2941, are to be classified in the heading which occurs last in numerical order in Chapter 29, among those appropriate to the fragments formed by “cleaving” of all metal bonds, other than metal-carbon bonds. Metal alcoholates are to be classified in the same heading as the corresponding alcohols except in the case of ethanol (heading 2905). Halides of carboxylic acids are to be classified in the same heading as the corresponding acids. Headings 2930 and 2931 do not include sulphonated or halogenated derivatives (including compound derivatives) which, apart from hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen, only have atoms of sulphur or of a halogen which give them their nature of sulphonated or halogenated derivatives (or compound derivatives). Headings 2932, 2933 and 2934 do not include epoxides with a three-membered ring, ketone peroxides, cyclic polymers of aldehydes or of thioaldehydes, anhydrides of polybasic carboxylic acids, cyclic esters of polyhydric alcohols or phenols with polybasic acids, or imides of polybasic acids. For the purposes of heading 2937, the term “hormones” includes hormone-releasing or hormone-stimulating factors, hormone inhibitors and hormone antagonists (anti-hormones); the expression “used primarily as hormones” applies not only to hormone derivatives and structural analogues used primarily for their hormonal effect, but also to those derivatives and structural analogues used primarily as intermediates in the synthesis of products of this heading. Within any one heading of this Chapter, derivatives of a chemical compound (or group of chemical compounds) are to be classified in the same sub-heading as that compound (or group of compounds) provided that they are not more specially covered by any other sub-heading and that there is no residual sub-heading named “other” in the series of subheadings concerned. Note 3 to this Chapter shall not be applicable to the sub-headings of this Chapter.
The document provided is a list of chemicals and their respective Harmonized System (HS) codes, which are used for international trade. The chemicals are categorized based on their properties, such as halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of hydrocarbons, alcohols and their derivatives, phenols, phenol-alcohols, and their derivatives.

The HS codes are used to classify goods for the purpose of customs duties and taxes. The codes are standardized and recognized by most countries around the world, making international trade easier and more efficient.

The list includes several Indian laws, specifically the Indian Trade Classification (ITC) (HS), which is based on the Harmonized System of the World Customs Organization. The list also includes the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer.

The chemicals listed are organized by their HS codes and include their common names, molecular formulas, and other relevant information. Some of the chemicals listed are commonly used in industrial and commercial applications, while others are restricted or banned due to their potential health and environmental hazards.

In summary, the document is a list of chemicals and their HS codes, which are used for international trade. The list includes Indian laws such as the ITC (HS), the CWC, and the Montreal Protocol. The chemicals are organized by their properties and include common names, molecular formulas, and other relevant information.
Summary:

The document outlines a list of chemicals and their respective classification under the Indian laws. These chemicals are classified based on their chemical properties and potential hazards. The classification includes phenols, halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of phenols or phenol-alcohols, ethers, ether-alcohols, ether-phenols, ether-alcohol-phenols, alcohol peroxides, ether peroxides, ketone peroxides, epoxides with a three-membered ring, acetals and hemiacetals, and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives.

Under each classification, there are specific chemicals listed with their respective permissible limits, if any. For example, under the classification of phenols, there is a list of specific phenols such as o-Phenyl phenols, p-Phenyl phenols, Thymol, Para tertiary butyl phenol, Alkyl phenols, Polyphenols; phenol-alcohols, Resorcinol and its salts, Hydroquinone (quinol) and its salts, 4,4-isopropylidenediphenol (bis-phenol A, diphenylolpropane) and its salts, 1,5-Dihydroxy naphthalene, Tris (p-hydroxy phenyl) ethane, Tertiary butyl hydroquinone, and other phenols. Each of these specific chemicals has a permissible limit mentioned in the document.

Similarly, under the classification of halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of phenols or phenol-alcohols, there is a list of specific chemicals such as Pentachlorophenol (ISO), Dinoseb (ISO) and its salts, 4,6-Dinitro-o-cresol [DNOC (ISO)] and its salts, Para nitrophenol, Musk xylol, and other halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of phenols or phenol-alcohols. Each of these specific chemicals has a permissible limit mentioned in the document.

The document also includes the classification of ethers, ether-alcohols, ether-phenols, ether-alcohol-phenols, alcohol peroxides, ether peroxides, ketone peroxides, epoxides with a three-membered ring, acetals and hemiacetals, and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives. Under each classification, there are specific chemicals listed with their respective permissible limits, if any.

In addition to the classification and permissible limits, the document also includes the Indian Standard (IS) numbers for some of the chemicals. The IS number is a standardization mark of Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for industrial products.

It is important to note that the document is a legal document, and the permissible limits and classifications mentioned in it are based on Indian laws. Therefore, it is essential to comply with the limits and classifications mentioned in the document to ensure the safety and health of people and the environment.
Summary:

This document is a list of chemical compounds and their corresponding tariff codes, as per the Harmonized System (HS). The HS is an international nomenclature for the classification of products that is used by customs authorities around the world to determine the duty and tax rates for imported goods.

The document begins by listing various carboxylic acids and their derivatives, including saturated and unsaturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids, cyclic monocarboxylic acids, and polycarboxylic acids. The list includes common acids such as formic acid, acetic acid, propionic acid, and benzoic acid, as well as their salts and esters. The document also includes halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated, and nitrosated derivatives of these acids.

The tariff codes for these chemicals range from 2914 to 2918. For example, formic acid has the tariff code 2915 11, while benzoic acid has the tariff code 2916 31. The tariff codes for the salts and esters of these acids are also listed.

The document also includes a section for "Other" carboxylic acids, which includes hexoic acid, octoic acid, and trifluoro acetic acid, among others. These acids have the tariff codes 2915 90 91, 2915 90 92, and 2915 90 93, respectively.

Overall, this document provides a comprehensive list of carboxylic acids and their derivatives, along with their corresponding tariff codes. This information can be useful for businesses that import or export these chemicals, as it can help them determine the applicable duty and tax rates for their products.
Summary:

The document lists various chemicals and their respective classification under the Customs Tariff Act of India. The Act is used to classify goods for the purpose of customs duty and other taxes. The chemicals are classified under different chapters and headings based on their chemical composition and use.

The first chemical listed is benzilic acid, which falls under Chapter 29, heading 18, subheading 00. The document also lists chlorobenzilate, which falls under the same chapter, heading, and subheading.

The next section of the document lists various carboxylic acids and their derivatives. These chemicals are classified under Chapter 29, heading 19, and are further divided into subheadings based on their specific type of derivative. For example, salicylic acid and its salts are classified under subheading 21, while other esters of salicylic acid and their salts are classified under subheading 23.

The document also includes various other chemicals, such as gallic acid, beta hydroxy napthoic acid, and propyl gallate, which are classified under Chapter 29, heading 29.

Additionally, the document includes various esters of inorganic acids of non-metals and their salts, as well as their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated, or nitrosated derivatives. These chemicals are classified under Chapter 29, heading 29, and are further divided into subheadings based on their specific type of derivative.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive list of various chemicals and their classification under the Customs Tariff Act of India. It is important to note that the classification of goods for the purpose of customs duty and other taxes can be complex and may require the assistance of a qualified professional.
Summary:

The document lists various chemical compounds and their respective Indian tariff codes, along with the percentage of the compound present in a given mixture. These codes fall under the category of "Organic Compounds," specifically "Oxygen-Function Amino-Compounds," "Quaternary Ammonium Salts and Hydroxides; Lecithins and Other Phosphoaminolipids, Whether or Not Chemically Defined," "Carboamide-Function Compounds; Amide-Function Compounds of Carbonic Acid," and "Nitrile-Function Compounds."

Under "Oxygen-Function Amino-Compounds," there are several subcategories, including "Amino-alcohols, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function, their ethers and esters; salts thereof," "Amino-naphthols and other amino-phenols, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function, their ethers and esters; salts thereof," and "Amino-aldehydes, amino-ketones and amino-quinones, other than those containing more than one kind of oxygen function; salts thereof." Each subcategory contains various chemical compounds with their corresponding Indian tariff codes and percentage of the compound in a given mixture.

Similarly, under "Quaternary Ammonium Salts and Hydroxides; Lecithins and Other Phosphoaminolipids, Whether or Not Chemically Defined," there are two subcategories: "Choline and its salts" and "Lecithins and other phosphoaminolipids." Each subcategory contains chemical compounds with their corresponding Indian tariff codes and percentage of the compound in a given mixture.

The category "Carboamide-Function Compounds; Amide-Function Compounds of Carbonic Acid" includes "Acyclic amides (including acyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; salts thereof," "Cyclic amides (including cyclic carbamates) and their derivatives; salts thereof," and "Carboamide-function compounds (including saccharin and its salts) and imine-function compounds." Each subcategory contains various chemical compounds with their corresponding Indian tariff codes and percentage of the compound in a given mixture.

Finally, the category "Nitrile-Function Compounds" includes "Acrylonitrile" and "1-Cyanoguanidine (dicyandiamide)." Each chemical compound has its corresponding Indian tariff code and percentage of the compound in a given mixture.

Note that the Indian tariff codes listed in the document are not actual codes used in Indian trade but are placeholders for future implementation.
Summary:

The document lists various chemical compounds that are subject to import controls in India under the Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016. The list is divided into several categories based on the chemical structure and properties of the compounds.

The first category includes organic compounds with sulfur or nitrogen atoms, such as thiocarbamates, dithiocarbamates, thiuram mono-, di or tetrasulphides, isocyanates, and organo-sulfur compounds. Examples of specific compounds in this category include phenyl isocyanate, toluene di-isocyanate, thiourea, and calcium salts of methionine.

The second category includes organic derivatives of hydrazine or of hydroxylamine, such as isoniazid and organic derivatives of hydrazine or of hydroxylamine.

The third category includes compounds with other nitrogen functions, such as isocyanates, N,N-diethylphosphoramidic dichloride, N,N-Diisopropylphosphoramidic dichloride, N,N-Dipropylphosphoramidic dichloride, N,N-Dimethylphosphoramidic dichloride, Diethyl N,N- Dimethylphosphoramidate, Phosphoramidic acid, diethyl, dimethylester, and other compounds.

The fourth category includes heterocyclic compounds with oxygen hetero-atom(s) only, such as tetrahydrofuran, 2-Furaldehyde (furfuraldehyde), furfuryl alcohol and tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol, sucralose, hydroxy dibenzfuran carboxylic acid, lactones, coumarin, methylcoumarins and ethylcoumarins, phenolphthalein, isosafrole, 1-(1,3-Benzodioxol-5-yl) propan-2- one, piperonal, safrole, tetrahydrocannabinols (all isomers), cineole, and other compounds.

The fifth category includes heterocyclic compounds with nitrogen hetero-atom(s) only, such as phenazone (antipyrin) and its derivates, hydantoin and its derivatives, tinidazole, metronidazole, metronidiazole benzoate, mebendazole, dimetridazole, albendazole, and other compounds.

The sixth category includes compounds containing a pyrimidine ring or piperazine ring in the structure, such as malonylurea (barbituric acid) and its salts, allobarbital (INN), amobarbital (INN), barbital (INN), butalbital (INN), butobarbital (INN), cyclobarbital (INN), methylphenobarbital (INN), pentobarbital (INN), secbutabarbital (INN), phenobarbital (INN), secobarbital (INN), and vinylbital (INN); salts thereof, other derivatives of malonylurea (barbituric acid); salts thereof, loprazolam (INN), mecloqualone (INN), methaqualone (INN) and zipeprol (INN); salts thereof, and other compounds.

The seventh category includes other compounds, such as aminophylline (cordophylin), trimethoprim, diethyl carbamazine citrate, 1-Amino-4-Methyl piperazine, cyanuric acid and its salts, 4-[4, 6-bis(2, 4-dimethylphenyl)-1, 3, 5-triazine-2-yl]-1, 3-benzenediol, tris(2-hydroxyethyl) isocyanurate, ethylhexyltriazone, 2, 4, 6-tri(2,4-dyhydroxyl-3-methylphenyl)-1, 3, 5-triazine, lactams, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, and N-ethyl-2-pyrrolidone.

It is important to note that the importation of these chemical compounds into India is subject to regulations and restrictions under the Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016. Importers must comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including obtaining necessary permits and following proper procedures for handling and disposal of these chemicals.
The document lists various chemical compounds and their classifications under the Harmonized System (HS) of tariff nomenclature. The HS system is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers to classify traded products. Each code represents a specific product or product group. The document includes several codes for different types of chemical compounds, such as nucleic acids and their salts, sulphonamides, vitamins, hormones, glycosides, alkaloids, and other organic compounds.

The codes are organized into different sections based on the type of compound. For example, section 2215 covers nucleic acids and their salts, while section 2216 covers heterocyclic compounds containing a thiazole ring. Section 2225 covers sulphonamides, and section 2243 covers provitamins and vitamins. Section 2268 covers hormones, prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes, while section 2284 covers glycosides and their salts. Section 2290 covers alkaloids and their salts, ethers, esters, and other derivatives.

Each code is followed by a percentage, which represents the maximum allowed amount of impurities in the product. For example, code 2215 has a percentage of 10%, which means that the product classified under this code can contain up to 10% impurities.

The document also includes specific codes for certain chemical compounds, such as azinphos-methyl (ISO), imidazo pyridine methyl amine, and chloro thiophene-2-carboxylic acid. These codes are followed by a percentage and a description of the compound.

In summary, this document provides a classification system for various chemical compounds under the Harmonized System (HS) of tariff nomenclature. The codes represent specific products or product groups, and each code is followed by a percentage representing the maximum allowed amount of impurities in the product. The document also includes specific codes for certain chemical compounds with a description of the compound.
Summary:

The document presents a list of pharmaceutical products and their respective tariff item descriptions, along with the applicable rates of duty. The list includes various categories of drugs, such as antibiotics, anti-inflammatory agents, and hormonal preparations. The antibiotics category includes Doxycycline and its salts, Tetracycline/oxytetra-cycline and their salts, Chloramphenicol and its derivatives, Erythromycin and its derivatives, Rifampicin and its salts, Cephalexin and its salts, Ciprofloxacine and its salts, Gentamycin and its salts, Neomycin, and Norfloxacin and its salts. The anti-inflammatory agents category includes Ibuprofane, and the hormonal preparations category includes Timolo maleate, Terbutoline sulphate, D(-)phenyl glycin chloride HCL (DPGCH), Imipramine HCl, Amitryptyline HCl, Cysteanune HCl, Atenolol, and Propranalol.

The document also includes a section on "immunological products," which are defined as peptides and proteins directly involved in the regulation of immunological processes, such as monoclonal antibodies, interleukins, interferons, chemokines, tumor necrosis factors, growth factors, hematopoietins, and colony stimulating factors.

The document also specifies certain exclusions from the scope of this chapter, including food or beverages, preparations for assisting smokers to quit smoking, plasters for use in dentistry, aqueous distillates or aqueous solutions of essential oils, preparations of headings 3303 to 3307, soap or other products of heading 3401 containing added medicaments, preparations with a basis of plaster for use in dentistry, and blood albumin not prepared for therapeutic or prophylactic uses.

The document also includes sub-heading notes and tariff item descriptions for human blood, animal blood prepared for therapeutic, prophylactic or diagnostic uses, antisera, other blood fractions and immunological products, whether or not modified or obtained by means of biotechnological processes; vaccines, toxins, cultures of micro-organisms (excluding yeasts) and similar products.

Finally, the document provides the applicable rates of duty for each tariff item, with separate rates for standard and preferential areas.
Summary:

The document provides a detailed list of various pharmaceutical products, their classification, and the corresponding tariff rates under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The products are classified based on their composition and intended use, and the tariff rates are expressed as a percentage of the assessable value of the goods. The classification includes several categories of pharmaceutical products, such as vaccines, medicaments, and other pharmaceutical goods.

Under the category of vaccines, there are several sub-categories, including those for tuberculosis, rabies, Japanese encephalitis, whopping cough, and other diseases. The tariff rates for these vaccines range from 10% to 20%. There are also provisions for mixed vaccines, such as DPT, DT, and MMR, with tariff rates ranging from 10% to 20%.

The category of medicaments includes various sub-categories, such as those containing penicillins, streptomycins, antibiotics, and other therapeutic or prophylactic substances. The tariff rates for these products range from 10% to 30%. There are also provisions for medicaments containing hormones, alkaloids, and other products, with tariff rates ranging from 10% to 30%.

The category of other pharmaceutical goods includes several sub-categories, such as human and animal blood, cultures of micro-organisms, toxins, and other products. The tariff rates for these products range from 10% to 30%.

It is important to note that the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, is a federal law in India, and the classification and tariff rates provided in this document are applicable throughout the country. The Act is administered by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC), which is responsible for the collection of customs duties and other indirect taxes. The CBIC is also responsible for the administration of various other laws related to international trade, such as the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992, and the Customs Act, 1962.

In conclusion, the document provides a comprehensive list of pharmaceutical products and their classification under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The tariff rates for these products are expressed as a percentage of the assessable value of the goods and are applicable throughout India. The classification and tariff rates are administered by the CBIC, which is responsible for the collection of customs duties and other indirect taxes.
Summary:

The document outlines various pharmaceutical products and their respective codes under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. These products are categorized into different groups based on their therapeutic or pharmacological properties. The first group includes anticancer drugs such as Cyclophosphamide, Methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil(5-FU), Bincristine, Vinblastine, Paclitaxel, Docetaxel, Etoposide, Actinomycin D, Dactinomycin, Doxorubicin, L-Asparaginase, Cisplatin, Carboplatin, and Tamoxifen. The second group consists of antitubercular drugs such as Isoniazid, Rifampicin, Pyrazinamide, Ethambutol, Streptomycin, Dapsone, and other antitubercular drugs. The third group includes antileprotic drugs such as Dapsone, Clofazimine, and other antileprotic drugs. The fourth group consists of antimalarial drugs such as Chloroquine, Amodiaquine, Mefloquine, Quinine, Chloroguamide, Pyrimethamine, and other antimalarial drugs.

The document also includes other pharmaceutical products such as Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory, Analgesics and Antipyratic drugs, Antihypertensive drugs, Antiepileptic drugs, Sulfa drugs not elsewhere specified or included, Preparations of enzymes, Veterinary medicinal preparations, not for human use, not elsewhere specified or included, Oral rehydration salts, Antibacterial formulations not elsewhere specified or included, Sedatives and Tranquilizers.

Furthermore, the document outlines various medical and surgical supplies such as Adhesive dressings and other articles having an adhesive layer, Cotton wool, medicated, Poultice of kaolin, Lint, medicated, Bandages, Burn therapy dressing soaked in protective gel, Micro pores surgical tapes, Corn removers and callous removers, Other, Sterile surgical catgut, similar sterile suture materials, Sterile laminaria and sterile laminaria tents, Sterile absorbable surgical or dental haemostatics, Sterile surgical or dental adhesion barriers, Blood grouping reagents, Opacifying preprations for X-ray examinations, Dental cements and other dental fillings, First-aid boxes and kits, Chemical contraceptive preparations based on hormones, on other products or on spermicides, Gel preparations designed to be used in human or veterinary medicine as a lubricant for parts of the body for surgical operations or physical examinations or as a coupling agent between the body and medical instruments, Appliances identifiable for ostomy use, and Waste Pharmaceuticals.

The document also includes notes regarding the classification of fertilizers under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The notes outline the different types of fertilizers that fall under various headings and subheadings, and the specific requirements for classification. The notes also clarify that certain products are excluded from the scope of the heading or subheading.
Summary:

The document provides a list of tariff items under Chapter 31, which covers fertilizers and related products. The chapter is divided into several headings, each covering a specific type of fertilizer.

Heading 3101 covers animal or vegetable fertilizers, whether or not mixed together or chemically treated. This includes guano, animal dung, and other animal excreta. The rate of duty for this heading is 10%.

Heading 3102 covers nitrogenous fertilizers, including urea, ammonium sulphate, and ammonium nitrate. The rate of duty for this heading is also 10%.

Heading 3103 covers phosphatic fertilizers, including superphosphates and other phosphates. The rate of duty for this heading is 10%.

Heading 3104 covers potassic fertilizers, including potassium chloride and potassium sulphate. The rate of duty for this heading is 2%.

Heading 3105 covers other fertilizers, including those containing two or three of the fertilizing elements nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. The rate of duty for this heading is 5%.

The chapter also includes a note that clarifies the coverage of certain products. For example, the chapter does not cover separate chemically defined elements or compounds, except those of heading 3203 or 3204, inorganic products of a kind used as luminophores, glass obtained from fused quartz or other fused silica, and also dyes and other colouring matter put up in forms or packings for retail sale, of heading 3212.

Chapter 32 covers tanning or dyeing extracts; tannins and their derivatives; dyes, pigments and other colouring matter; paints and varnishes; putty and other mastics; inks. However, the document only provides tariff items for tanning extracts of vegetable origin; tannins and their salts, ethers, esters and other derivatives under heading 3201. The rate of duty for this heading is 1% for quebracho extract, 2% for wattle extract, and 5% for other extracts. The chapter also includes a note that clarifies the coverage of certain products, such as tannates or other tannin derivatives of products of headings 2936 to 2939, 2941 or 3501 to 3504, and mastics of asphalt or other bituminous mastics.
This document lists various dyes and pigments, along with their corresponding tariff codes. The dyes are categorized into different types, including disperse dyes, acid dyes, basic dyes, direct dyes, vat dyes, and reactive dyes. Each dye type has a specific range of tariff codes assigned to it, and the document provides a comprehensive list of dyes under each category.

Disperse dyes include Disperse blue 1, Disperse blue 3, Disperse blue 5, Disperse blue 6, Disperse blue 14, Disperse blue 24, and other dyes. Acid dyes include Azo dyes, Acid yellows, Acid oranges, Acid red, Acid violets, Acid blues, Acid greens, Acid brown, and Acid blacks. Basic dyes include Basic yellow, Basic red, Basic violet, Basic blue, and Basic green. Direct dyes include Direct yellow, Direct red, Direct blue, Direct orange, Direct green, Direct brown, and Direct black. Vat dyes include Vat yellow, Vat orange, Vat red, Vat violet, Vat blue, Vat green, Vat brown, and Vat black. Reactive dyes include Yellows, Oranges, Reds, Violets, Blues, Greens, Browns, and Blacks.

The tariff codes for each dye type are provided in the document, along with the percentage of the total value of the goods to be added to the customs value for the calculation of the duty payable. For example, Disperse blue 1 has a tariff code of 2413: 3204 11 52 and a 10% duty rate.

In summary, this document provides a detailed list of various dyes and pigments with their corresponding tariff codes and duty rates. The dyes are categorized into different types, including disperse dyes, acid dyes, basic dyes, direct dyes, vat dyes, and reactive dyes. The tariff codes and duty rates are provided for each dye type, which will help in the calculation of the duty payable on these goods.
Summary:
This document describes various chemical compounds and products, specifically focusing on Indian laws related to these substances. The document includes a variety of azoic coupling components, azoic diazo components, and other colouring matters. These components are used in the production of textiles and are subject to specific regulations under Indian law.

The azoic coupling components listed in the document are identified by a series of codes, such as 3204 19 16, 3204 19 21, and 3204 19 22. These codes indicate the specific type of component and its permitted uses. For example, Azoic coupling component 14 (naphthol kg. 1[10%] ASPH) is identified by the code 3204 19 21.

Similarly, the azoic diazo components are also identified by codes, such as 3204 19 31, 3204 19 32, and 3204 19 33. These components are used in the production of textiles and are subject to specific regulations under Indian law.

The document also includes a list of other colouring matters, such as pigments, preparations based on titanium dioxide, and inorganic products used as luminophores. These substances are also subject to specific regulations under Indian law.

Overall, this document provides important information about the chemical compounds and products that are subject to Indian laws and regulations. By understanding these laws and regulations, companies can ensure that they are complying with all applicable requirements and avoiding any potential legal issues.
Summary:

This document pertains to the Indian Tariff Act, specifically focusing on Chapter 33, which covers Essential Oils and Resinoids; Perfumery, Cosmetic or Toilet Preparations. The chapter is divided into several headings, each covering different types of products.

Heading 3301 covers Essential Oils, Resinoids, Extracted Oleoresins, Concentrates of Essential Oils in Fats, in Fixed Oils, in Waxes or the Like, Obtained by Enfleurage or Maceration, Terpenic By-Products of the Deterpenation of Essential Oils, Aqueous Distillates and Aqueous Solutions of Essential Oils. The heading is further divided into several subheadings, covering essential oils of citrus fruit, essential oils other than those of citrus fruit, anise oil, cajeput oil, cananga oil, caraway oil, cassia oil, cedar wood oil, cinnamon bark oil, cinnamon leaf oil, clove leaf or stem, oil, coriander seed oil, dill oil, eucalyptus oil, fennel seed oil, ginger oil, ginger grass oil, clove bud oil, tuberose concentrate, nutmeg oil, palmarosa oil, patchouli oil, pepper oil, petitgrain oil, sandalwood oil, rose oil, camphor oil, lemon grass oil, ylang ylang oil, davana oil, cumin oil, celery seed oil, garlic oil, paprika oil, turmeric oil, spices’ oils not elsewhere specified or included, resinoids, flavouring essences, all types, including those for liquors, oleoresins of spices not elsewhere specified or included, attars of all kinds in fixed oil base, mustard oil aroma essence of ambrettolide (ambrette seed oil essence), concentrates of essential oils in fats, in fixed oils or in waxes or the like, obtained by cold absorption or by maceration, terpenic by-products of the deterpenation of essential oils, aqueous distillates of essential oils, not elsewhere specified or included, and aqueous solutions of essential oils.

Heading 3302 covers Mixtures of Odoriferous Substances and Mixtures (including Alcoholic Solutions) with a Basis of One or More of These Substances, of a Kind Used as Raw Materials in Industry; Other Preparations Based on Odoriferous Substances, of a Kind Used for the Manufacture of Beverages. The heading is further divided into several subheadings, covering mixtures of a kind used in the food or drink industries, synthetic flavouring essences, other mixtures, aleuritic acid, and other preparations.

Heading 3303 covers Perfumes and Toilet Waters. The heading is further divided into several subheadings, covering eau-de-cologne, rose water, keora water, perfumes and perfumery compounds not containing spirit, perfumes containing spirit, spirituous toilet preparations not elsewhere specified or included, and other perfumes and toilet waters.

Heading 3304 covers Beauty or Make-Up Preparations and Preparations for the Care of the Skin (other than Medicaments), Including Sunscreen or Suntan Preparations; Manicure or Pedicure Preparations. The heading is further divided into several subheadings, covering lip make-up preparations, eye make-up preparations, manicure or pedicure preparations, powders, face creams, nail polish or lacquers, moisturising lotion, sindur, bindi, kumkum, turmeric preparations, and other beauty or make-up preparations.

The document also includes notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of goods under this chapter. For example, note 1 states that this chapter does not cover natural oleoresins or vegetable extracts of heading 1301 or 1302, soap or other products of heading 3401, or gum, wood or sulphate turpentine or other products of heading 3805. Note 2 states that the expression “odoriferous substances” in heading 3302 refers only to the substances of heading 3301, to odoriferous constituents isolated from those substances or to synthetic aromatics. Note 3 states that headings 3303 to 3307 apply, inter alia, to products, whether or not mixed, suitable for use as goods of these headings and put up in packings of a kind sold by retail for such use. Note 4 states that the expression “perfumery, cosmetic or toilet preparations” in heading 3307 applies, inter alia, to the following products: scented sachets; odoriferous preparations which operate by burning; perfumed papers and papers impregnated or coated with cosmetics; contact lens or artificial eye solutions; wadding, felt and non-wovens, impregnated, coated or covered with perfume or cosmetics; animal toilet preparations.

In summary, this document provides a detailed breakdown of the Indian Tariff Act's classification of essential oils, resinoids, perfumery, cosmetic, or toilet preparations, and related products. It includes specific subheadings for various types of essential oils, resinoids, flavouring essences, mixtures, perfumes, toilet waters, and beauty or make-up preparations. The document also includes notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of goods under this chapter.
Summary:

The document lists various products and their corresponding tariff item descriptions, unit rates of duty, and standard/preferential areas. The products are categorized under different headings, including those related to Indian laws.

Heading 3305 covers shampoos, with two subheadings: one for shampoos containing spirit and another for other shampoos. The tariff item description for shampoos containing spirit includes 10 kg. with 20% rate of duty, while the other shampoos have a tariff item description of 90 kg. with 20% rate of duty.

Heading 3306 covers preparations for oral or dental hygiene, including denture fixative pastes and powders, yarn used to clean between the teeth, and other preparations. The tariff item descriptions and rates of duty vary for different products under this heading.

Heading 3307 covers pre-shave, shaving or after-shave preparations, personal deodorants, bath preparations, depilatories, and other perfumery, cosmetic, or toilet preparations, not elsewhere specified or included; prepared room deodorizers, whether or not perfumed or having disinfectant properties. The tariff item descriptions and rates of duty vary for different products under this heading.

Heading 3401 covers soap, organic surface-active agents, washing preparations, lubricating preparations, artificial waxes, prepared waxes, polishing or scouring preparations, candles and similar articles, modelling pastes, dental waxes, and dental preparations with a basis of plaster. The tariff item descriptions and rates of duty vary for different products under this heading.

Heading 3402 covers organic surface-active agents, whether or not put up for retail sale, and surface-active preparations, washing preparations (including auxiliary washing preparations) and cleaning preparations, whether or not containing soap, other than those of heading 3401. The tariff item descriptions and rates of duty vary for different products under this heading.

The document also includes notes on the classification of goods under different headings, including those related to Indian laws. For example, Note 1 under Chapter 34 states that this chapter does not cover edible mixtures or preparations of animal or vegetable fats or oils of a kind used as mould release preparations, separate chemically defined compounds, or shampoos, dentifrices, shaving creams and foams, or bath preparations, containing soap or other organic surface-active agents.

The document further provides the rates of duty for the goods classified under different headings and standard/preferential areas. The rates of duty vary for different products and areas.

In summary, the document lists various products and their corresponding tariff item descriptions, unit rates of duty, and standard/preferential areas. The products are categorized under different headings, including those related to Indian laws, and the rates of duty vary for different products and areas. The document also includes notes on the classification of goods under different headings, including those related to Indian laws.
Summary:

The document appears to be a tariff schedule for various products, specifically focusing on Indian laws. The schedule is divided into several chapters, each covering a specific type of product. The chapters relevant to this task are Chapter 17, which covers vegetable fats and oils, and Chapter 35, which covers albuminoidal substances, modified starches, glues, enzymes, and other similar products.

Under Chapter 17, the schedule covers vegetable fats and oils, including preparations used for the oil or grease treatment of textile materials, leather, fur skins, or other materials. The schedule includes several headings for different types of preparations, including those containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals, and those containing other substances. The rate of duty for each heading varies, and the schedule includes a specific rate for each type of preparation.

Under Chapter 35, the schedule covers albuminoidal substances, modified starches, glues, enzymes, and other similar products. The chapter includes several headings for different types of products, including casein, caseinates, and other casein derivatives; albumins, albuminates, and other albumin derivatives; gelatin and gelatin derivatives; peptones and their derivatives; and other protein substances and their derivatives. The rate of duty for each heading varies, and the schedule includes a specific rate for each type of product.

The schedule also includes several notes that provide additional guidance on how to interpret the schedule. For example, Note 1 under Chapter 36 states that the chapter does not cover separate chemically defined compounds other than those described in Note 2(a) or (b). Note 2(a) states that the expression "articles of combustible materials" in heading 3606 applies only to certain types of fuels and resin torches.

Overall, the document provides a detailed tariff schedule for various products, specifically focusing on Indian laws. The schedule includes specific rates of duty for different types of products, as well as notes that provide additional guidance on how to interpret the schedule.
Summary:

The document appears to be a Customs Tariff Schedule for various goods, specifically related to Indian laws. It includes different categories of goods with their respective tariff item descriptions, unit rates of duty, and applicable rates for standard, preferential areas, and others. The goods listed are primarily related to photography, cinematography, explosives, fireworks, matches, and other related items.

The tariff schedule includes the following categories:

* Industrial explosives and safety fuses
* Detonating fuses, percussion or detonating caps, igniters, and electric detonators
* Fireworks, signalling flares, rain rockets, fog signals, and other pyrotechnic articles
* Matches, other than pyrotechnic articles
* Ferro-cerium and other pyrophoric alloys in all forms; articles of combustible materials
* Photographic or cinematographic goods

Some notable tariff items include:

* Photographic plates and film in the flat, sensitised, unexposed, of any material other than paper, paperboard, or textiles
* Photographic film in rolls, sensitised, unexposed, of any material other than paper, paperboard, or textiles
* Photographic paper, paperboard, and textiles, sensitised, unexposed
* Photographic plates and film, exposed but not developed
* Photographic plates and film, exposed and developed, other than cinematographic film
* Cinematographic film, exposed and developed, whether or not incorporating sound track or consisting only of sound track

The tariff schedule also includes specific notes and a supplementary note related to the interpretation of the categories and the applicable rates for different goods. For instance, the term "Central Board of Film Certification" refers to the authority established under law in India for the purpose of certifying films.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive list of goods and their respective tariff rates, which are essential for the import and export of goods in India. It helps regulate and facilitate international trade while ensuring that the appropriate duties and taxes are levied on imported and exported goods.
Summary:

The document provides a detailed list of various types of films and chemical preparations for photographic uses, classified under different headings and sub-headings in the Indian Customs Tariff. The headings include feature films in black and white and color, children's films, documentary shots, advertisement shots, educational films, short films, and other miscellaneous films. The chemical preparations for photographic uses include sensitizing emulsions, chemical products mixed or compounded for photographic uses, and miscellaneous chemical products.

Heading 3706 covers various types of films, including feature films, children's films, documentaries, advertisement shots, educational films, and short films. Feature films are classified based on their length and color, with separate sub-headings for black and white films and color films. Children's films are classified as patch prints or those certified by the Central Board of Film Certification to be "Children's Film". Documentary shots and films certified as such by the Central Board of Film Certification are also covered under this heading.

Heading 3707 covers chemical preparations for photographic uses, including sensitizing emulsions and chemical products mixed or compounded for photographic uses. Sensitizing emulsions are classified under sub-heading 3707 10, while other chemical products mixed or compounded for photographic uses are classified under sub-heading 3707 90.

Heading 3808 covers insecticides, rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, anti-sprouting products, and plant-growth regulators, disinfectants, and similar products. Sub-headings 3808 52 and 3808 59 cover goods of heading 3808, containing certain specified substances. Sub-heading 3808 59 also covers dustable powder formulations containing a mixture of benomyl, carbofuran, and thiram. Sub-headings 3808 61 to 3808 69 cover goods of heading 3808, containing certain other specified substances.

Heading 3822 covers certified reference materials, which are reference materials accompanied by a certificate indicating the values of the certified properties, the methods used to determine these values, and the degree of certainty associated with each value. Heading 3824 includes cultured crystals, fusel oil, ink removers, stencil correctors, other correcting fluids and correction tapes, and ceramic firing testers, fusible.

Heading 3825 covers municipal waste, sewage sludge, and other wastes. Municipal waste includes waste from households, hotels, restaurants, hospitals, shops, offices, road and pavement sweepings, as well as construction and demolition waste. Sewage sludge means sludge arising from urban effluent treatment plant and includes pre-treatment waste, scourings, and unstabilized sludge. Other wastes include clinical waste, waste organic solvents, wastes of metal pickling liquors, hydraulic fluids, brake fluids, and anti-freezing fluids, and other wastes from chemical or allied industries.

Heading 3826 covers biodiesel, which means mono-alkyl esters of fatty acids of a kind used as a fuel, derived from animal or vegetable fats and oils whether or not used.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive list of various types of films and chemical preparations for photographic uses, classified under different headings and sub-headings in the Indian Customs Tariff. The classification is based on the nature and composition of the goods, and the sub-headings provide further details on the specific type of goods covered.
Summary:

This document provides a list of goods and their corresponding tariff codes, along with the applicable rate of duty, under the Indian Customs Tariff. The goods are classified under various headings and subheadings, which are organized based on their nature and use. The headings and subheadings provide a detailed description of the goods, and the tariff codes assigned to them are used for customs clearance and other regulatory purposes.

The document includes several headings and subheadings related to chemical products, such as artificial graphite, activated carbon, tall oil, residual lyes from the manufacture of wood pulp, gum, wood or sulphate turpentine and other terpenic oils, rosin and resin acids and derivatives, wood tar, wood tar oils, wood creosote, wood naphtha, vegetable pitch, brewers' pitch, insecticides, rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, anti-sprouting products, plant-growth regulators, disinfectants, and similar products.

Under each heading or subheading, the goods are further classified based on their specific properties or uses. For example, under heading 3801, artificial graphite is classified into several subheadings based on its physical form, such as blocks, plates, or other semi-manufactures. Similarly, under heading 3806, rosin and resin acids are classified into several subheadings based on their specific type, such as gum rosin, salts of rosin, ester gums, and run gums.

The tariff codes assigned to each heading or subheading are used to determine the applicable rate of duty. The rate of duty is expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the goods and is specified in the document for each tariff code. The rates of duty vary depending on the nature and use of the goods, with some goods being subject to higher rates of duty than others.

The document also includes several supplementary notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of certain goods. For example, note 1 to chapter 38 provides a list of goods that are subject to specific restrictions or prohibitions under Indian law. Note 2 to chapter 38 provides guidance on the classification of certain chemical products, such as insecticides and fungicides, based on their active ingredients.

Overall, this document provides a detailed and comprehensive classification of various goods under the Indian Customs Tariff, along with the applicable rate of duty and other relevant information. It serves as an important reference for businesses and individuals involved in international trade with India, as it helps ensure compliance with Indian customs regulations and other legal requirements.
This document appears to be a list of various chemical products and preparations, organized by their respective tariff headings and subheadings. Here is a summary of the main points:

1. Gum inhibitors, viscosity improvers, anti-corrosive preparations, and other prepared additives for mineral oils or liquids used for the same purposes as mineral oils are classified under tariff heading 3811.
2. Additives for lubricating oils containing petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals are classified under tariff heading 3811.
3. Prepared rubber accelerators, compound plasticizers for rubber or plastics, and other compound stabilizers for plastics are classified under tariff heading 3812.
4. Preparations and charges for fire-extinguishers, and charged fire-extinguishing grenades are classified under tariff heading 3814.
5. Organic composite solvents and thinners, not elsewhere specified or included, and prepared paint or varnish removers are classified under tariff heading 3814.
6. Supported catalysts with nickel or nickel compounds as the active substance, and supported catalysts with precious metal or precious metal compounds as the active substance are classified under tariff heading 3815.
7. Refractory cements, mortars, concretes, and similar compositions, other than products of heading 3801, are classified under tariff heading 3817.
8. Mixed alkyl benzenes and mixed alkyl naphthalenes, other than those of heading 2707 or 2902, are classified under tariff heading 3817.
9. Chemical elements doped for use in electronics, in the form of discs, wafers, or similar forms, and chemical compounds doped for use in electronics are classified under tariff heading 3818.
10. Hydraulic brake fluids and other prepared liquids for hydraulic transmission, not containing or containing less than 70% by weight of petroleum oils or oils obtained from bituminous minerals, are classified under tariff heading 3819.
11. Anti-freezing preparations and prepared de-icing fluids are classified under tariff heading 3820.
12. Prepared culture media for development or maintenance of micro-organisms (including viruses and the like) or of plant, human, or animal cells are classified under tariff heading 3821.
13. Diagnostic or laboratory reagents on a backing, prepared diagnostic or laboratory reagents whether or not on a backing, other than those of heading 3002 or 3006, and certified reference materials are classified under tariff heading 3822.
14. Industrial mono carboxylic fatty acids, acid oils from refining, and industrial fatty alcohols are classified under tariff heading 3823.
15. Prepared binders for foundry moulds or cores, chemical products and preparations of the chemical or allied industries (including those consisting of mixtures of natural products), not elsewhere specified or included, are classified under tariff heading 3824.
16. Non-agglomerated metal carbides mixed together or with metallic binders, prepared additives for cements, mortars, or concretes, non-refractory mortars and concretes, and sorbitol other than that of subheading 2905 44 are classified under tariff heading 3824.
17. Goods specified in Sub-heading Note 3 to this Chapter are classified under tariff heading 3824.
18. Mixtures containing halogenated derivatives of methane, ethane, or propane are classified under tariff heading 3824.
19. Residual products of the chemical or allied industries, not elsewhere specified or included, municipal waste, sewage sludge, other wastes specified in Note 6 to this Chapter are classified under tariff heading 3825.
20. Biodiesel and mixtures thereof, not containing or containing less than 70% by weight of petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminous minerals, are classified under tariff heading 3826.

It's important to note that this is just a summary of the main points and does not include all the details of the document. If you need more specific information about any of the tariff headings or subheadings, I would recommend consulting the original document or a legal expert.
Summary:

This document is related to the classification of goods in the Indian Customs Tariff Schedule. It provides detailed rules for classifying various types of goods, with a specific focus on plastics and articles thereof. The document includes definitions, exceptions, and notes that provide guidance on how to classify these goods.

The document begins by defining "plastics" as materials of headings 3901 to 3914 that are capable of being formed into shapes by moulding, casting, extruding, rolling, or other processes. The document then explains that goods classified in Chapter 39 must consist of plastics or articles thereof, and must meet certain criteria regarding their intended use and composition.

The document then provides a list of exceptions for goods that are not covered by Chapter 39, including lubricating preparations, waxes, chemically defined organic compounds, heparin or its salts, solutions with more than 50% solvent, stamping foils, organic surface active agents, run gums or ester gums, prepared additives for mineral oils, prepared hydraulic fluids, diagnostic or laboratory reagents on a backing of plastics, synthetic rubber and articles thereof, saddlery or harness, trunks, suitcases, handbags or other containers, plaits, wickerwork or other articles of Chapter 46, wall coverings of heading 4814, textiles and textile articles, machines and mechanical or electrical appliances, parts of aircraft or vehicles, optical elements, spectacle frames, drawing instruments, clock or watch cases, musical instruments or parts thereof, furniture, lamps and lighting fittings, illuminated signs, prefabricated buildings, toys, games, sports requisites, brushes, buttons, slide fasteners, combs, mouth-pieces or stems for smoking pipes, cigarette holders or the like, parts of vacuum flasks or the like, pens, propelling pencils, and monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles.

The document then provides rules for classifying goods of a kind produced by chemical synthesis in headings 3901 to 3911. These rules specify that the goods must be produced by chemical synthesis and must fall into certain categories, including liquid synthetic polyolefins, resins, silicones, and resols. The document also provides rules for classifying copolymers and polymer blends.

The document then provides rules for classifying chemically modified polymers, which are those in which only appendages to the main polymer chain have been changed by chemical reaction. These polymers are to be classified in the heading appropriate to the unmodified polymer.

The document also includes rules for classifying certain types of goods, such as primary forms, waste, parings and scrap of a single thermoplastic material, tubes, pipes and hoses, wall or ceiling coverings of plastics, plates, sheets, film, foil and strip, and certain articles not covered by earlier headings.

Finally, the document includes subheading notes that provide guidance on how to classify polymers, copolymers, and chemically modified polymers within any one heading of this Chapter.
The document provided appears to be a list of tariff items and their corresponding rates of duty for various polymers and chemical products. The items are organized into several categories, including primary forms of polymers, acrylic polymers, polyamides, amino-resins, phenolic resins, and silicones. Within each category, the items are further divided into subcategories based on the specific type of polymer or chemical derivative.

For example, in the category of primary forms of polymers, there are subcategories for polymers of ethylene, propylene, styrene, vinyl chloride, vinyl acetate, and other vinyl polymers. Each subcategory contains a list of specific types of polymers with their corresponding rates of duty. For instance, in the subcategory of polymers of ethylene, there are separate listings for low density polyethylene (LDPE), linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE), high density polyethylene (HDPE), and ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymers.

The rates of duty are expressed as a percentage of the value of the goods, and they vary depending on the type of polymer or chemical derivative. Some items have a standard rate of duty, while others have a preferential rate for goods imported from certain countries or regions. The rates of duty are also subject to change based on various factors, such as changes in trade agreements or tariff policies.

Overall, the document provides a detailed classification of various polymers and chemical products, along with their corresponding rates of duty. This information is important for businesses and governments involved in the import and export of these products, as it helps to determine the applicable taxes and duties that must be paid.
Summary:

The document provides a detailed list of various plastic and polymer products, along with their corresponding HS codes. The list includes cellulose acetate flakes, cellulose acetate moulding powder, cellulose nitrate, cellulose ethers, carboxymethyl cellulose and its salts, chemical derivatives of natural rubber, ion-exchangers based on polymers, waste, parings, and scrap of plastics, semimanufactures, articles, monofilament, rods, sticks, and profile shapes, tubes, pipes, and hoses, and fittings therefor, floor coverings, self-adhesive plates, sheets, film, foil, tape, strip, and other flat shapes, and other plates, sheets, film, foil, and strip, non-cellular and not reinforced, laminated, supported, or similarly combined with other materials.

Under Indian laws, these products are subject to various taxes, duties, and regulations, as determined by their HS codes. The HS code is a standardized system of codes used to classify traded products, and it is used by customs authorities around the world to determine the applicable tariffs and taxes.

In India, the HS code is used in conjunction with the Indian Trade Classification (ITC) system, which is maintained by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC). The ITC system provides a more detailed classification of goods than the HS code, and it is used to determine the applicable rates of goods and services tax (GST) and other indirect taxes.

Therefore, it is essential to correctly classify these plastic and polymer products under the appropriate HS code and ITC code to ensure compliance with Indian laws and regulations. Failure to do so can result in penalties, fines, and other legal consequences. It is recommended to consult with a qualified tax professional or legal advisor to ensure accurate classification and compliance with Indian laws.
The document appears to be a list of various products made of different types of plastics, including polymers of vinyl chloride, polymers of styrene, polyurethanes, regenerated cellulose, and other plastics. The products are categorized based on their properties, such as rigid or flexible, plain or lacquered, metallized or laminated, and their intended use, such as for packaging, sanitary ware, conveyance or packing of goods, and household articles.

The list includes various types of sheets, plates, film, foil, and strip, as well as boxes, cases, crates, sacks, bags, spools, bobbins, stoppers, lids, caps, and other closures, carboys, bottles, flasks, and similar articles, and other articles. The products are further classified based on their composition, such as containing a certain percentage of plasticizers, and their physical characteristics, such as being rigid or flexible, plain or lacquered, metallized or laminated.

The list also includes various types of baths, shower-baths, sinks, wash-basins, bidets, lavatory pans, seats, and covers, and similar sanitary ware, as well as articles for the conveyance or packing of goods, and tableware, kitchenware, and other household articles and hygienic or toilet articles.

The document also specifies the applicable HS code for each product, which is a system used to classify traded products and determine the applicable customs duties and taxes. The HS code for each product is indicated in the format "39**", followed by a series of digits.

It is important to note that this document does not contain any specific Indian laws, acts, or articles. It is a list of products made of different types of plastics, along with their HS codes, which can be used for various purposes, including customs clearance, trade statistics, and tariff analysis.
This document appears to be a list of tariff codes and descriptions for various products made of rubber or containing rubber. The codes are organized into chapters and headings, with notes providing additional guidance on how to classify certain products. The document begins with a definition of "rubber" as a broad category that includes natural rubber, synthetic rubber, and reclaimed rubber. It also specifies that this chapter does not cover textiles, footwear, headgear, mechanical or electrical appliances, certain articles of Chapters 90, 92, 94, 96, or 95 (other than sports gloves, mittens, and articles of headings 4011 to 4013). 

The document then goes on to provide more specific definitions and rules for classifying products within this chapter. For example, it specifies that certain headings only apply to primary forms of rubber, such as liquids, pastes, blocks, lumps, bales, powders, granules, and crumbs. It also provides a detailed definition of synthetic rubber, which includes unsaturated synthetic substances that can be vulcanized into non-thermoplastic substances with certain properties. 

The document also includes a number of notes that provide additional guidance on how to classify certain products. For example, Note 1 states that the expression "rubber" includes natural rubber, balata, gutta-percha, guayule, chicle, and similar natural gums, synthetic rubber, factice derived from oils, and reclaimed rubber. Note 2 states that this chapter does not cover certain types of goods, such as textiles, footwear, headgear, mechanical or electrical appliances, and certain articles of Chapters 90, 92, 94, 96, or 95. 

The document also includes a number of headings with tariff codes and descriptions for specific types of rubber products. For example, Heading 4001 covers natural rubber, balata, gutta-percha, guayule, chicle, and similar natural gums in primary forms or in plates, sheets, or strip. This heading is further divided into subheadings that cover specific types of natural rubber products, such as natural rubber latex (prevulcanised or other than prevulcanised), smoked sheets, technically specified natural rubber (TSNR), Hevea, pale crepe, estate brown crepe, and oil extended natural rubber. Each subheading includes a tariff code and a percentage rate of duty. 

Overall, this document appears to be a list of tariff codes and descriptions for various rubber products that are subject to import duties in India. It provides detailed definitions and rules for classifying these products, as well as tariff codes and duty rates for specific types of rubber products.
Summary:

The document appears to be a list of tariff classifications for various rubber products under the Harmonized System (HS). The HS is an international nomenclature for the classification of products that is used by customs authorities around the world to determine the applicable tariff rates for imported goods. The list includes a wide range of rubber products, including natural and synthetic rubbers, rubber threads and cords, plates, sheets, and strips, tubes, pipes, and hoses, conveyor or transmission belts or belting, and pneumatic tires.

Each classification is assigned a unique code, which consists of six digits. The first two digits indicate the chapter of the HS, while the next two digits specify the heading within that chapter. The last two digits provide further details about the product, such as its specific type or use. For example, the code "4002" refers to rubber, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip, while the code "4002 11" refers to latex.

The document also includes notes and explanations for certain classifications, which provide additional guidance on how to apply the HS codes. For example, the note for the classification "4002 19" states that it includes other natural gums, such as balata, gutta-percha, guayule, and chicle.

It is important to note that the tariff classifications listed in this document are specific to India and may not be applicable in other countries. Additionally, the tariff rates for these classifications may be subject to change over time.
Summary:
This document appears to be a table listing various types of goods and their corresponding tariff codes and rates of duty. The goods are categorized into different chapters, with each chapter covering a specific type of product. For example, Chapter 41 covers raw hides and skins (other than furskins) and leather, while Chapter 42 covers articles of rubber, including tyres and inner tubes, and hygienic or pharmaceutical articles. Within each chapter, the goods are further divided into headings and subheadings, with each heading and subheading having a unique tariff code. The tariff codes are used to determine the rate of duty that will be applied to the goods when they are imported into a country. The rates of duty vary depending on the type of goods and their origin. For example, whole hides and skins of bovine animals (including buffalo) that are unsplit and have a weight per skin not exceeding 8 kg when simply dried, 10 kg when dry-salted, or 16 kg when fresh, wet-salted or otherwise preserved, are duty-free when imported into the standard preferential areas. However, whole hides and skins of bovine animals (including buffalo) that are unsplit and have a weight per skin exceeding 16 kg are subject to a duty of 10% when imported into the standard preferential areas. The document also includes notes that provide additional guidance on how the tariff codes should be applied. For example, Note 1(C) states that raw hides and skins with the hair or wool on, raw, tanned or dressed, are not covered by Chapter 41 and should be classified in Chapter 43 instead. Similarly, Note 2(A) states that headings 4104 to 4106 do not cover hides and skins that have undergone a tanning (including pre-tanning) process which is reversible. Instead, these hides and skins should be classified in headings 4101 to 4103, as appropriate. Overall, this document is a useful resource for determining the tariff classification and duty rate for various types of goods.
Summary:

The document outlines the Harmonized System (HS) code for various leather and fur products. The HS code is used for the classification of goods in international trade. The code 4113 refers to leather further prepared after tanning or crusting, including parchment-dressed leather, of other animals, without wool or hair on, whether or not split. The code is further divided into subcategories based on the type of animal the leather comes from, including goats, kids, swine, reptiles, and others. The code 4114 covers chamois (including combination chamois) leather, patent leather, patent laminated leather, and metallised leather. The code 4115 covers composition leather with a basis of leather or leather fiber, in slabs, sheets or strip, whether or not in rolls; parings and other waste of leather or of composition leather, not suitable for the manufacture of leather articles; leather dust, powder and flour. The code 4202 covers trunks, suitcases, vanity-cases, executive cases, briefcases, school satchels and similar containers; travelling-bags, insulated food or beverages bags, toilet bags, rucksacks, handbags, shopping bags, wallets, purses, map cases, cigarette-cases, tobacco-pouches, tool bags, sports bags, bottle-cases, jewellery boxes, powder-boxes, cutlery cases and similar containers, of leather or of composition leather, of sheeting of plastics, of textile materials, of vulcanised fibre or of paperboard, or wholly or mainly covered with such materials or with paper. The code 4203 covers articles of apparel and clothing accessories, of leather or of composition leather. The code 4205 covers straps other than for machinery or harness. The code 4206 covers articles of gut (other than silk-worm gut), of old beater's skin, of bladders or of tendons. Chapter 43 covers fur skins and artificial fur; manufactures thereof. The note to this chapter states that references to "Fur skins", other than to raw Fur skins of heading 4301, apply to hides or skins of all animals which have been tanned or dressed with the hair or wool on.

The Indian laws and regulations related to these HS codes would be found in the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Indian Customs Tariff Rules, 1995. These laws and regulations provide the legal framework for the classification, valuation, and payment of duties on imported and exported goods in India. They also provide for the administration and enforcement of the HS code system in India.

In summary, the document provides the HS codes for various leather and fur products, and the Indian laws and regulations related to these codes would be found in the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Indian Customs Tariff Rules, 1995. These laws and regulations provide the legal framework for the classification, valuation, and payment of duties on imported and exported goods in India, and they also provide for the administration and enforcement of the HS code system in India.
The document provided is a table listing various types of fur skins, tanned or dressed fur skins, and articles of fur skin, along with their corresponding rates of duty. The table is divided into several sections, each with its own unique heading.

The first section, Heading 4301, covers raw fur skins (including heads, tails, paws, and other pieces or cuttings suitable for furriers' use) other than raw hides and skins of Heading 4101, 4102, or 4103. The section includes several subheadings, each with a specific type of fur skin and its corresponding rate of duty. For example, raw mink skins with or without head, tail, or paws have a rate of duty of 15%, while raw lamb skins (except Astrakhan, Broadtail, Caracul, Persian, and similar lamb) have a rate of duty of free.

The second section, Heading 4302, covers tanned or dressed fur skins (including heads, tails, paws, and other pieces or cuttings) unassembled or assembled (without the addition of other materials) other than those of Heading 4303. The section includes several subheadings, each with a specific type of tanned or dressed fur skin and its corresponding rate of duty. For example, whole skins of mink, with or without head, tail, or paws, have a rate of duty of 10%, while whole skins of other fur skins (including calf skins, hides or skins of other bovine and equine animals, goat and kid skins, and hides and skins of other animals) have a rate of duty of 10%.

The third section, Heading 4303, covers articles of apparel, clothing accessories, and other articles of fur skin. The section includes several subheadings, each with a specific type of fur skin article and its corresponding rate of duty. For example, articles of apparel and clothing accessories of wild animals covered under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 have a rate of duty of 10%, while articles of apparel and clothing accessories of animals covered under the Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species (CITES) have a rate of duty of 10%.

The fourth section, Heading 4304, covers artificial fur and articles thereof. The section includes several subheadings, each with a specific type of artificial fur or article thereof and its corresponding rate of duty. For example, artificial fur as trimmings and embellishments for garments, made-ups, knitwear, plastic and leather goods have a rate of duty of 10%, while other articles of artificial fur have a rate of duty of 10%.

The document also includes several notes and sub-heading notes that provide additional information on the classification and rates of duty for the various types of fur skins, tanned or dressed fur skins, and articles of fur skin. For example, Note 1 states that any reference to "wood" in a heading of this Chapter applies also to bamboos and other materials of a woody nature, while Sub-heading Note 1 defines "wood pellets" as by-products such as cutter shavings, sawdust, or chips of the mechanical wood processing industry, furniture-making industry, or other wood transformation activities, which have been agglomerated either directly by compression or by the addition of a binder in a proportion not exceeding 3% by weight. Such pellets are cylindrical, with a diameter not exceeding 25 mm and a length not exceeding 100 mm.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive list of various types of fur skins, tanned or dressed fur skins, and articles of fur skin, along with their corresponding rates of duty. The document is intended to be used as a reference for determining the rates of duty for these types of goods when importing or exporting them into or out of India.
Summary:
The document outlines various Indian laws related to the import of different types of wood and wood products. The laws specify the tariff rates for various categories of wood and wood products, including coniferous and non-coniferous wood, wooden sticks, hoop wood, split poles, piles, pickets and stakes of wood, wooden sticks, roughly trimmed but not turned, bent or otherwise worked, suitable for the manufacture of walking sticks, umbrellas, tool handles or the like; chip wood and the like, railway or tramway sleepers (crossties) of wood, wood sawn or chipped lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded or end jointed, of a thickness exceeding 6 mm, sheets for veneering (including those obtained by slicing laminated wood), for plywood or similar laminated wood and other wood, sawn lengthwise, sliced or peeled, whether or not planed, sanded, spliced or end-jointed, of a thickness not exceeding 6 mm, wood (including strips and friezes for parquet flooring, not assembled) continuously shaped (tongued, grooved, rebated, chamfered, V-jointed, beaded, moulded, rounded or the like) along any of its edges or faces, whether or not planed, sanded or end-jointed, particle board, oriented strand board (OSB) and similar board of wood or other ligneous materials, whether or not agglomerated with resins or other organic binding substances, fiber board of wood or other ligneous materials, whether or not bonded with resins or other organic substances, and other wood and wood products. The laws also specify the tariff rates for different types of wood, including pine, fir, spruce, oak, beech, birch, poplar, eucalyptus, and other woods. The tariff rates vary depending on the type of wood and its intended use. The laws also specify that the tariff rates are subject to change and may be revised from time to time. It is important to note that the tariff rates mentioned in this document are for informational purposes only and may not be up-to-date. Importers are advised to check the current tariff rates with the relevant authorities before importing any wood or wood products into India.
Summary:

The document lists various Indian laws related to the import of goods. The goods are categorized under different tariff items, with each tariff item having a specific rate of duty. The goods are classified based on their material, composition, and intended use.

The document begins with tariff items related to cork and articles of cork. It includes natural cork, raw or simply prepared, waste cork, crushed, granulated, or ground cork, and articles of natural cork, such as corks and stoppers. The rate of duty for these items is 10%.

The document then moves on to tariff items related to manufactures of straw, esparto, or other plaiting materials, basketware, and wickerwork. The plaiting materials include straw, osier or willow, bamboos, rattan, rushes, reeds, strips of wood, strips of other vegetable material, unspun natural textile fibers, monofilament and strip and the like of plastics, and strips of paper. The rate of duty for these items varies from 10% to 20%.

The document also includes tariff items related to wooden frames for paintings, photographs, mirrors, or similar objects, packing cases, boxes, crates, drums, and similar packings, of wood; cable-drums of wood; pallets, box pallets, and other load boards, of wood; pallet collars of wood; casks, barrels, vats, tubs, and other coopers' products and parts thereof, of wood, including staves; tools, tool bodies, tool handles, broom or brush bodies, and handles, of wood; boot or shoe lasts and trees, of wood; builders' joinery and carpentry of wood, including cellular wood panels, assembled flooring panels, shingles, and shakes; tableware and kitchenware, of wood, including bread boards, chopping boards, and similar boards, chopsticks, and other articles; inlaid wood marquetry and wood; caskets and cases for jewelry or cutlery, and similar articles, of wood; statuettes and other ornaments, of wood; wooden articles of furniture not falling in Chapter 94; and other articles of wood. The rate of duty for these items varies from 10% to 40%.

The document also includes notes and explanations regarding the classification of goods, the application of rates of duty, and the interpretation of the tariff items. For example, the document notes that the expression "plaiting materials" means materials in a state or form suitable for plaiting, interlacing, or similar processes, and it includes straw, osier or willow, bamboos, rattan, rushes, reeds, strips of wood, strips of other vegetable material, unspun natural textile fibers, monofilament and strip and the like of plastics, and strips of paper. The document also notes that the expression "cellular wood panels" means panels consisting of a core of cellular wood, such as honeycomb panels, and having a surface on each side of the core.

In summary, the document provides a detailed list of tariff items related to various goods imported into India, along with the applicable rates of duty and explanations regarding the classification of goods. The tariff items cover a wide range of products, including cork and articles of cork, manufactures of straw, esparto, or other plaiting materials, basketware, and wickerwork, wooden frames for paintings, photographs, mirrors, or similar objects, packing cases, boxes, crates, drums, and similar packings, of wood; cable-drums of wood; pallets, box pallets, and other load boards, of wood; pallet collars of wood; casks, barrels, vats, tubs, and other coopers' products and parts thereof, of wood, including staves; tools, tool bodies, tool handles, broom or brush bodies, and handles, of wood; boot or shoe lasts and trees, of wood; builders' joinery and carpentry of wood, including cellular wood panels, assembled flooring panels, shingles, and shakes; tableware and kitchenware, of wood, including bread boards, chopping boards, and similar boards, chopsticks, and other articles; inlaid wood marquetry and wood; caskets and cases for jewelry or cutlery, and similar articles, of wood; statuettes and other ornaments, of wood; wooden articles of furniture not falling in Chapter 94; and other articles of wood. The rates of duty vary depending on the product, with most items having a rate of duty of 10%. The document also includes notes and explanations regarding the classification of goods and the application of rates of duty. Overall, the document provides important information for businesses and individuals involved in the import of goods into India.
Summary:

The given document is related to the Indian Customs Tariff, specifically focusing on various headings and subheadings under Chapter 46 (Plaiting materials, basketware, and wickerwork) and Chapter 48 (Paper and paperboard; articles of paper pulp, of paper or of paperboard).

Chapter 46 details the classification and rates of duty for various plaiting materials, basketware, and wickerwork. The chapter includes headings for plaiting materials, plaits, and similar products of plaiting materials (heading 4601), basketwork and wickerwork (heading 4602), and articles of heading 4601 (heading 4603). The subheadings provide further classification based on the materials used, such as bamboo, rattan, or other vegetable materials. The rate of duty for these items is generally 10%.

Chapter 48 deals with paper and paperboard, as well as articles made from paper pulp, paper, or paperboard. The chapter includes headings for pulp of wood or other fibrous cellulosic material (heading 4701), recovered (waste and scrap) paper or paperboard (heading 4707), and paper and paperboard and articles thereof (heading 4801 to 4809). The chapter also includes various notes that provide definitions and exceptions for the headings and subheadings.

For example, the note under heading 4802 defines "newsprint" as uncoated paper used for printing newspapers, with specific requirements for fiber content, weight, surface roughness, and size. Similarly, the note under heading 4801 provides definitions for "paper" and "paperboard," as well as exceptions for certain types of articles.

Overall, the given document provides a detailed classification of various goods under Indian Customs Tariff, with specific focus on plaiting materials, basketware, wickerwork, and paper and paperboard. The document includes various headings, subheadings, and notes that provide specific definitions and exceptions for the classification of these goods.
Summary:

The document outlines the Harmonized System (HS) codes and corresponding rates of duty for various paper and paperboard products in India. The HS code system is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers to classify traded products. It is used by customs authorities around the world to identify products for the purpose of levying duties and taxes.

The document begins by defining the scope of various HS codes and the products that fall under them. For example, HS code 4801 covers newsprint, in rolls or sheets, while HS code 4802 covers uncoated paper and paperboard, of a kind used for writing, printing or other graphic purposes, and non-perforated punch card and punch tape paper, in rolls or rectangular (including square) sheets of any size, other than paper of heading 4801 or 4803; hand-made paper and paperboard.

The document also specifies the rates of duty for each HS code. For example, newsprint (HS code 4801) is subject to a duty rate of 10%, while uncoated paper and paperboard (HS code 4802) is subject to a duty rate of 10%, with some variations depending on the specific type of paper or paperboard.

The document also includes notes and supplementary notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of certain products. For example, Note 12 states that if paper and paper products of heading 4811, 4816 or 4820 are printed with any character, name, logo, motif or format, they shall remain classified under the respective headings as long as such products are intended to be used for further printing or writing.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive overview of the HS codes and corresponding rates of duty for various paper and paperboard products in India. It serves as a useful resource for businesses and individuals who import or export these products, as it helps them understand the classification and taxation of these products under Indian law.
Summary:

The document provides a list of various types of paper and paperboard, including their respective tariff codes and rates, under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The list includes different categories of paper such as printing paper, security printing paper, currency paper, stamp paper, drawing paper, poster paper, and printing paper dyed or marbled in mass. The list also includes paper for automatic data processing machines and paper for sanitary purposes, such as toilet or facial tissue stock, towel or napkin stock, and similar paper of a kind used for household or sanitary purposes.

Furthermore, the document includes uncoated kraft paper and paperboard, whether or not in rolls or sheets, other than that of heading 4802 or 4803. The uncoated kraft paper and paperboard are classified based on their weight and bleaching status, such as unbleached kraft paper, sack kraft paper, and other kraft paper and paperboard weighing 150 g/m2 or less, more than 150 g/m2 but less than 225 g/m2, and 225 g/m2 or more.

The list also includes other uncoated paper and paperboard, not further worked or processed than as specified in note 3 to this chapter, such as fluting paper, testliner, sulphite wrapping paper, filter paper, and felt paper. Additionally, the document includes composite paper and paperboard, not surface-coated or impregnated, whether or not internally reinforced, in rolls or sheets.

The document also provides tariff codes and rates for corrugated paper and paperboard, creped, crinkled, embossed, or perforated, in rolls or sheets, other than paper of the kind described in heading 4803. The corrugated paper and paperboard are classified based on their perforation and kraft paper status.

The list also includes carbon paper, self-copy paper, and other copying or transfer papers, whether or not printed, in rolls or sheets. The self-copy paper is further classified based on its weight.

Lastly, the document includes paper and paperboard, coated on one or both sides with kaolin (china clay) or other inorganic substances, with or without a binder, and with no other coating, whether or not surface-coloured, surface-decorated, or printed, in rolls or rectangular (including square) sheets, of any size. The paper and paperboard are classified based on their use and fiber content.
Summary:
The document provided is a list of Indian Customs Tariff Nomenclature, specifically focusing on paper and paper products. The list includes various types of paper and paper products, such as filter blocks, cigarette paper, wallpaper, carbon paper, envelopes, toilet paper, and packing containers. Each item is assigned a unique 8-digit code, with the first 6 digits being the same for similar items. The list also includes information on the rate of duty for each item, which is expressed as a percentage of the item's value. For example, the rate of duty for filter blocks is 10%. The list also includes references to other legal terms, such as "free" and "ex-bond", which have specific meanings in the context of Indian customs law. Overall, the document provides a detailed and comprehensive list of paper and paper products that are subject to Indian customs duties.
The document provided is the Harmonized System (HS) Code for Printed Books, Brochures, Leaflets and Similar Printed Matter, whether or not in Single Sheets (HS Code 4901). The HS Code is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers to classify traded products. Each HS code refers to a specific category of goods that are subject to the same tariff rates in a particular country. 

HS Code 4901 covers printed books, brochures, leaflets, and similar printed matter, whether or not in single sheets. The code is further divided into subheadings that provide more specific classifications for these items. For example, subheading 4901 10 10 covers printed books in single sheets, while subheading 4901 10 20 covers pamphlets, booklets, brochures, leaflets, and similar printed matter in single sheets. 

It is important to note that certain types of publications are excluded from HS Code 4901. For instance, publications that are essentially devoted to advertising, such as brochures, pamphlets, leaflets, trade catalogues, year books published by trade associations, and tourist propaganda, are classified in heading 4911 instead. 

Moreover, children's picture, drawing, or colouring books are classified under HS Code 4903, which is a separate heading from HS Code 4901. 

Overall, HS Code 4901 provides a standardized system for classifying printed books, brochures, leaflets, and similar printed matter, ensuring consistent and predictable tariff rates for these items across different countries.
Summary:
The document outlines the classification of yarns and fabrics under Indian law, specifically under the Customs Tariff Act. The Act classifies yarns and fabrics based on their material, measurements, and treatment. Yarns are classified into six categories based on their material, including silk, man-made fibers, true hemp or flax, coir, other vegetable fibers, and reinforced with metal thread. There are exceptions to these categories, including yarn of wool or other animal hair, paper yarn, man-made filament tow, silk worm gut, metallised yarn, and chenille yarn. Yarns that are put up for retail sale are also classified based on their weight and packaging. The Act also defines terms such as "unbleached yarn," "bleached yarn," "coloured (dyed or printed) yarn," "unbleached woven fabric," "bleached woven fabric," "dyed woven fabric," and "woven fabric of yarns of different colours." The Act also outlines the classification of sewing thread and high tenacity yarn. Additionally, the Act defines terms such as "made up," "impregnated," "polyamides," "electromeric yarn," and "textile garments." The Act also specifies that textile garments of different headings are to be classified in their own headings even if put up in sets for retail sale. The Act also outlines the meaning of certain expressions used in the Act, such as "textile materials," "man-made fibers," "monofilament," "strip," "slivers," "rovings," "marl," "mixture yarns," "woven fabrics," "textured yarn," "polyamides," "aramids," "electromeric yarn," and "textile garments."
Summary:

This document pertains to Indian laws related to the classification of textile materials and products. The text is a part of the Customs Tariff Act, which provides definitions and guidelines for the classification of textile materials.

The definitions provided in the document include:

1. Printed woven fabric: Woven fabric that has been printed in the piece, whether or not made from yarns of different colors. This term also includes woven fabrics bearing designs made by means of transfer paper, flocking, or the batik process.
2. Plain weave: A fabric construction in which each yarn of the weft passes alternately over and under the successive yarns of the warp, and each yarn of the warp passes alternatively over and under successive yarns of the weft.

The rules for classification stipulate that:

1. Products of Chapters 56 to 63 containing two or more textile materials are to be regarded as consisting wholly of that textile material which would be selected for the classification of a product of Chapters 50 to 55 or of heading 5809 consisting of the same textile materials.
2. In the case of textile products consisting of a ground fabric and a pile or looped surface, only the pile or looped surface shall be taken into account.

The document also includes a table that lists various textile items and their corresponding rates of duty. This table covers silk (Chapter 50) and wool, fine or coarse animal hair, horsehair yarn, and woven fabric (Chapter 51). The silk chapter includes items such as silk-worm cocoons, raw silk, silk waste, silk yarn, and woven fabrics of silk or of silk waste. The wool chapter includes items such as greasy wool, fine or coarse animal hair, waste of wool or of fine or coarse animal hair, garnetted stock of wool or of fine or coarse animal hair, wool and fine or coarse animal hair (carded or combed), yarn of carded wool, yarn of combed wool, yarn of fine animal hair (carded or combed), yarn of wool or fine animal hair (put up for retail sale), and woven fabrics of carded wool or of carded fine animal hair. The rates of duty vary for each item and depend on the type of textile material and its origin.
This document appears to be a table listing various types of woven fabrics and their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and descriptions. The fabrics are categorized based on their material (e.g., cotton, combed wool, fine animal hair) and characteristics (e.g., bleached, dyed, printed). The tariff items are identified using a numerical code (e.g., 5111, 5112) and are associated with a rate of duty, which is expressed as a percentage (e.g., 1[25%], 2[25%]). The descriptions provide more details about the fabrics, such as their weight and any additional treatments or finishes.

The table includes several Indian laws and legal terms related to tariffs and trade. For example, the document refers to the "Customs Tariff Act, 1975," which is the primary legislation governing tariffs in India. The Act sets out the rates of duty for various goods imported into India, as well as the rules and procedures for determining the tariff classification of those goods.

The document also uses several legal terms and concepts related to tariffs and trade. For example, the term "tariff item" refers to a specific category of goods that is subject to a particular rate of duty. The term "rate of duty" refers to the percentage of the value of the goods that must be paid as a tax or fee upon importation. The term "preferential" refers to a reduced rate of duty that is available to certain countries or products under trade agreements or other special arrangements.

In summary, this document is a table listing various types of woven fabrics and their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and descriptions. The table includes several Indian laws and legal terms related to tariffs and trade, such as the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, tariff items, rates of duty, and preferential treatment.
Summary:

The document provides the Indian laws for the classification and taxation of cotton yarn, fabrics, and other related products. The laws are divided into different sections, each with its own set of rules and regulations.

The first section deals with cotton yarn other than sewing thread, which contains less than 85% by weight of cotton. The yarn is classified based on the measurement of single yarn, with different tax rates applied to each classification. For example, yarn measuring 714.29 decitex or more is taxed at a lower rate than yarn measuring less than 125 decitex. Additionally, yarn is classified based on whether it is made from uncombed or combed fibers, and whether it is single, multiple, or cabled yarn.

The second section deals with cotton yarn put up for retail sale, which contains 85% or more by weight of cotton. The tax rate for this category is higher than for the previous category. The yarn is classified based on whether it is bleached or unbleached, and the weight per square meter.

The third section deals with woven fabrics of cotton, which contain 85% or more by weight of cotton, and weigh not more than 200 g/m2. The fabrics are classified based on the weave, weight per square meter, and whether they are bleached or unbleached. There are different tax rates for each classification, with unbleached fabrics generally taxed at a lower rate than bleached fabrics.

Overall, the document provides a detailed and complex set of rules and regulations for the classification and taxation of cotton yarn, fabrics, and other related products in India. It is clear that the Indian government has put a lot of thought and effort into creating a fair and equitable system for the taxation of these products. However, the system is also quite complex, and it may be difficult for manufacturers and retailers to navigate without the help of a legal expert.
Summary:

The document appears to be a table listing various types of fabrics and their corresponding tariff classifications under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The fabrics are categorized based on factors such as weave, weight, and yarn type, and the classifications include specific descriptions such as "Bleeding Madras," "Furnishing fabrics," and "Zari bordered sarees." Each fabric classification is assigned a tariff code, which is a combination of numbers and letters.

The table is organized into several sections, each representing a different category of fabrics. For example, Section 5208 includes fabrics made of cotton that weigh more than 100 g/m2, while Section 5209 includes fabrics made of cotton that contain 85% or more by weight of cotton and weigh more than 200 g/m2. Within each section, the fabrics are further categorized based on weave, such as plain weave or 3-thread or 4-thread twill.

The tariff codes for each fabric classification are listed in the first column of the table, while the descriptions of the fabrics are listed in the second column. The third column indicates the percentage of the tariff rate that applies to each fabric classification, which appears to be 25%. The remaining columns provide additional information about the fabrics, such as their weight or yarn type.

It is important to note that the tariff classifications listed in this document are specific to Indian customs law and may not apply to other countries. Additionally, the tariff rates and percentages listed in this document are subject to change and may vary depending on the specific circumstances of each import transaction.
Summary:

The document appears to be a list of various types of textile fabrics and their corresponding HS codes. HS codes are used for classifying traded products and are important for determining customs duties and taxes. In this document, the HS codes are organized according to the type of fabric and its composition.

The fabrics are categorized into several groups, including woven fabrics of cotton, woven fabrics of flax, woven fabrics of jute or other bast fibers, and woven fabrics of other vegetable textile fibers. Within each group, there are further subcategories based on the specific type of fabric, such as suitings, poplin and broad fabrics, saree, voils, and other.

For example, under the category of woven fabrics of cotton, there are subcategories for suitings, poplin and broad fabrics, saree, voils, and other. Each subcategory has a specific HS code, such as 5210 for suitings, 5211 for woven fabrics of cotton containing less than 85% by weight of cotton, and 5212 for other woven fabrics of cotton weighing not more than 200 g/m2.

Similarly, under the category of woven fabrics of flax, there are subcategories for unbleached or bleached fabrics containing 85% or more by weight of flax, and for fabrics containing less than 85% by weight of flax. Each subcategory has a specific HS code, such as 5309 for unbleached or bleached fabrics containing 85% or more by weight of flax, and 5309 for fabrics containing less than 85% by weight of flax.

The document also includes HS codes for yarn of jute or other textile bast fibers of heading 5307, yarn of other vegetable textile fibers; paper yarn, and woven fabrics of paper yarn.

It is important to note that the HS codes in this document are specific to Indian laws and regulations. Other countries may have different HS codes for the same products.
Summary:

The document presents a schedule of duties for various textile products under Indian law. It includes different types of fabrics and yarns made from natural and synthetic fibers, as well as man-made filaments. The schedule outlines the tariff item description, unit rate of duty, and standard preference areas for each product.

The schedule includes several headings for different types of textile products:

* Heading 5401 covers sewing thread of man-made filaments, whether or not put up for retail sale. It is divided into two categories: synthetic filaments and artificial filaments.
* Heading 5402 covers synthetic filament yarn, not put up for retail sale, including synthetic monofilament of less than 67 decitex. It includes high tenacity yarn of nylon or other polyamides, polyesters, polypropylene, and other synthetic fibers.
* Heading 5403 covers artificial filament yarn, not put up for retail sale, including artificial monofilament of less than 67 decitex. It includes high tenacity yarn of viscose rayon, cellulose acetate, and other artificial fibers.
* Heading 5404 covers synthetic monofilament of 67 decitex or more and of which no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1 mm; strip and the like (for example, artificial straw) of synthetic textile materials of an apparent width not exceeding 5 mm. It includes elastomeric monofilament, polypropylene monofilament, and other synthetic monofilament.
* Heading 5405 covers artificial monofilament of 67 decitex or more and of which no cross-sectional dimension exceeds 1 mm; strip and the like (for example, artificial straw) of artificial textile materials of an apparent width not exceeding 5 mm. It includes artificial monofilament of viscose rayon, cellulose acetate, and other artificial fibers.
* Heading 5406 covers man-made filament yarn (other than sewing thread), put up for retail sale. It includes synthetic filament yarn and artificial filament yarn.
* Heading 5407 covers woven fabrics of synthetic filament yarn, including woven fabrics obtained from materials of Heading 5404. It includes unbleached, bleached, dyed, printed, and other woven fabrics of nylon, polyester, and other synthetic fibers.

The schedule also includes notes that define certain terms used in the schedule, such as "man-made fibers," "synthetic," and "artificial." These notes clarify that "man-made fibers" include staple fibers and filaments of organic polymers produced by manufacturing processes, either by polymerization of organic monomers or by chemical treatment of natural organic polymers. The notes also define "synthetic" fibers as those produced by polymerization of organic monomers, and "artificial" fibers as those produced by chemical treatment of natural organic polymers. Additionally, the notes specify that "man-made," "synthetic," and "artificial" have the same meaning when used in relation to "textile materials."

The schedule also includes a note that Headings 5402 and 5403 do not apply to synthetic or artificial filament tow of Chapter 55. This means that synthetic or artificial filament tow, which is a continuous strand of fibers, is not subject to the duties outlined in Headings 5402 and 5403.

In summary, this document presents a schedule of duties for various textile products under Indian law, including different types of fabrics and yarns made from natural and synthetic fibers, as well as man-made filaments. The schedule outlines the tariff item description, unit rate of duty, and standard preference areas for each product, and includes notes that define certain terms used in the schedule and specify exemptions from the duties.
This document appears to be a list of tariff items for various textile products, specifically woven fabrics and staple fibers, under the Indian Customs Tariff. The tariff items are organized by material, construction, and color, with each item having a corresponding rate of duty.

The tariff items are divided into several sections, including:

* Section XI: Woven fabrics of man-made filament yarn
	+ This section includes various types of woven fabrics made from synthetic filament yarns, such as nylon, polyester, acrylic, and polypropylene. The fabrics are further classified by construction, such as unbleached, bleached, dyed, printed, and of different colors.
* Section XII: Woven fabrics containing 85% or more by weight of synthetic filaments
	+ This section includes woven fabrics that contain 85% or more by weight of synthetic filaments, such as polyester and nylon. The fabrics are classified by construction and color.
* Section XIII: Other woven fabrics
	+ This section includes various types of woven fabrics that do not meet the criteria of the previous sections, such as fabrics made from natural fibers or fabrics with less than 85% synthetic filaments. The fabrics are classified by construction and color.
* Chapter 55: Man-made staple fibers
	+ This chapter includes various types of man-made staple fibers, such as nylon, polyester, acrylic, and polypropylene. The fibers are classified by material and construction.

Each tariff item has a corresponding rate of duty, which is expressed as a percentage of the item's Customs value. The rates of duty vary depending on the item's classification and origin. For example, the rate of duty for unbleached nylon woven fabrics is 10%, while the rate of duty for unbleached viscose rayon woven fabrics is 20%.

It's important to note that this is just a summary of the document, and for a full understanding of the Indian Customs Tariff, it's recommended to consult the official document.
Summary:

The document provides a list of Indian laws related to the import and export of textile products, specifically synthetic fibers, artificial fibers, and man-made staple fibers. The laws are organized into sections based on the type of product, such as waste, synthetic staple fibers, artificial staple fibers, sewing thread, and yarn.

Each section includes a series of codes, such as "5505 10" or "5506 10 00," which correspond to specific legal provisions. These codes are followed by a description of the product, such as "Of synthetic fibers: 377: 5505 10 [10%]1" which refers to a 10% tariff on imports of synthetic fibers.

The document also includes specific provisions related to the composition of the textile products, including requirements for the percentage of synthetic or artificial fibers in the product. For example, the provision "5509 11 00 kg. [10%]1" refers to a 10% tariff on imports of waste containing 85% or more by weight of nylon or other polyamides.

In addition to tariffs, the document also includes provisions related to labeling, packaging, and other requirements for importing and exporting textile products in India. These provisions are intended to ensure that textile products meet certain quality and safety standards, and to provide transparency and accountability in the import and export process.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive overview of the legal framework governing the import and export of textile products in India, with a focus on synthetic and artificial fibers. By understanding these laws and regulations, businesses and individuals can ensure that they are complying with all relevant requirements and can avoid legal penalties or other negative consequences.
The document lists various types of woven fabrics and their corresponding tariff classifications under the Indian Customs Tariff. The fabric types are classified based on their composition, construction, and finish. The classification includes fabrics made of polyester staple fibers, synthetic staple fibers, artificial staple fibers, and other woven fabrics. Each classification has specific conditions, such as minimum percentage of certain fibers, weight limits, and finishing processes. The tariff classification is denoted by a code number, such as 5514, 5515, or 5516, and is followed by a specific code that denotes the type of fabric and its characteristics. The classification also specifies the rate of duty for each type of fabric. The document also includes notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of certain types of fabrics.
The document provided appears to be a schedule of customs tariffs for various textile and related products in India. The tariff schedule is organized into several sections, each with its own unique heading and classification number. The sections covered in this document include wadding of textile materials and articles thereof, textile fibers, needle loom felt and stitch-bonded fiber fabrics, nonwovens, rubber thread and cord, textile covered, textile yarn and strip and the like, twine, cordage, ropes and cables, knotted netting of twine, cordage or rope, and carpets and other textile floor coverings.

Under each section, there are several subheadings with specific classification numbers and descriptions of the goods covered. For example, under the section for wadding of textile materials and articles thereof, there are subheadings for absorbent cotton wool, other wadding of cotton, wadding of man-made fibers, and textile flock and dust and mill neps. Each subheading includes a description of the goods covered and a rate of duty.

The rate of duty is expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the goods, which is determined based on the transaction value or the computed value, depending on the circumstances. The rate of duty may vary depending on the origin of the goods, with lower rates applicable to goods originating in countries that have a preferential trade agreement with India.

The tariff schedule also includes several notes that provide guidance on the classification of the goods and the application of the rates of duty. For example, note 1 under the section for carpets and other textile floor coverings states that the term "carpets and other textile floor coverings" means floor coverings in which textile materials serve as the exposed surface of the article when in use and includes articles having the characteristics of textile floor coverings but intended for use for other purposes. Note 2 states that this chapter does not cover floor covering underlays.

In summary, the document provided is a schedule of customs tariffs for various textile and related products in India. The tariff schedule is organized into several sections, each with its own unique heading and classification number. The sections cover a wide range of goods, including wadding of textile materials, textile fibers, needle loom felt and stitch-bonded fiber fabrics, nonwovens, rubber thread and cord, textile yarn and strip and the like, twine, cordage, ropes and cables, knotted netting of twine, cordage or rope, and carpets and other textile floor coverings. Each section includes several subheadings with specific classification numbers and descriptions of the goods covered, as well as a rate of duty expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the goods. The tariff schedule also includes several notes that provide guidance on the classification of the goods and the application of the rates of duty.
Summary:

This document provides information on Indian laws related to the taxation of various textile products. The products are categorized based on their type and material, and each category has a specific tax rate. The tax rates are mentioned in the form of a percentage or a fixed amount per square meter, whichever is higher. The categories include mats and matting, other textile materials, carpets and other floor coverings, tufted textile fabrics, lace, tapestries, trimmings, and embroidery.

The tax rates for each category are as follows:

* Mats and matting: 10% or Rs. 105 per square meter, whichever is higher.
* Other textile materials: 10% or Rs. 105 per square meter, whichever is higher.
* Carpets and other floor coverings (cotton, other than durries): 10%.
* Carpets and other floor coverings (silk): 10%.
* Place mat and other similar goods: 10%.
* Other (not of pile construction, made up): 10%.
* Carpets and other floor coverings (wool or fine animal hair): 10%.
* Carpets and other floor coverings (man-made textile materials): 10% or Rs. 110 per square meter, whichever is higher.
* Other (man-made textile materials): 10% or Rs. 110 per square meter, whichever is higher.
* Carpets and other textile floor coverings (tufted, whether or not made up): 10%.
* Carpets and other textile floor coverings (not tufted or flocked, whether or not made up): 10% or Rs. 35 per square meter, whichever is higher.
* Other carpets and other textile floor coverings (whether or not made up): 10%.

The document also includes notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of certain products. For example, heading 5801 includes woven weft pile fabrics that have not yet had the floats cut, and heading 5804 does not apply to knotted net fabrics of twine, cordage, or rope. The document also specifies that narrow woven fabrics are those with a width not exceeding 30 cm, and embroidery includes sewn appliqué work of sequins, beads, or ornament motifs of textile or other materials.

In summary, this document provides detailed information on the taxation of various textile products in India, with specific tax rates and categories based on the type and material of the products. The document also includes notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of certain products.
Summary:
The document provides a list of Indian laws related to textile products, specifically focusing on customs duties. The list includes various types of textile materials, such as handloom m2, other m2, terry towelling and similar woven terry fabrics, tufted textile fabrics, gauze, tulles and other net fabrics, hand-woven tapestries, narrow woven fabrics, labels, badges and similar articles, braids in the piece, ornamental trimmings in the piece, woven fabrics of metal thread and woven fabrics of metallised yarn, embroidery in the piece, quilted textile products in the piece, impregnated, coated, covered or laminated textile fabrics, and textile articles of a kind suitable for industrial use.

Each type of textile material has a corresponding code number and a rate of duty, which is expressed as a percentage of the value of the product or a specific amount per unit of measurement (e.g., per kg or per sq. meter). The rates of duty vary depending on the type of textile material and its intended use.

For example, handloom m2 has a rate of duty of 10% or Rs. 60 per sq. meter, whichever is higher. Gauze, other than narrow fabrics of heading 5806, has a rate of duty of 10% or Rs. 200 per kg, whichever is higher. Tulles and other net fabrics have a rate of duty of 10% or Rs. 200 per kg, whichever is higher, for cotton, and 10% or contains: 0: Rs. 200 per kg., whichever is higher for other textile materials.

The document also includes notes that provide additional guidance on how to apply the rates of duty. For example, Note 1 states that the expression "textile fabrics" applies only to certain types of woven fabrics, braids, and knitted or crocheted fabrics. Note 2 states that Heading 5903 applies to textile fabrics that are impregnated, coated, covered, or laminated with plastics, subject to certain conditions. Note 4 states that the expression "rubberised textile fabrics" means textile fabrics that are impregnated, coated, covered, or laminated with rubber, subject to certain conditions.

Overall, the document provides a detailed list of Indian laws related to textile products and their corresponding rates of duty, as well as notes that provide additional guidance on how to apply these laws.
Summary:

This document pertains to various Indian laws regarding the classification of goods, specifically under Section XI of the Indian Tariff Schedule. The section includes several headings and subheadings for textile products, rubber products, linoleum, textile wall coverings, rubberized textile fabrics, textile wicks, textile hose piping, transmission or conveyor belts, and textile products for technical uses.

Under Heading 5901, textile fabrics coated with gum or amylaceous substances, of a kind used for the outer covers of books or the like, tracing cloth, prepared painting canvas, buckram, and similar stiffened textile fabrics of a kind used for hat foundations are classified. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate.

Heading 5902 covers tyre cord fabric of high tenacity yarn of nylon or other polyamides, polyesters, or viscose rayon. The goods under this heading are also subject to a 10% duty rate.

Heading 5903 includes textile fabrics impregnated, coated, covered, or laminated with plastics, other than those of Heading 5902. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate for imitation leather fabrics of cotton and other materials, and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Heading 5904 covers linoleum, whether or not cut to shape, and floor coverings consisting of a coating or covering applied on a textile backing, whether or not cut to shape. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate for linoleum and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Heading 5905 includes textile wall coverings, which are subject to a 10% duty rate for goods fixed on the backing of any material and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Heading 5906 covers rubberized textile fabrics, other than those of Heading 5902. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate for adhesive tape of a width not exceeding 20 cm, knitted or crocheted fabrics of cotton, insulating tape, and rubberized cotton fabrics, and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Heading 5907 includes textile fabrics otherwise impregnated, coated, or covered, painted canvas being theatrical scenery, studio back-cloths, or the like. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate for fabrics covered partially or fully with textile flocks, or with preparation containing textile flocks, and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Heading 5908 covers textile wicks, woven, plaited, or knitted, for lamps, stoves, lighters, candles, or the like; incandescent gas mantles and tubular knitted gas mantle fabric, whether or not impregnated. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate for wicks and gas mantles of cotton and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Heading 5909 includes textile hose piping and similar textile tubing, with or without lining, armour, or accessories of other materials. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate for cotton goods, a 20% duty rate for man-made fiber goods, and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Heading 5910 covers transmission or conveyor belts or belting, of textile material, whether or not impregnated, coated, covered, or laminated with plastics, or reinforced with metal or other material. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate for cotton canvas ply belting, a 20% duty rate for rubberized cotton belting, and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Heading 5911 includes textile products and articles, for technical uses, specified in Note 7 to this Chapter. The goods under this heading are subject to a 10% duty rate for textile fabrics, felt, and felt-lined woven fabrics, coated, covered, or laminated with rubber, leather, or other material, of a kind used for card clothing, and similar fabrics of a kind used for other technical purposes, including narrow fabrics made of velvet impregnated with rubber, for covering weaving spindles (weaving beams), and a 90% duty rate for other goods.

Note 7 to this Chapter specifies that goods classified under Heading 5911 must be for technical uses, and must not fall in any other heading of Section XI. The goods must also be specifically provided for in Note 7.

In summary, this document outlines the classification and duty rates for various textile and rubber products under Indian law. The goods are classified under different headings and subheadings based on their composition, use, and other factors. The duty rates vary depending on the heading and subheading, with some goods subject to a 10% duty rate and others subject to a 90% duty rate. It is important to note that the goods classified under Heading 5911 must be for technical uses and must not fall in any other heading of Section XI.
Summary:

The document outlines the Indian Customs Tariff Classification for various textile products. It includes specific classifications for jute fabrics, cotton fabrics, textile fabrics with metalized yarn, straining cloth, paper maker's felt, gaskets and washers, and other textile machinery parts. The document also covers knitted or crocheted fabrics, with specific provisions for pile fabrics, warp knit fabrics, and other knitted or crocheted fabrics. The classification is based on the material used, the construction of the fabric, and the intended use of the product. The document also includes notes and sub-heading notes that provide additional guidance on the classification of certain products. The tariff rates for each classification vary, with some items subject to a percentage duty and others subject to a specific duty per kilogram. The document also includes provisions for goods that are not covered by the specific classifications.
Summary:
The document outlines Indian law regarding the classification and taxation of various garments and clothing accessories.

The expression "babies' garments and clothing accessories" refers to articles for young children with a body height not exceeding 86 cm.

Articles that can be classified in both heading 6111 and other headings of this Chapter are to be classified in heading 6111.

For the purpose of heading 6112, "ski suits" are defined as garments or sets of garments that are intended to be worn principally for skiing. They can be either a "ski overall" or a "ski ensemble." A "ski overall" is a one-piece garment designed to cover the upper and lower parts of the body, while a "ski ensemble" is a set of garments composed of two or three pieces put up for retail sale and consisting of a garment such as an anorak, wind-cheater, wind-jacket or similar article, and a pair of trousers, breeches or a bib and brace overall. The components of a "ski ensemble" must be made up in a fabric of the same texture, style, and composition, and must be of corresponding or compatible size.

Garments that are, prima facie, classifiable both in heading 6113 and in other headings of this Chapter, excluding heading 6111, are to be classified in heading 6113.

Garments designed for left over right closure at the front are regarded as men's or boys' garments, and those designed for right over left closure at the front as women's or girls' garments. Garments that cannot be identified as either men's or boys' garments or as women's or girls' garments are to be classified in the headings covering women's or girls' garments.

Articles of this Chapter may be made of metal thread.

The document also includes a table that outlines the tariff item description of goods, unit rate of duty, and the applicable tax rate for various garments and clothing accessories. The tax rates vary depending on the type of fabric and the type of garment. For example, men's or boys' overcoats, car-coats, capes, cloaks, anoraks (including ski-jackets), wind-cheaters, wind-jackets and similar articles, knitted or crocheted, other than those of heading 6103 made of cotton are subject to a tax rate of 10% or Rs. 540 per piece, whichever is higher.

It is important to note that this summary is not a substitute for the actual document, and it is recommended to consult the original document for complete and accurate information.
Summary:

The document outlines various Indian laws related to textile imports, specifically focusing on the import duties and taxes for different types of textile materials and garments. The document is divided into several sections, each covering a specific type of textile material or garment.

The first section covers textile materials made from man-made fibers, synthetic fibers, and artificial fibers. The import duty for these materials ranges from 10% to 20%, depending on the specific type of fiber. The second section covers other textile materials, such as silk, wool, and fine animal hair. The import duty for these materials ranges from 3% to 10%, again depending on the specific type of material.

The third section covers women's or girls' slips, petticoats, briefs, panties, night-dresses, pyjamas, negligees, bathrobes, dressing gowns, and similar articles. The import duty for these garments ranges from 1% to 275%, depending on the specific type of garment and the material it is made from.

The fourth section covers singlets and T-shirts, other vests, knitted or crocheted. The import duty for these garments is either 10% or Rs. 45 per piece, whichever is higher.

The fifth section covers jerseys, pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats, and similar articles, knitted or crocheted. The import duty for these garments ranges from 10% to 275%, depending on the specific type of garment and the material it is made from.

The sixth section covers babies' garments and clothing accessories, knitted or crocheted. The import duty for these garments is either 10% or Rs. 25 per kg, whichever is higher.

The seventh section covers track suits, ski suits, and swimwear, knitted or crocheted. The import duty for these garments ranges from 10% to 110%, depending on the specific type of garment and the material it is made from.

The eighth section covers panty hose, tights, stockings, socks, and other hosiery, including graduated compression hosiery. The import duty for these garments ranges from 10% to 110%, depending on the specific type of garment and the material it is made from.

The ninth section covers gloves, mittens, and mitts, knitted or crocheted. The import duty for these garments is either 10% or Rs. 25 per piece, whichever is higher.

The tenth section covers other made-up clothing accessories, knitted or crocheted, and knitted or crocheted parts of garments or of clothing accessories. The import duty for these items is either 10% or Rs. 25 per piece, whichever is higher.

The eleventh section outlines the scope of Chapter 62, which covers articles of apparel and clothing accessories, not knitted or crocheted. This chapter does not apply to worn clothing or other worn articles, or to orthopaedic appliances, surgical belts, trusses, or the like.

Overall, the document provides detailed information on the import duties and taxes for various types of textile materials and garments in India. It is clear and straightforward, using plain English to explain the legal concepts and terms. The document does not use any abbreviations or shorthand, making it easy to understand for anyone who is not familiar with Indian textile laws.
Summary:

The document outlines various Indian laws and regulations related to textiles and clothing. The first section defines different types of garments, including suits and ensembles. A suit is defined as a set of garments, including a jacket, trousers, and sometimes a waistcoat, made of the same fabric. An ensemble is defined as a set of garments, other than suits and certain other garments, composed of several pieces made up in identical fabric, put up for retail sale, and comprising one garment designed to cover the upper part of the body and one or two different garments designed to cover the lower part of the body. All components of an ensemble must be of the same fabric construction, style, color, and composition, and of corresponding or compatible size.

The document also includes information on the classification of textile and clothing items for the purpose of import duties. For example, overcoats, raincoats, car-coats, capes, cloaks, and similar articles are classified under heading 6201, with different rates of duty depending on the material of the garment. Suits, ensembles, jackets, blazers, trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches, and shorts are classified under heading 6203, with different rates of duty depending on the material and country of origin of the garment.

The document also includes provisions for the classification of "Khadi" garments, which are defined as garments made from any cloth woven on handlooms in India from cotton, silk, or woolen yarn handspun in India or from a mixture of any two or all of such yarns, and produced by a person certified or recognized by the Khadi Village Industries Commission established under section 4 of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956.

Finally, the document includes provisions for the classification of garments based on the direction of the front closure, with garments designed for left over right closure at the front being classified as men's or boys' garments, and those designed for right over left closure at the front being classified as women's or girls' garments. Garments that cannot be identified as either men's or boys' garments or as women's or girls' garments are to be classified in the headings covering women's or girls' garments.
Summary:

The document outlines various Indian laws related to the import of textile goods, specifically focusing on women's or girls' suits, ensembles, jackets, blazers, dresses, skirts, divided skirts, trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches, and shorts. The tariff rates for these items vary depending on the type of textile material used.

For example, suits made of wool or fine animal hair are subject to a tariff rate of 10% or Rs. 550 per piece, whichever is higher, while those made of cotton are subject to a rate of 10%. Suits made of synthetic fibers are subject to a rate of 10% or Rs. 550 per piece, whichever is higher. For other textile materials, such as silk, the tariff rate is 10% or Rs. 500 per piece, whichever is higher.

Ensembles, which are defined as blouses combined with skirts, trousers, or shorts, are subject to different tariff rates depending on the type of textile material used. For example, ensembles made of wool or fine animal hair are subject to a tariff rate of 10%, while those made of cotton are subject to a rate of 10%. Ensembles made of synthetic fibers are subject to a rate of 10% or Rs. 390 per piece, whichever is higher.

Dresses, skirts, and divided skirts are subject to different tariff rates depending on the type of textile material used. For example, dresses made of wool or fine animal hair are subject to a tariff rate of 10% or Rs. 370 per piece, whichever is higher, while those made of cotton are subject to a rate of 10% or Rs. 650 per piece, whichever is higher. Dresses made of synthetic fibers are subject to a rate of 10% or Rs. 390 per piece, whichever is higher. Skirts and divided skirts made of wool or fine animal hair are subject to a tariff rate of 10% or Rs. 285 per piece, whichever is higher, while those made of cotton are subject to a rate of 10%. Skirts and divided skirts made of synthetic fibers are subject to a rate of 10%.

Trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches, and shorts are subject to different tariff rates depending on the type of textile material used. For example, trousers and shorts made of wool or fine animal hair are subject to a tariff rate of 10% or Rs. 285 per piece, whichever is higher, while those made of cotton are subject to a rate of 10%. Trousers and shorts made of synthetic fibers are subject to a rate of 10%.

The document also outlines tariff rates for men's or boy's shirts, women's or girl's blouses, shirts, and shirt-blouses, and garments and babies' clothing accessories. For example, men's or boy's shirts made of cotton are subject to a tariff rate of 25% or Rs. 85 per piece, whichever is higher, while those made of man-made fibers are subject to a rate of 10% or Rs. 120 per piece, whichever is higher. Women's or girl's blouses, shirts, and shirt-blouses made of silk or silk waste are subject to a tariff rate of 10%, while those made of wool or fine animal hair are subject to a rate of 10% or Rs. 135 per piece, whichever is higher. Those made of cotton are subject to a rate of 25% or Rs. 95 per piece, whichever is higher, while those made of man-made fibers are subject to a rate of 10% or Rs. 120 per piece, whichever is higher. Garments and babies' clothing accessories made of silk are subject to a tariff rate of 10%, while those made of other textile materials are subject to a rate of 5%.

In summary, the document outlines various Indian laws related to the import of textile goods, specifically focusing on women's or girls' suits, ensembles, jackets, blazers, dresses, skirts, divided skirts, trousers, bib and brace overalls, breeches, and shorts. The tariff rates for these items vary depending on the type of textile material used. The document also outlines tariff rates for men's or boy's shirts, women's or girl's blouses, shirts, and shirt-blouses, and garments and babies' clothing accessories.
This document appears to be a table listing various items of clothing and accessories, along with their corresponding tariff codes and rates of duty. The items are organized into different categories, such as outer garments, other garments, men's or boys' garments, women's or girls' garments, track suits, ski suits, brassieres, girdles, corsets, braces, suspenders, handkerchiefs, scarves, shawls, mufflers, ties, bow and cravats, gloves, mittens and mitts, and other made up clothing accessories.

For each item, the table provides the tariff code, a description of the item, and the rate of duty that applies to that item. The rate of duty is expressed as a percentage, and it may be subject to certain conditions or exceptions. For example, some rates of duty are only applicable to certain types of textile materials, such as cotton, man-made fibers, silk, or wool. Others may be subject to minimum values, such as Rs. 305 or Rs. 365 per piece.

The table also includes several sub-headings and notes that provide additional information about the classification and interpretation of the tariff codes and rates of duty. For example, Sub-Chapter I applies only to made up articles of any textile fabric, and it does not cover goods of Chapters 56 to 62 or worn clothing or other worn articles of heading 6309. Heading 6309 applies only to articles of textile materials, such as clothing and clothing accessories, blankets, bed linen, table linen, toilet linen, kitchen linen, furnishing articles, and footwear and headgear of any material other than asbestos.

Overall, this document appears to be a detailed and technical guide to the tariff codes and rates of duty that apply to various items of clothing and accessories in India. It may be used by importers, exporters, customs officials, and other stakeholders to determine the correct classification and valuation of these items for the purpose of international trade.
Summary:

The document provided appears to be a list of tariff items for various textile products, including their corresponding rates of duty. The items are categorized under different headings and subheadings, with each item having a unique 8-digit code. The rates of duty are mentioned as a percentage, denoted by "[10%]" or any other percentage as applicable.

The textile products listed include a variety of items such as man-made fibers, other textile materials, table linen, toilet linen, kitchen linen, curtains, drapes, interior blinds, bedspreads, bed sheets, bedcovers, cushion covers, napkins, pillow cases, tablecloths, terry towels, towels, mosquito nets, curtains, drapes, and other furnishing articles. The products are made of different materials such as cotton, silk, wool, fine animal hair, man-made fibers, and other textile materials.

The tariff items also include sacks and bags of jute or other textile bast fibers, cotton, man-made textile materials, and other textile materials. The sacks and bags are used for the packing of goods.

Tarpaulins, awnings, sunblinds, tents, sails for boats, sailboards or land craft, camping goods, and other made-up articles, including dress patterns, are also included in the tariff items.

The document also includes tariff items for used or new rags, scrap twine, cordage, rope, and cables and worn-out articles of twine, cordage, rope, or cables of textile materials.

The tariff items are subject to certain notes and subheading notes that provide guidance on how to classify the goods. The notes cover topics such as the definition of certain terms, the constituent material of the upper and outer sole, and the application of spikes, springs, stops, clips, bars, or the like.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive list of tariff items for various textile products, along with their corresponding rates of duty and classification guidelines.
The document provided appears to be a list of tariff codes for various types of footwear and headgear, along with their corresponding rates of duty. The codes are organized into several categories based on the materials used, the design of the item, and its intended use.

The first category of codes (6401, 6402, 6403, 6404) covers various types of footwear. Code 6401 applies to waterproof footwear with outer soles and uppers of rubber or plastic, which are not fixed to the sole or assembled by stitching, riveting, nailing, screwing, plugging, or similar processes. This category is further divided into several subcategories based on the design and materials used, such as footwear with protective metal toe-caps, footwear covering the ankle but not the knee, and footwear with outer soles of leather or composition leather and uppers of leather.

Code 6402 covers other footwear with outer soles and uppers of rubber or plastic, including sports footwear, ski-boots, cross-country ski footwear, and snowboard boots. This category is also divided into several subcategories based on the design and materials used.

Code 6403 applies to footwear with outer soles of rubber, plastics, leather, or composition leather and uppers of leather. This category includes sports footwear, ski-boots, cross-country ski footwear, and snowboard boots, as well as footwear with outer soles of leather or composition leather and uppers which consist of leather straps across the instep and around the big toe.

Code 6404 covers other footwear with outer soles of rubber, plastics, leather, or composition leather and uppers of textile materials. This category includes footwear with outer soles of rubber or plastics, sports footwear, and footwear with outer soles of leather or composition leather.

The second category of codes (6501, 6502, 6504, 6505) covers various types of headgear. Code 6501 applies to hat-forms, hat bodies, and hoods of felt, neither blocked to shape nor with made brims; plateaux and manchons (including slit manchons), of felt. This category is further divided into several subcategories based on the materials used, such as cotton, wool and fur felt, and other materials.

Code 6502 covers hat-shapes, plaited or made by assembling strips of any material, neither blocked to shape, nor with made brims, nor lined, nor trimmed. This category is also divided into several subcategories based on the materials used.

Code 6504 applies to hats and other headgear, plaited or made by assembling strips of any material, whether or not lined or trimmed.

Code 6505 covers hats and other headgear, knitted or crocheted, or made up from lace, felt or other textile fabric, in the piece (but not in strips), whether or not lined or trimmed; hair-nets of any material, whether or not lined or trimmed. This category includes various types of headgear made from knitted or crocheted materials, as well as hair-nets.

In summary, the document provides a list of tariff codes for various types of footwear and headgear, along with their corresponding rates of duty. The codes are organized into several categories based on the materials used, the design of the item, and its intended use. These codes and rates of duty may be used for the purpose of importing or exporting these items.
Summary:

The document outlines various tariff items and their corresponding rates of duty under the Indian Customs Tariff. The items are categorized into different headings and chapters, each covering specific types of goods. For instance, Heading 6701 covers skins and other parts of birds with their feathers or down, feathers, parts of feathers, down and articles thereof (other than goods of Heading 0505 and worked quills and scapes). The heading does not cover articles in which feathers or down constitute only filling or padding, articles of apparel or clothing accessories in which feathers or down constitute no more than mere trimming or padding, or artificial flowers or foliage or parts thereof or made up articles of Heading 6702.

Heading 6702 covers artificial flowers, foliage and fruit and parts thereof; articles made of artificial flowers, foliage or fruit. It does not cover articles of glass, artificial flowers, foliage or fruit of pottery, stone, metal, wood or other materials, obtained in one piece by moulding, forging, carving, stamping or other process, or consisting of parts assembled otherwise than by binding, glueing, fitting into one another or similar methods.

Heading 6801 covers sets, curbstones and flagstones, or natural stone (except slate), while Heading 6802 covers worked monumental or building stone (except slate) and articles thereof, other than goods of Heading 6801; mosaic cubes and the like of natural stone (including slate), whether or not on a backing; artificially coloured granules, chippings and powder, of natural stone (including slate). The heading does not cover slate.

Heading 6804 covers millstones, grindstones, grinding wheels and the like, without frameworks, for grinding, sharpening, polishing, trueing or cutting, hand sharpening or polishing stones, and parts thereof, of natural stone, of agglomerated natural or artificial abrasives, or of ceramics, with or without parts of other materials.

Heading 6805 covers natural or artificial abrasive powder or grain, on a base of textile material, of paper, of paperboard or of other materials, whether or not cut to shape or sewn or otherwise made up. The heading does not cover abrasive cloth on a base of woven textile fabric only, abrasive paper or paperboard on a base of paper or paperboard only, or abrasive products on a base of other materials.

Heading 6806 covers slag wool, rock wool and similar mineral wools; exfoliated vermiculite, expanded clays, foamed slag and similar expanded mineral materials; mixtures and articles of heat-insulating, sound-insulating or sound-absorbing mineral materials, other than those of Heading 6811 or 6812 or of Chapter 69.

Heading 6807 covers articles of asphalt or of similar material (for example, petroleum bitumen or coal tar pitch). The heading does not cover articles of asphalt or of similar material in rolls.

Heading 6808 covers panels, boards, tiles, blocks and similar articles of vegetable fiber, of straw or of shavings, chips, particles, sawdust or other waste, of wood, agglomerated with cement, plaster or other mineral binders.

Heading 6809 covers articles of plaster or of compositions based on plaster. The heading does not cover boards, sheets, panels, tiles and similar articles, not ornamented.

Heading 6810 covers articles of cement, of concrete or of artificial stone, whether or not reinforced. The heading does not cover tiles, flagstones, bricks and similar articles.

The rates of duty for the tariff items range from 10% to 40%, depending on the type of goods and their origin. The rates of duty for goods originating from Standard Preferential Areas are different from those for goods originating from other countries.
Summary:

The document appears to be a list of Indian customs tariffs for various goods, specifically focusing on ceramic products. The document is divided into several sections, each with its own set of tariffs and codes.

The first section, "Goods of Siliceous Fossil Meals or of Similar Siliceous Earths, and Refractory Goods," includes tariffs for bricks, blocks, tiles, and other ceramic goods made from siliceous fossil meals or similar siliceous earths. The tariffs range from 10% to 20%, depending on the type of product.

The second section, "Refractory Bricks, Blocks, Tiles, and Similar Refractory Ceramic Constructional Goods, Other Than Those of Siliceous Fossil Meals or Similar Siliceous Earths," includes tariffs for refractory goods made from magnesite, chrome magnesite, magnesia carbon, direct bonded basic, silica, high alumina, alumina carbon, silicon carbide, mullite, fire clay, graphic, and vermiculite insulation bricks and shapes. The tariffs range from 10% to 20%, depending on the type of product.

The third section, "Other Refractory Ceramic Goods (For Example, Retorts, Crucibles, Muffles, Nozzles, Plugs, Supports, Couples, Tubes, Pipes, Sheaths, and Rods), Other Than Those of Siliceous Fossil Meals or of Similar Siliceous Earths," includes tariffs for refractory goods made from magnesia carbon, alumina, silicon carbide, zircon or zircon-mullite, basalt, ceramic fibers, monolithics or castables, and other refractory ceramic goods. The tariffs range from 10% to 30%, depending on the type of product.

The fourth section, "Ceramic Building Bricks, Flooring Blocks, Support or Filler Tiles and the Like," includes tariffs for building bricks and other constructional ceramic goods. The tariffs range from 10% to 20%, depending on the type of product.

The fifth section, "Roofing Tiles, Chimney-Pots, Cowls, Chimney Liners, Architectural Ornaments and Other Ceramic Constructional Goods," includes tariffs for roofing tiles, chimney-pots, cowls, chimney liners, architectural ornaments, and other constructional ceramic goods. The tariffs range from 15% to 30%, depending on the type of product.

The sixth section, "Ceramic Pipes, Conduits, Guttering and Pipe Fittings," includes tariffs for ceramic pipes, conduits, guttering, and pipe fittings. The tariffs range from 15% to 20%, depending on the type of product.

The seventh section, "Unglazed Ceramic Flags and Paving, Hearth or Wall Tiles; Unglazed Ceramic Mosaic Cubes and the Like, Whether or Not on a Backing," includes tariffs for unglazed ceramic flags, paving, hearth or wall tiles, and unglazed ceramic mosaic cubes. The tariffs range from 15% to 20%, depending on the type of product.

The eighth section, "Ceramic Wares for Laboratory, Chemical or Other Technical Uses; Ceramic Throats, Tubs and Similar Receptacles of a Kind Used in Agriculture; Ceramic Pots, Jars and Similar Articles or a Kind Used for the Conveyance or Packing of Goods," includes tariffs for ceramic wares for laboratory, chemical or other technical uses, ceramic throats, tubs, and similar receptacles of a kind used in agriculture, and ceramic pots, jars, and similar articles used for the conveyance or packing of goods. The tariffs range from 10% to 20%, depending on the type of product.

Overall, the document provides a detailed list of Indian customs tariffs for various ceramic products, with tariffs ranging from 10% to 30%, depending on the type of product. The document also includes specific tariff codes for each product, which can be used to identify and classify the goods for customs purposes.
Summary:

This document pertains to Indian laws regarding the classification and taxation of various ceramic and glass products. The goods are categorized under different headings and subheadings, each with a specific rate of duty. The headings include cullet and other waste and scrap of glass; glass in balls, rods, or tubes, unworked; cast glass and rolled glass, in sheets or profiles; drawn glass and blown glass, in sheets; float glass and surface ground or polished glass, in sheets; glass of heading 7003, 7004, or 7005, bent, edge-worked, engraved, drilled, enameled, or otherwise worked, but not framed or fitted with other materials; safety glass, consisting of toughened (tempered) or laminated glass; insulating multiple-walled units of glass; glass mirrors, whether or not framed, including rear-view mirrors; carboys, bottles, flasks, jars, pots, phials, ampoules, and other containers, of glass, of a kind used for the conveyance or packing of goods; preserving jars of glass; stoppers, lids, and other closures, of glass; glass envelopes (including bulbs and tubes), open, and glass parts thereof, without fittings, for electric lamps, cathode-ray tubes or the like.

Under each heading, there are subheadings that further classify the products based on their material, shape, size, and intended use. For example, under heading 7001, cullet and other waste and scrap of glass, there are subheadings for cullet and other waste and scrap of glass, enamel glass in the mass, and other glass in the mass. Similarly, under heading 7002, glass in balls, rods, or tubes, unworked, there are subheadings for balls, rods, and tubes, with further classification based on the material and size.

The rate of duty for each subheading varies and is expressed as a percentage of the value of the goods. The standard rate of duty for most of the subheadings is 10%, but there are exceptions where the rate is 15% or 24%. For instance, under heading 7009, glass mirrors, whether or not framed, including rear-view mirrors, the rate of duty for rear-view mirrors for vehicles is 15%, while for other glass mirrors, it is 10%. Similarly, under heading 7011, glass envelopes (including bulbs and tubes), open, and glass parts thereof, without fittings, for electric lamps, cathode-ray tubes or the like, the rate of duty for glass envelopes for fluorescent lamps is 10%, while for other glass envelopes, it is 1%.

It is important to note that the document contains several legal terms and definitions that are crucial to understanding the classification and taxation of the products. For example, the term "glass" includes fused quartz and other fused silica, and the term "lead crystal" means only glass having a minimum lead monoxide (PbO) content by weight of 24 per cent.

In conclusion, this document outlines the Indian laws regarding the classification and taxation of various ceramic and glass products. The goods are classified under different headings and subheadings, each with a specific rate of duty. The rates of duty vary based on the material, shape, size, and intended use of the products. The document contains several legal terms and definitions that are essential to understanding the classification and taxation of the products.
Summary:

The document provides a list of Harmonized System (HS) codes for various glassware products, including drinking glasses, signalling glassware, clock or watch glasses, building or construction glassware, laboratory, hygienic or pharmaceutical glassware, glass beads, imitation pearls, statuettes, and other ornaments of lamp-worked glass, glass fibers and articles thereof, and other articles of glass. Each HS code is accompanied by a description of the product, and some codes have additional specifications. The HS codes are used for customs tariffs and trade statistics. The document also includes notes with general rules for classifying goods in this chapter and exceptions for certain products. The expression “metal clad with precious metal” is defined as a layer of precious metal applied to a base metal object. The term “precious metal” refers to silver, gold, and platinum, including their alloys with at least 2% by weight of the precious metal. The term “platinum” includes iridium, osmium, palladium, rhodium, and ruthenium. The term “precious or semi-precious stones” does not include any of the substances specified in Note 2 (b) to Chapter 96.
Summary:

This document pertains to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, specifically focusing on Sections VI and VII, which deal with natural or cultured pearls and precious or semi-precious stones, and precious metals, respectively.

Under Section VI, natural or cultured pearls, whether or not worked or graded but not strung, mounted or set, are classified under heading 7101. Specifically, natural pearls are classified under subheading 7101 10, while cultured pearls are classified under subheading 7101 21. Diamonds, whether or not worked, but not mounted or set, are classified under heading 7102, with unsorted diamonds falling under subheading 7102 10, industrial diamonds under subheading 7102 21, and non-industrial diamonds under subheading 7102 31. Stones (other than precious diamonds) and semi-precious stones, whether or not worked or graded but not strung, mounted or set, are classified under heading 7103, with unworked or simply sawn or roughly shaped stones falling under subheading 7103 10 and otherwise worked stones falling under subheading 7103 91.

Under Section VII, precious metals and metals clad with precious metals, unwrought or in semi-manufactured forms, or in powder form, are classified under heading 7106. Silver with gold or platinum is included in this heading. Base metals clad with silver, not further worked than semi-manufactured, are classified under heading 7107. Gold (including gold plated with platinum) unwrought or in semi-manufactured forms, or in powder form, is classified under heading 7108, with non-monetary gold falling under subheading 7108 11 and monetary gold falling under subheading 7108 20. Base metals or silver, clad with gold, not further worked than semi-manufactured, are classified under heading 7109. Platinum, unwrought or in semi-manufactured form, or in powder form, is classified under heading 7110, with palladium, rhodium, iridium, osmium, and ruthenium also falling under this heading.

Note 1(a) to Section VI states that goods answering to a description in heading 7112 are to be classified in that heading and in no other heading of this Schedule. Note 9 to Section VI defines "articles of jewellery" as any small objects of personal adornment, such as rings, bracelets, necklaces, brooches, ear-rings, watch-chains, fobs, pendants, tie-pins, cuff-links, dress-studs, religious or other medals and insignia, as well as articles of personal use of a kind normally carried in the pocket, in the handbag or on the person, such as cigar or cigarette cases, snuff boxes, cachou or pill boxes, powder boxes, chain purses or prayer beads. These articles may be combined or set with natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones, synthetic or reconstructed precious or semi-precious stones, tortoise shell, mother-of-pearl, ivory, natural or reconstituted amber, jet or coral.

Heading 7113 includes such articles as ornaments, tableware, toilet-ware, smokers' requisites and other articles of household, office or religious use made of precious metals. Heading 7114 includes articles of gold smiths' or silversmiths' wares, such as ornaments, tableware, toilet-ware, smokers' requisites and other articles of household, office or religious use. Heading 7117 includes imitation jewellery, which are articles of jewellery not incorporating natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed) nor (except as plating or as minor constituents) precious metal or metal clad with precious metal.

Sub-heading notes 1, 2, and 3 provide further clarification on the classification of alloys, the definition of "platinum," and the classification of platinum alloys, respectively.

The Tariff Item Description of goods under Section VI and VII provides a detailed list of the various types of natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones, and precious metals that fall under each subheading, along with the applicable rate of duty. The Areas column indicates the country of origin or destination of the goods.
Summary:

The document provides information on the classification and tariff rates for various goods under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The goods are classified based on their material composition, whether it be precious metals, base metals, or other materials. The Act specifies the rates of duty for each category and subcategory of goods.

Precious metals and their alloys are classified under Chapter 71 of the Act. This includes gold, silver, platinum, and palladium, as well as their alloys. The tariff rates for these goods vary depending on their form and level of processing. For example, unworked precious metals are subject to a lower tariff rate than semi-manufactured or fully manufactured goods.

Base metals and their alloys are classified under Chapter 72 of the Act. This includes iron, steel, copper, aluminum, and other non-precious metals. The tariff rates for these goods are generally lower than those for precious metals, but still vary depending on the level of processing. For example, waste and scrap metal are subject to a lower tariff rate than semi-manufactured or fully manufactured goods.

Other goods made of non-metallic materials are classified under various chapters of the Act. For example, Chapter 40 covers rubber and plastics, while Chapter 50 covers chemical products. The tariff rates for these goods vary depending on their specific classification.

In addition to the tariff rates, the Act also specifies certain exemptions and exclusions. For example, certain goods are exempt from tariffs if they are used as inputs in the production of other goods. Other goods are excluded from the Act altogether, such as prepared paints, inks, and other products with a basis of metallic flakes or powder.

Overall, the Indian Customs Tariff Act provides a comprehensive framework for the classification and taxation of imported goods. The Act takes into account the specific characteristics of various goods and sets tariff rates accordingly. By doing so, the Act aims to promote fair trade practices and protect domestic industries.
Summary:

The document discusses the classification of different types of ferrous materials under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The classification is based on the composition, form, and use of the materials. The document begins by defining various terms used in the classification, such as alloy pig iron, non-alloy free-cutting steel, silicon-electrical steel, high-speed steel, and silico-manganese steel.

The classification of ferrous materials is divided into several headings. Heading 7201 covers pig iron and spiegeleisen in primary forms. Non-alloy pig iron containing 0.5% or less of phosphorus is classified under tariff item 7201 10 00, while non-alloy pig iron containing more than 0.5% of phosphorus is classified under tariff item 7201 20 00. Alloy pig iron and spiegeleisen are classified under tariff item 7201 50, with further classification based on the carbon content.

Heading 7202 covers ferro-alloys, which are further classified based on the type of alloy and the percentage of alloying elements. For example, ferro-manganese containing more than 2% of carbon is classified under tariff item 7202 11 00, while other ferro-manganese is classified under tariff item 7202 19 00. Ferro-silicon containing more than 55% of silicon is classified under tariff item 7202 21 00, while other ferro-silicon is classified under tariff item 7202 29 00.

Heading 7203 covers steel, which is further classified based on the carbon content and the presence of other elements. Stainless steel is classified under tariff item 7219 31 00, while other alloy steel is classified under tariff item 7219 32 00. Remelting scrap ingots of iron and steel are classified under tariff item 7224 90 90.

Heading 7204 covers ferrous waste and scrap, which is further classified based on the type of waste or scrap. For example, steel turnings and borings are classified under tariff item 7204 21 00, while cast iron scrap is classified under tariff item 7204 91 90.

Heading 7205 covers granules, which are further classified based on the size and composition of the granules. For example, granules of iron or steel with a particle size of less than 1 mm are classified under tariff item 7205 10 00, while granules of iron or steel with a particle size of more than 1 mm but less than 5 mm are classified under tariff item 7205 20 00.

Heading 7206 covers semi-finished products, which are further classified based on the form and composition of the products. For example, continuous cast products of solid section are classified under tariff item 7206 11 00, while other products of solid section are classified under tariff item 7206 19 00.

Heading 7207 covers flat-rolled products, which are further classified based on the thickness, width, and surface pattern of the products. For example, flat-rolled products of solid rectangular cross-section with a thickness of less than 4.75 mm and a width of at least ten times the thickness are classified under tariff item 7207 11 00, while flat-rolled products of solid rectangular cross-section with a thickness of 4.75 mm or more and a width of at least twice the thickness are classified under tariff item 7207 19 00.

Heading 7208 covers bars and rods, which are further classified based on the form, composition, and surface pattern of the products. For example, hot-rolled products in irregularly wound coils with a solid cross-section in the shape of circles, segments of circles, ovals, rectangles, triangles, or other convex polygons are classified under tariff item 7208 10 00, while other bars and rods are classified under tariff item 7208 90 90.

Heading 7209 covers angles, shapes, and sections, which are further classified based on the form and composition of the products. For example, products having a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length in the shape of circles, segments of circles, ovals, rectangles, triangles, or other convex polygons are classified under tariff item 7209 10 00, while other angles, shapes, and sections are classified under tariff item 7209 90 90.

Heading 7210 covers wire, which is further classified based on the form, composition, and surface pattern of the wire. For example, cold-formed products in coils with a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length are classified under tariff item 7210 10 00, while other wire is classified under tariff item 7210 90 90.

Heading 7211 covers hollow drill bars and rods, which are further classified based on the size and composition of the bars and rods. For example, hollow bars and rods of iron or steel with a greatest external dimension of the cross-section exceeding 15 mm but not exceeding 52 mm and a greatest internal dimension not exceeding one half of the greatest external dimension are classified under tariff item 7211 10 00, while other hollow drill bars and rods are classified under tariff item 7211 90 90.

The document also includes sub-heading notes, supplementary notes, and tariff item descriptions, which provide further guidance on the classification of ferrous materials under the Indian Customs Tariff Act.
Summary:

The provided document outlines various categories and subcategories of ferrous and non-ferrous products, primarily focusing on Indian laws related to these products. The products are classified based on their composition, manufacturing process, and physical characteristics.

The primary categories include:

1. Ferro-alloys: These are alloys of iron with a high proportion of one or more other elements, such as silicon, manganese, chromium, nickel, molybdenum, tungsten, titanium, vanadium, niobium, phosphorus, selenium, cobalt, columbium, zirconium, and tantalum.

2. Ferrous products obtained by direct reduction of iron ore and other spongy ferrous products: These are products obtained through the direct reduction of iron ore, typically in the form of lumps, pellets, or similar forms.

3. Ferrous waste and scrap: This category includes waste and scrap of cast iron, alloy steel, stainless steel, high-speed steel, tinned iron or steel, and other ferrous materials.

4. Granules and powders of pig iron, Spiegeleisen, iron, or steel: This category includes various forms of granules and powders made from iron, Spiegeleisen, or steel.

5. Iron and non-alloy steel in ingots or other primary forms: This category includes ingots, puddled bars and pilings, blocks, lumps, and similar forms of iron and non-alloy steel.

6. Semi-finished products of iron or non-alloy steel: These are semi-finished products made from iron or non-alloy steel, which may contain less than 0.25% of carbon. They are further classified based on their cross-sectional shape, including rectangular (including square), rectangular (other than square), and other forms.

7. Flat-rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel: This category includes flat-rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel, which are 600 mm or more in width and have varying thicknesses. They are classified based on their thickness, whether they are hot-rolled, not clad, plated, or coated, and if they are in coils or not.

The document uses a hierarchical structure with headings and subheadings to organize the information, making it easier to understand the different categories and subcategories of ferrous and non-ferrous products. The primary focus is on Indian laws, with specific codes assigned to each category and subcategory.
This document appears to be a list of Indian tariff codes related to the importation of various types of steel products. The codes are organized by the type of steel product and its characteristics, such as thickness, width, and surface treatment.

The tariff codes are organized into several categories based on the type of steel product. These categories include:

* Flat-rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel, of a width of 600 mm or more, clad, plated or coated
* Flat-rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel, of a width of less than 600 mm, not clad, plated or coated
* Flat-rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel, of a width of less than 600 mm, clad, plated or coated
* Bars and rods, hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, of iron or non-alloy steel
* Other bars and rods of iron or non-alloy steel, not further worked than forged, hot-rolled, hot-drawn nor hot-extruded, but including those twisted after rolling
* Other bars and rods of iron or non-alloy steel
* Angles, shapes and sections of iron or non-alloy steel
* Wire of iron or non-alloy steel

Each category is further divided into subcategories based on the specific characteristics of the steel product. For example, the subcategories for flat-rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel, of a width of 600 mm or more, clad, plated or coated include:

* Plated or coated with tin
* Plated or coated with lead, including terne-plate
* Electrolytically plated or coated with zinc
* Otherwise plated or coated with zinc
* Plated or coated with chromium oxides or with chromium and chromium oxides
* Plated or coated with aluminium
* Plated or coated with aluminium-zinc alloys
* Painted, varnished or coated with plastics
* Other

Within each subcategory, the tariff codes are organized by the thickness of the steel product, with different codes for products with a thickness of less than 0.5 mm, between 0.5 mm and 1 mm, and greater than 1 mm. There are also separate codes for plates, sheets, strip, and other forms of the steel product.

The tariff codes are followed by a percentage indicating the import duty that will be applied to the product. For example, the code "227: 7209 26 10 Plates kg. 1[15%]" indicates that plates of iron or non-alloy steel, with a thickness exceeding 1 mm but less than 3 mm, will be subject to an import duty of 15%.

Overall, this document provides a detailed list of Indian tariff codes related to the importation of various types of steel products, organized by the type and characteristics of the product. The tariff codes are followed by the applicable import duty, which will be applied to the product upon importation into India.
The document provided appears to be a detailed list of various types of steel products, including their dimensions and applicable tariff rates. The list includes flat-rolled products, bars and rods, and hollow drill bars and rods made of stainless steel, other alloy steel, or non-alloy steel. The products are classified based on their dimensions, such as width, thickness, and cross-section, as well as the type of steel they are made of, such as chromium type, nickel chromium austenitic type, or other chromium type.

The tariff rates listed in the document range from 15% to 22.5%, depending on the type and dimensions of the steel product. For example, flat-rolled products of stainless steel with a width of 600 mm or more and a thickness of 4.75 mm or more but not exceeding 10 mm are subject to a tariff rate of 22.5%. On the other hand, bars and rods of other alloy steel, not further worked than hot-rolled, in irregularly wound coils, and with a diameter of 16 mm or more but less than 40 mm are subject to a tariff rate of 15%.

It is worth noting that the document does not contain any specific Indian laws or legal terms. It is merely a list of steel products and their corresponding tariff rates.
This document appears to be a list of customs tariffs for various steel products, organized by product type and quality. The tariffs are organized under chapter headings, with specific tariff codes for each product. The tariffs are expressed as a percentage of the product's value, and are followed by the phrase "kg. 1[15%]" which indicates that the tariff is 15% of the product's weight.

The products listed in this document include flat-rolled products, bars and rods, angles, shapes, and sections, hollow drill bars and rods, wire, sheet piling, railway or tramway track construction materials, and tubes, pipes, and hollow profiles. Each product type is further divided into subcategories based on factors such as the product's dimensions, composition, and intended use.

For example, under the heading "7225 FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF SPRING STEEL," there are several subcategories based on the product's thickness and whether it is further worked than hot-rolled or cold-rolled. The tariffs for each subcategory are expressed as a percentage of the product's weight.

Similarly, under the heading "7226 FLAT-ROLLED PRODUCTS OF OTHER ALLOY STEEL, OF A WIDTH OF LESS THAN 600 MM," there are several subcategories based on the product's composition, dimensions, and whether it is further worked than hot-rolled, cold-rolled, electrolytically plated, or coated with zinc. The tariffs for each subcategory are expressed as a percentage of the product's weight.

Overall, this document provides a detailed list of customs tariffs for various steel products, organized by product type and quality. The tariffs are expressed as a percentage of the product's weight, and are based on factors such as the product's dimensions, composition, and intended use.
The document lists various types of tubes, pipes, and containers made of iron or steel, along with their respective customs tariff codes and rates of duty. The tariff codes are organized based on the material, shape, and use of the products.

The tariff codes for tubes and pipes made of iron or steel include:

* 7304: This code covers tubes and pipes of iron or non-alloy steel, including drill pipe, casing, and line pipe. The rate of duty is 15%.
* 7305: This code covers other tubes and pipes of iron or steel, with an external diameter exceeding 406.4 mm. The rate of duty is 15%.
* 7306: This code covers other tubes, pipes, and hollow profiles of iron or steel, including line pipe of a kind used for oil or gas pipelines. The rate of duty varies depending on the type of material and manufacturing process.

The tariff codes for containers made of iron or steel include:

* 7309: This code covers reservoirs, tanks, vats, and similar containers for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, of a capacity exceeding 300 L. The rate of duty is 15%.
* 7310: This code covers tanks, casks, drums, cans, boxes, and similar containers, for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of iron or steel, of a capacity not exceeding 300 L. The rate of duty varies depending on the capacity and type of container.
* 7311: This code covers containers for compressed or liquefied gas, of iron or steel. The rate of duty varies depending on the type of gas and the pressure rating of the container.

It's worth noting that the document also includes references to legal terms such as "galvanized" (a process of coating iron or steel with zinc to prevent rusting) and "stainless steel" (a type of steel that contains chromium, which makes it resistant to corrosion). Additionally, the document includes references to specific manufacturing processes, such as "longitudinally submerged arc welded" and "cold-drawn or cold-rolled (cold-reduced)". These terms and processes are important for accurately classifying the products and determining the correct rate of duty.
Summary:

This document appears to be a list of goods and their corresponding tariff codes, which are used to determine the applicable taxes and duties on imported or exported goods in India. The goods listed are primarily made of iron or steel and include a wide range of products such as wire, chain, anchors, screws, bolts, nuts, washers, rivets, cotters, cotter-pins, sewing needles, knitting needles, bodkins, crochet hooks, embroidery stilettos, safety pins, other pins, stoves, ranges, grates, cookers, barbecues, braziers, gas-rings, plate warmers, radiators for central heating, table, kitchen or other household articles and parts thereof, iron or steel wool, pot scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves and the like, sanitary ware and parts thereof, other cast articles of iron or steel, and other articles of iron or steel.

Each good is assigned a unique 12-digit tariff code, with the first 8 digits being the "Chapter" number, which identifies the general category of the good, and the last 4 digits being the "Tariff Item" number, which identifies the specific product within that category. The tariff codes are organized according to the Harmonized System (HS) of tariff nomenclature, which is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers used to classify traded products.

The tariff codes also indicate the applicable tax rates for the goods, which are expressed as a percentage of the value of the goods. For example, the tariff code "7317 00 11" indicates that the goods are "Nails, tacks, drawing pins, corrugated nails, staples (other than those of heading 8305) and similar articles, of iron or steel, whether or not with heads of other material, but excluding such articles with heads of copper" and that the applicable tax rate is 15%.

It is important to note that this document only provides a summary of the tariff codes and their corresponding tax rates, and that the actual tariff rates and rules may vary depending on the specific circumstances of the import or export transaction, such as the country of origin or destination, the value or quantity of the goods, and any applicable trade agreements or preferential tariff arrangements. Therefore, it is always advisable to consult the relevant authorities or a licensed customs broker for accurate and up-to-date information on tariffs and customs procedures.
Summary:

The document provides a detailed list of goods and their corresponding tariff items under Chapter 74 of the Indian Customs Tariff. The chapter covers copper and articles thereof. The document defines various expressions used in the chapter, including refined copper, copper alloys, master alloys, bars and rods, profiles, wire, plates, sheets, strip and foil, and tubes and pipes.

Refined copper is defined as metal containing at least 99.85 per cent. by weight of copper or metal containing at least 97.5 per cent. by weight of copper, provided that the content by weight of any other element does not exceed the limit specified in the table provided in the document. Copper alloys are defined as metallic substances other than unrefined copper in which copper predominates by weight over each of the other elements. Master alloys are defined as alloys containing with other elements more than 10 per cent. by weight, of copper not usefully malleable and commonly used as an additive in the manufacture of other alloys or as de-oxidants, desulphuring agents or for similar uses in the metallurgy of non-ferrous metals.

Bars and rods are defined as rolled, extruded, drawn or forged products, not in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons. Profiles are defined as rolled, extruded, drawn, forged or formed products, coiled or not, of a uniform cross-section along their whole length, which do not conform to any of the definitions of bars, rods, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes or pipes. Wire is defined as rolled, extruded or drawn products, in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons.

Plates, sheets, strip and foil are defined as flat-surfaced products (other than the unwrought products of heading 7403), coiled or not, of solid rectangular (other than square) cross-section with or without rounded corners of a uniform thickness, which are of a rectangular (including square) shape with a thickness not exceeding one-tenth of the width. Tubes and pipes are defined as hollow products, coiled or not, which have a uniform cross-section with only one enclosed void along their whole length in the shape of circles, ovals, rectangles (including squares), equilateral triangles or regular convex polygons, and which have a uniform wall thickness.

The document also provides a list of tariff items under heading 7403, which covers refined copper and copper alloys, unwrought. The heading includes cathodes and sections of cathodes, wire-bars, billets, and other unwrought copper and copper alloys. The tariff items provide the rate of duty for each item.

Overall, the document provides a detailed classification of copper and articles thereof under the Indian Customs Tariff, along with the definitions of various expressions used in the chapter and the corresponding tariff items with their rates of duty.
Summary:

The document provided appears to be a detailed list of various types of copper scrap and alloys, along with their corresponding HS codes and descriptions. The list includes different forms of copper scrap, such as copper wire scrap, copper alloy scrap, bronze scrap, and copper nickel scrap. Each type of scrap is further classified based on its composition, size, and shape. For example, copper wire scrap is classified based on whether it has various types of insulation, while copper alloy scrap is classified based on the specific alloy it contains, such as brass or bronze.

The document also includes a list of copper powders and flakes, copper bars, rods, and profiles, copper plates, sheets, and strip, copper foil, copper tubes and pipes, copper tube or pipe fittings, stranded wire, cables, plated bands, nails, tacks, drawing pins, staples, screws, bolts, nuts, screw hooks, rivets, cotters, cotter-pins, washers, and other copper alloy articles. Each category is further broken down into specific types of products, along with their corresponding HS codes and descriptions.

In addition, the document includes a section on Indian laws, specifically the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. This section outlines the various rates of duty applicable to different types of copper scrap and alloys, based on their HS codes. The rates of duty range from 5% to 10%, depending on the specific type of scrap or alloy.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive list of various types of copper scrap and alloys, along with their corresponding HS codes, descriptions, and rates of duty under Indian law.
The document provides information on the classification of various nickel and aluminum products under the Indian Customs Tariff. It starts by defining various terms such as bars, rods, profiles, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes, and pipes. These definitions are important as they form the basis for classifying the products under different headings.

Under Heading 7501, nickel mattes, nickel oxide sinters, and other intermediate products of nickel metallurgy are classified. Nickel mattes are intermediate products in the nickel metallurgy process, while nickel oxide sinters are a type of intermediate product that is obtained by sintering a mixture of nickel oxide and other materials.

Heading 7502 covers unwrought nickel, which includes nickel, not alloyed, and nickel alloys. Nickel, not alloyed, is pure nickel, while nickel alloys are metallic substances in which nickel predominates by weight over each of the other elements. The subheading notes provide the specific requirements for each subheading.

Heading 7503 covers nickel waste and scrap, including new and old nickel scrap, nickel powders and flakes, and other nickel waste and scrap. The subheading notes provide the specific requirements for each subheading.

Heading 7505 covers nickel bars, rods, profiles, and wire. Bars and rods are rolled, extruded, drawn, or forged products that have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length. Profiles are products that do not conform to any of the definitions of bars, rods, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes, or pipes. Wire is rolled, extruded, or drawn products, in coils, which have a uniform solid cross-section along their whole length.

Heading 7506 covers nickel plates, sheets, strip, and foil. These are flat-surfaced products that have a uniform thickness and are coiled or not. The subheading notes provide the specific requirements for each subheading.

Heading 7507 covers nickel tubes, pipes, and tube or pipe fittings. Tubes and pipes are hollow products that have a uniform cross-section with only one enclosed void along their whole length. Tube or pipe fittings are products that are used to connect tubes and pipes.

Heading 7508 covers other articles of nickel, including cloth, grill, and netting of nickel wire, electroplating anodes of nickel, blanks ordinarily used for manufacturing tubes and pipes of nickel, nickel screen, and other articles of nickel and nickel alloy.

Chapter 76 covers aluminum and articles thereof. The note to this chapter provides the definitions of bars and rods, profiles, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes, and pipes, which are similar to those provided in Heading 7501. The headings and subheadings in this chapter cover various aluminum products, which are classified based on their shape, size, and use. The subheading notes provide the specific requirements for each subheading.
Summary:

The document discusses the Harmonized System (HS) code for aluminum and aluminum products. The HS code is a standardized system of names and numbers to classify traded products. The document focuses on the codes for aluminum and aluminum alloys, including unwrought aluminum, waste and scrap, powders and flakes, bars, rods, and profiles, wire, plates, sheets, and strip, tubes and pipes, and foil.

Under HS code 7601, unwrought aluminum is classified, including aluminum, not alloyed, and aluminum alloys. The code applies to ingots, billets, wire bars, wire rods, and other unwrought aluminum. The rate of duty for this code is 7.5%.

HS code 7602 covers aluminum waste and scrap. The code includes clean aluminum lithographic sheets, mixed low copper aluminum clippings and solids, clean mixed old alloy sheet aluminum, new aluminum can stock, old can stock, shredded aluminum used beverages can (U) scrap, densified aluminum UBC scrap, baled aluminum UBC scrap, briquetted aluminum UBC scrap, painted siding, coated scrap, aluminum scrap radiators, E.C. aluminum nodules, new pure aluminum wire and cable, new mixed aluminum wire and cable, old pure aluminum wire and cable, old mixed aluminum wire and cable, aluminum pistons, segregated aluminum borings and turnings, mixed aluminum castings, wrecked airplane sheet aluminum, new aluminum foil, old aluminum foil, aluminum grindings, segregated new aluminum alloy clippings and solids, mixed new aluminum alloy clippings and solids, segregated new aluminum castings, forgings, and extrusions, aluminum auto castings, insulated aluminum wire scrap, aluminum airplane castings, fragmentizer aluminum scrap (from automobile shredder), aluminum auto or truck wheels, fragmentizer aluminum scrap from automobile shredders, burnt fragmentizer aluminum scrap (from automobile shredders), shredded non-ferrous scrap (predominantly aluminum), new production aluminum extrusions, all aluminum radiators from automobiles, aluminum extrusions '10/10', aluminum extrusions dealer grade, and other waste and scrap. The rate of duty for this code is 5%.

HS code 7603 covers aluminum powders and flakes. The code is divided into two categories: powders of non-lamellar structure and powders of lamellar structure or flakes. The rate of duty for this code is 7.5%.

HS code 7604 covers aluminum bars, rods, and profiles. The code applies to aluminum, not alloyed, and aluminum alloys. The code is divided into four categories: wire rods, bars and rods (other than wire rods), hollow profiles, and other profiles. The rate of duty for this code is 7.5%.

HS code 7605 covers aluminum wire. The code applies to aluminum, not alloyed, and aluminum alloys. The code is divided into three categories: wire with a maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding 7 mm, wire with a maximum cross-sectional dimension exceeding 6 mm but not exceeding 7 mm, and other wire. The rate of duty for this code is 7.5%.

HS code 7606 covers aluminum plates, sheets, and strip, of a thickness exceeding 0.2 mm. The code applies to aluminum, not alloyed, and aluminum alloys. The code is divided into three categories: rectangular (including square), circles, and other. The rate of duty for this code is 7.5%.

Indian laws related to this document include the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of Anti-dumping Duty on Certain Goods) Rules, 1995. These laws provide the legal framework for the classification and assessment of duties on imported goods, including aluminum and aluminum products. The Customs Tariff Act, 1975, sets out the rates of duty for different categories of goods, while the Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of Anti-dumping Duty on Certain Goods) Rules, 1995, provide the procedures for the identification and assessment of anti-dumping duties on imported goods sold at dumped prices.

In summary, the document provides the HS code for aluminum and aluminum products, including unwrought aluminum, waste and scrap, powders and flakes, bars, rods, and profiles, wire, plates, sheets, and strip, tubes and pipes, and foil. The rates of duty for these codes are provided under Indian laws, including the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of Anti-dumping Duty on Certain Goods) Rules, 1995.
Title: Indian Tariff Classification of Aluminum and Articles Thereof

The Indian Tariff Classification document provides a detailed breakdown of various aluminum products and their respective classification codes. The classification is based on the Harmonized System (HS) of tariff nomenclature, which is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers to classify traded products. The document includes various categories of aluminum products, such as:

1. Aluminum Foil: This category includes aluminum foil of a thickness not exceeding 0.2 mm, whether or not printed or backed with paper, paperboard, plastics, or similar backing materials. It is further divided into subcategories based on whether the foil is backed or not, and whether it is ordinarily used for tea chest lining or not.
2. Aluminum and Pipes: This category includes aluminum pipes and tubes, whether or not alloyed, and aluminum tube or pipe fittings such as couplings, elbows, and sleeves.
3. Aluminum Structures: This category includes aluminum structures and parts of structures, such as bridges, towers, lattice masts, roofs, and roofing frameworks. It also includes doors, windows, and their frames and thresholds for doors, balustrades, pillars, and columns.
4. Aluminum Reservoirs, Tanks, Vats, and Similar Containers: This category includes aluminum containers for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of a capacity exceeding 300 L, whether or not lined or heat-insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment.
5. Aluminum Casks, Drums, Cans, Boxes, and Similar Containers: This category includes aluminum containers for any material (other than compressed or liquefied gas), of a capacity not exceeding 300 L, whether or not lined or heat-insulated, but not fitted with mechanical or thermal equipment. It is further divided into subcategories based on whether the containers are collapsible tubular containers, plain, lacquered, or printed.
6. Aluminum Containers for Compressed or Liquefied Gas: This category includes aluminum containers for compressed or liquefied gas, such as low pressure cylinders, high pressure cylinders, and other containers. It is further divided into subcategories based on whether the containers are plain, lacquered, printed, or other.
7. Stranded Wire, Cables, Plaited Bands, and the Like, of Aluminum, Not Electrically Insulated: This category includes stranded wire, cables, plaited bands, and the like, of aluminum, not electrically insulated. It is further divided into subcategories based on whether the products have a steel core or not.
8. Table, Kitchen or Other Household Articles and Parts Thereof, of Aluminum; Pot Scourers and Scouring or Polishing Pads, Gloves and the Like, of Aluminum; Sanitary Ware and Parts Thereof, of Aluminum: This category includes various household articles and parts thereof, of aluminum, such as pressure cookers, solar collectors, utensils, pot scourers, scouring or polishing pads, gloves, and sanitary ware.
9. Other Articles of Aluminum: This category includes various other articles of aluminum, such as nails, tacks, staples, screws, bolts, nuts, screw hooks, rivets, cotters, cotter-pins, washers, cloth, grill, netting and fencing, of aluminum wire, chains, bobbins, and other articles.

Each category and subcategory is assigned a specific classification code, which is used for customs and tariff purposes. The document also includes notes and explanations to clarify the classification of certain products.

In summary, the Indian Tariff Classification document provides a comprehensive classification system for aluminum products and articles, which is based on the Harmonized System (HS) of tariff nomenclature. The document includes various categories and subcategories of aluminum products, such as aluminum foil, pipes, structures, containers, and household articles, and assigns a specific classification code to each category and subcategory. The document also includes notes and explanations to clarify the classification of certain products.
Summary:
The document outlines the Indian laws related to the importation of lead and zinc, specifically in terms of tariff items and rates of duty. It includes specific regulations on the content of various impurities, such as silver, arsenic, bismuth, calcium, cadmium, copper, iron, sulphur, antimony, tin, and zinc, in lead and zinc products. The document also provides definitions for various types of lead and zinc products, such as bars, rods, profiles, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes, and pipes. The tariff items for lead and zinc are listed under chapters 78 and 79, respectively, and include specific rates of duty for different types of products. The document also includes provisions for lead and zinc waste and scrap, dust, powders, and flakes, as well as other articles of lead and zinc. The rates of duty for these products vary, with some being subject to a 5% rate and others being subject to a 7.5% or 10% rate. The document also includes a note defining certain terms used in the chapter, such as "Bars and rods," "Profiles," and "Wire."
Summary:

The document outlines the Harmonized System (HS) codes for various base metals and their products, including tin, tungsten, molybdenum, tantalum, magnesium, cobalt, bismuth, cadmium, titanium, zirconium, antimony, manganese, and beryllium, among others. The HS codes are used for customs tariffs and trade statistics. The document provides a detailed description of each metal and its products, including unwrought forms, waste and scrap, powders, raspings, turnings, and granules, wrought forms, and articles. The codes also specify the rate of duty for each category of product. For example, tin not alloyed has a rate of duty of 5% in blocks and ingots, while tin alloys have a rate of duty of 5% in all forms. Similarly, unwrought tungsten has a rate of duty of 5%, while tungsten filament has a rate of duty of 10%. The HS codes also provide specific definitions for certain terms used in the classification of these metals and their products, such as bars, rods, profiles, wire, plates, sheets, strip, foil, tubes, and pipes. These definitions are important for accurately classifying the products under the correct HS code. Overall, the document provides a comprehensive guide to the HS codes for various base metals and their products, which is useful for businesses involved in the import and export of these metals and their products.
This document appears to be a list of tariff codes and descriptions for various goods, primarily related to tools, implements, cutlery, and metalworking. The codes are organized into chapters and headings, and each code corresponds to a specific type of good. The descriptions provide more detail about the goods, including their intended use and any specific features.

The tariff codes are organized into chapters, with each chapter covering a specific type of good. For example, Chapter 82 covers tools, implements, cutlery, and metalworking, while Chapter 84 covers machinery and mechanical appliances. Within each chapter, the codes are further organized into headings that group similar goods together. For example, within Chapter 82, heading 8201 covers hand tools, while heading 8202 covers hand saws.

Each tariff code is followed by a description of the corresponding good. The descriptions provide more detail about the goods, including their intended use and any specific features. For example, the description for tariff code 8201 10 00 states that it covers spades and shovels of base metal, and specifies that the duty rate is 10%.

The document also includes several notes that provide additional information about the tariff codes and descriptions. For example, Note 1 to Chapter 82 states that the chapter covers only articles with a blade, working edge, working surface, or other working part of base metal, metal carbides, cermets, precious or semi-precious stones, abrasive materials, or a combination of these materials. Note 2 to the chapter states that parts of base metal of the articles of this chapter are to be classified with the articles of which they are parts, except parts separately specified as such and tool-holders for hand tools.

Overall, this document appears to be a reference guide for tariff codes and descriptions for various goods, primarily related to tools, implements, cutlery, and metalworking. It provides a detailed and organized system for classifying and identifying these goods, and includes information about the duty rates for each tariff code.
Summary:
The document outlines various Indian laws and regulations related to the importation of goods into India. The goods are classified under different headings and subheadings, with each heading corresponding to a specific type of product. The rates of duty for each heading are also provided. The document includes various legal terms such as "base metal," "precious metal," and "tariff item." It also specifies certain conditions and exceptions for the classification and duty rates of certain goods. For example, parts of base metal are to be classified with their parent articles, except for certain types of iron or steel parts. Additionally, the document includes notes that provide further clarification on the classification and duty rates of certain goods. It is important to note that this is a summary and does not include all the details and provisions of the original document.
Summary:

The document summarizes Indian laws related to the classification of goods in the Harmonized System (HS). The summary focuses on the classification of certain goods, such as base metal, plastics, drill pipe, endless belts, articles of Chapter 82 or 83, Section XVII, Chapter 90, Chapter 91, interchangeable tools, articles of Chapter 95, typewriter or similar ribbons, and vacuum cleaners. The document also outlines rules for classifying parts of machines, composite machines, and machines consisting of individual components. Additionally, the document explains the meaning of "machine" and provides notes on Chapter 84, which covers nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery, and mechanical appliances, including parts thereof. The chapter does not cover certain items, such as millstones, grindstones, machinery or appliances of ceramic material, laboratory glassware, machinery or appliances of glass, articles of base metal, vacuum cleaners, and electro-mechanical domestic appliances. The chapter also outlines rules for classifying machines or appliances that fall under more than one heading. Finally, the document provides specific rules for classifying automatic data processing machines and their components.
This document appears to be a table listing various types of machinery and equipment, along with their corresponding tariff item descriptions, unit rates of duty, and standard or preferential rates of duty. The machinery and equipment are grouped under various headings and subheadings, which seem to correspond to different categories or types of machinery and equipment. The headings and subheadings include descriptions such as "nuclear reactors," "steam or other vapour generating boilers," "central heating boilers," "auxiliary plant for use with boilers," "producer gas or water gas generators," "steam turbines and other vapour turbines," "spark-ignition reciprocating or rotary internal combustion piston engines," "compression-ignition internal combustion piston engines (diesel or semi-diesel engines)," "parts suitable for use solely or principally with the engines of heading 8407 or 8408," "hydraulic turbines, water wheels, and regulators therefor," and "turbo-jets, turbo-propellers and other gas turbines."

For each type of machinery or equipment, the table lists a tariff item description, which provides a more detailed description of the item, along with its corresponding unit rate of duty and standard or preferential rate of duty. The unit rate of duty is expressed as a percentage, and it appears to be the duty that is imposed on the item per unit of measurement (such as per kilogram). The standard or preferential rate of duty is also expressed as a percentage, and it appears to be the duty that is imposed on the item under certain conditions or agreements (such as a free trade agreement).

It is worth noting that the table includes several notes and sub-heading notes that provide additional information or clarification about the classification of certain items. For example, Note 1 to Section XVI and Note 1 to Chapter 84 provide general rules for the classification of machinery and equipment, while Sub-heading Note 3 provides a specific definition of the term "machining centres" for the purposes of sub-heading 8465 20.

Overall, this document appears to be a tariff schedule or a list of tariff items and their corresponding rates of duty for various types of machinery and equipment. It seems to be used for the purpose of determining the duty that is imposed on these items when they are imported into a country.
Summary:

The document outlines various Indian laws related to the import of specific goods. The goods are categorized under different headings and subheadings, with each category having a specific rate of duty. The headings and subheadings cover various products such as steam engines, pumps for liquids, air or vacuum pumps, air conditioning machines, furnace burners, industrial or laboratory furnaces and ovens, refrigerators, freezers, and other refrigerating or freezing equipment, and machinery for the treatment of materials by a process involving a change of temperature.

Under each heading, there are various subheadings that provide more specific classifications of the products. For instance, under heading 8413, which covers pumps for liquids, there are subheadings for hand pumps, pumps for dispensing fuel or lubricants, and pumps for handling water, among others. Each subheading has a specific rate of duty, which is indicated in the brackets next to it.

The document also includes provisions for the import of parts of the products covered under the different headings and subheadings. For instance, under heading 8414, which covers air or vacuum pumps, air or other gas compressors, and fans, there is a subheading for parts of these products, which has a specific rate of duty.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive overview of the Indian laws related to the import of specific goods, with clear classifications and specific rates of duty for each category of products. It is written in clear and straightforward English, making it easy to understand the various legal concepts and terms used in the document.
Summary:

The document lists various types of machinery, equipment, and parts under the heading 'Chapter 84 - Nuclear reactors, boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances; parts thereof'. This chapter is further divided into several subheadings, each covering specific types of machinery and equipment.

Under subheading 8419, the document lists various types of machinery and equipment used for temperature, humidity, or light control, such as tissue culture chambers, semiconductor devices heating apparatus, chemical or physical vapor deposition apparatus, vacuum-vapor plant for metal deposition, and parts thereof.

Subheading 8420 covers calendering or other rolling machines, other than for metals or glass, and cylinders therefor. It includes parts of these machines, such as cylinders, under subheading 8420 91.

Subheading 8421 covers centrifuges, including centrifugal dryers, and filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus for liquids or gases. It includes various types of centrifuges, such as cream separators, clothes-dryers, bowl centrifuges, basket centrifuges, continuous automatic centrifuges, self-cleaning centrifuges, decanter centrifuges, and other centrifuges for chemical industries. It also includes filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus for liquids, such as ion exchanger plant or apparatus, household type filters, filters for beverages other than water, oil or petrol-filters for internal combustion engines, and filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus for gases, such as intake air filters for internal combustion engines, air separators to be employed in the processing, smelting or refining of minerals, ores or metals, air strippers, air purifiers or cleaners, and other air filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus.

Subheading 8422 covers dish washing machines, machinery for cleaning or drying bottles or other containers, machinery for filling, closing, sealing or labelling bottles, cans, boxes, bags or other containers, machinery for capsuling bottles, jars, tubes and similar containers, other packing or wrapping machinery, and parts thereof.

Subheading 8423 covers weighing machinery, including weighing machine weights of all kinds, and parts of weighing machinery.

Subheading 8424 covers mechanical appliances for projecting, dispersing or spraying liquids or powders, fire extinguishers, spray guns and similar appliances, steam or sand blasting machines and similar jet projecting machines, and parts thereof.

Subheading 8425 covers pulley tackle and hoists other than skip hoists, winches and capstans, jacks, and parts thereof.

Subheading 8426 covers ship's derricks, cranes including cable cranes, mobile lifting frames, straddle carriers and works trucks fitted with a crane, and parts thereof.

Subheading 8427 covers fork-lift trucks, other works trucks fitted with lifting or handling equipment, and parts thereof.

Subheading 8428 covers other lifting, handling, loading or unloading machinery, such as lifts and skip hoists, pneumatic elevators and conveyors, continuous-action elevators and conveyors for goods or materials, escalators and moving walkways, teleferics, chair-lifts, ski-rag lines, traction mechanisms for funiculars, and parts thereof.

Subheading 8429 covers self-propelled bulldozers, angle dozers, graders, levelers, scrapers, mechanical shovels, excavators, shovel loaders, tamping machines, road rollers, and parts thereof.

Subheading 8430 covers other moving, grading, levelling, scraping, excavating, tamping, compacting, extracting or boring machinery, for earth, minerals or ores, pile drivers and pile-extractors, snow-ploughs and snow-blowers, and parts thereof.

The document also includes various legal terms, such as 'duty' and 'percentage rates of duty', which refer to the tax levied on imported goods. The rates of duty vary depending on the type of machinery or equipment being imported, with some items being exempt from duty and others subject to a specific percentage rate of duty. The rates of duty are indicated in the square brackets next to each subheading.
Summary:

The document outlines the classification and tariff rates for various types of machinery and equipment under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The Act is organized into different headings and subheadings, each representing a specific type of machinery or equipment. The headings include machinery for mining, agriculture, dairy, food and beverage preparation, paper and pulp production, book-binding, and printing, among others.

For each heading, the document provides a detailed description of the type of machinery or equipment that falls under that heading. For example, heading 8425 covers mining machinery, while heading 8432 covers agricultural machinery for soil preparation or cultivation. Under each heading, there are subheadings that further specify the type of machinery or equipment. For example, under heading 8432, there are subheadings for ploughs, harrows, seeders, planters, and manure spreaders.

The document also provides the applicable tariff rates for each heading and subheading. The tariff rates are expressed as a percentage of the customs value of the goods. For example, the tariff rate for mining machinery is 7.5%, while the tariff rate for agricultural machinery is also 7.5%. However, there are some exceptions where the tariff rate may be different, such as for non-powered mowers with a width of 75 cm or more, which have a tariff rate of 10%.

In addition to the tariff rates, the document also provides information on the harmonized system (HS) codes for each heading and subheading. The HS codes are used for international trade and are based on a standardized system of classification.

Overall, the document provides a comprehensive overview of the Indian Customs Tariff Act and the classification and tariff rates for various types of machinery and equipment. It is an important resource for businesses and individuals involved in importing or exporting goods to or from India.
Summary:

The document outlines the Harmonized System (HS) codes for various types of machinery and equipment used in different industries. HS codes are used for classifying goods for customs purposes and are standardized internationally. The document covers machinery used in the printing industry, specifically offset printing machinery, letterpress printing machinery, flexographic printing machinery, gravure printing machinery, and other printing machinery. The codes also include machinery for printing repetitive words or designs or colors on cotton textiles.

The document also covers machines that perform two or more functions of printing, copying, or facsimile transmission, capable of connecting to an automatic data processing machine or to a network. The codes for these machines are categorized based on the type of printer, such as line printer, dot matrix printer, letter quality daisy wheel printer, laser jet printer, and ink jet printer.

The document also includes codes for electrostatic photocopying apparatus operated by reproducing the original image directly onto the copy (direct process) and electrostatic photocopying apparatus operated by reproducing the original image via an intermediate onto the copy (indirect process). The codes also cover other photocopying apparatus incorporating an optical system and other photocopying apparatus of contact type.

Additionally, the document covers parts and accessories of printing machinery used for printing by means of plates, cylinders, and other printing components of heading 8442. The codes for parts and accessories are categorized based on the type of machine they are intended for, such as automatic document feeders, paper feeders, sorters, and other parts of copying machines.

The document also includes codes for machines for extruding, drawing, texturing, or cutting man-made textile materials, machines for preparing textile fibers, spinning, doubling or twisting machines and other machinery for producing textile yarns, textile reeling or winding machines, and machines for preparing textile yarns for use on the machines of heading 8446 or 8447.

Finally, the document covers auxiliary machinery for use with machines of heading 8444, 8445, 8446, or 8447, such as dobbies, jacquards, automatic stop motions, shuttle changing mechanisms, spindles and spindle flyers, card clothing, combs, extruding nipples, shuttles, healds and heald frames, and hosiery needles.

In summary, the document provides a comprehensive list of HS codes for various types of machinery and equipment used in different industries, including the printing industry, textile industry, and auxiliary machinery for use with machines of heading 8444, 8445, 8446, or 8447. These codes are used for customs purposes and are standardized internationally.
Summary:

This document contains a list of Indian tariff items related to machinery, specifically auxiliary machinery, parts and accessories of machines, and machinery for weaving, finishing, or manufacturing textiles. The tariff items are organized into categories based on the type of machinery or part. Each tariff item includes a code, a description of the item, and a tax rate. The tax rate is indicated as a percentage in brackets next to the code.

The categories of auxiliary machinery include card clothing, machines for preparing textile fibers, spindles, spindle flyers, spinning rings, ring travellers, combs, gills, and other parts and accessories. The tax rate for these items is generally 7.5%.

The categories of weaving machinery include parts and accessories of weaving machines or their auxiliary machinery, reeds for looms, healds and heald-frames, healds (excluding wire healds), wire healds, and other parts. The tax rate for these items is generally 7.5%.

The categories of finishing machinery include dry-cleaning machines, drying machines, ironing machines and presses, washing, bleaching or dyeing machines, sizing and dressing machines, finishing machines, and other machinery. The tax rate for these items varies, but is generally 7.5%.

The categories of sewing machinery include sewing machines of the household type, automatic units, sewing machine needles, furniture, bases and covers for sewing machines and parts thereof, and other parts of sewing machines. The tax rate for these items varies, but is generally 7.5% or 10%.

The categories of machinery for preparing, tanning or working hides, skins or leather include machinery for preparing, tanning or working hides, skins or leather, machinery for making or repairing footwear, and other machinery. The tax rate for these items is generally 7.5%.

The categories of converters, ladles, ingot moulds and casting machines include converters, ingot moulds and ladles, casting machines, and parts. The tax rate for these items is generally 7.5%.

The categories of metal-rolling mills and rolls therefor include tube mills, other rolling mills, rolls for rolling mills, and other parts. The tax rate for these items is generally 7.5%.

The categories of machine-tools for working any material by removal of material include machine-tools operated by laser or other light or photon beam processes, ultrasonic processes, electro-discharge processes, electrochemical processes, electron beam, ionic-beam or plasma arc processes, water-jet cutting machines, and other machine-tools. The tax rate for these items varies, but is generally 7.5%.

The categories of machining centers, unit construction machines and multi-station transfer machines include machining centers, unit construction machines, and multi-station transfer machines. The tax rate for these items is generally 7.5%.

The categories of lathes include horizontal lathes and automatic, single spindle lathes. The tax rate for these items is generally 7.5%.
The document lists various types of machine tools used for working with metal or ceramets, which are a type of hard material made from a mixture of metals and ceramics. The list includes lathes, drilling and boring machines, milling machines, threading machines, and finishing machines, among others. Each type of machine tool is further divided into subcategories based on its specific function or characteristics. For example, lathes are divided into subcategories such as base sliding head type, horizontal chucking, other, and automatic, multi-spindle bar. Similarly, drilling and boring machines are divided into subcategories such as way-type unit head machines, numerically controlled, bench and pillar, and radial.

The document also includes information about the tariff rates for these machine tools. In general, the tariff rates range from 7.5% to 10%, with some variations depending on the specific type and subcategory of machine tool. The tariff rates are indicated in square brackets next to the description of each machine tool.

In Indian law, these machine tools are subject to tariffs and customs duties when they are imported into the country. The tariff rates are set by the Indian government and are intended to protect domestic industries and regulate international trade. The tariff rates for machine tools are specified in the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the rates listed in the document are based on this Act.

In summary, the document provides a comprehensive list of machine tools used for working with metal or ceramets, along with information about their tariff rates in Indian law. The list includes various types of lathes, drilling and boring machines, milling machines, threading machines, and finishing machines, among others. The tariff rates for these machine tools are set by the Indian government and are intended to protect domestic industries and regulate international trade.
Summary:
The document provides a list of Indian tariff items, which are used to classify imported goods for the purpose of determining customs duties. These tariff items are organized under various headings and subheadings. The summary will focus on a few selected headings and subheadings that pertain to machinery and tools.

Heading 8456 covers machine tools for working metals, and subheading 8456 10 includes lathes, boring machines, and other machine tools for working metals. Subheading 8456 30 covers machine tools for drilling, milling, tapping, boring, or other working of metals by removing material, while subheading 8456 90 includes machine tools for forging, hammering, stamping, or pressing metals.

Heading 8460 covers machinery for sorting, screening, separating, washing, crushing, grinding, mixing, or kneading earth, stone, ores, or other mineral substances, in solid (including powder or paste) form. Subheading 8460 10 covers screening, separating, washing, crushing, or grinding machinery, while subheading 8460 20 includes mixing or kneading machinery.

Heading 8461 covers machinery for agglomerating, shaping, or moulding solid mineral fuels, ceramic paste, unhardened cements, plastering materials, or other mineral products in powder form. Subheading 8461 10 covers machinery for agglomerating or shaping solid mineral fuels, while subheading 8461 20 includes machinery for moulding ceramic paste or other mineral products.

Heading 8462 covers machinery for compacting or shaping textile, paper, rubber, plastic, or other materials. Subheading 8462 10 covers machinery for compacting or shaping textile, while subheading 8462 20 includes machinery for compacting or shaping paper, rubber, plastic, or other materials.

Heading 8463 covers machinery for working wire, cable, or other flexible tubes. Subheading 8463 10 covers machinery for drawing, twisting, or winding wire, while subheading 8463 20 includes machinery for working cable or other flexible tubes.

Heading 8464 covers machine-tools for working stone, ceramics, concrete, asbestos-cement, or like mineral materials or for cold working glass. Subheading 8464 10 covers sawing machines, while subheading 8464 20 includes grinding or polishing machines.

Heading 8465 covers machine-tools (including machines for nailing, stapling, glueing, or otherwise assembling) for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics, or similar hard materials. Subheading 8465 10 covers machines which can carry out different types of machining operations without tool change between such operations, while subheading 8465 20 includes machining centers.

Heading 8466 covers parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with the machines of headings 8456 to 8465. Subheading 8466 10 includes tool holders and self-opening dieheads, while subheading 8466 20 covers work holders. Subheading 8466 30 includes dividing heads and other special attachments for machines, while subheading 8466 90 covers parts and accessories for machines of headings 8464 or 8465.

Heading 8467 covers tools for working in the hand, pneumatic, hydraulic, or with self-contained electric or non-electric motor. Subheading 8467 11 covers pneumatic tools, while subheading 8467 21 includes tools with self-contained electric motor.

Heading 8468 covers machinery and apparatus for soldering, brazing, or welding, whether or not capable of cutting, other than those of heading 8515, and gas-operated surface tempering machines and appliances. Subheading 8468 10 covers hand-held blow pipes, while subheading 8468 20 includes other gas-operated machinery and apparatus.

Heading 8470 covers calculating machines and pocket-size data recording, reproducing, and displaying machines with calculating functions; accounting machines, postage-franking machines, ticket-issuing machines, and similar machines, incorporating a calculating device; cash registers. Subheading 8470 10 covers electronic calculators capable of free operation without an external source of electric power and pocket-size data recording, reproducing, and displaying machines with calculating functions.

Heading 8471 covers automatic data processing machines and units thereof; magnetic or optical readers, machines for transcribing data on to data media in coded form, and machines for processing such data, not elsewhere specified or included. Subheading 8471 30 covers portable automatic data processing machines, while subheading 8471 41 includes machines comprising in the same housing at least a central processing unit and an input and output unit, whether or not combined.

Heading 8472 covers other office machines (for example, hectograph or stencil duplicating machines, addressing machines, automatic banknote dispensers, coin sorting machines, coin-counting or wrapping machines, pencil-sharpening machines, perforating or stapling machines). Subheading 8472 10 covers duplicating machines, while subheading 8472 30 includes machines for sorting or folding mail or for inserting mail in envelopes or bands, machines for opening, closing, or sealing mail, and machines for affixing or canceling postage stamps.

Heading 8473 covers parts and accessories (other than covers, carrying cases, and the like) suitable for use solely or principally with machines of headings 8470 to 8472. Subheading 8473 21 covers parts and accessories of the electronic calculating machines of sub-heading 8470 10, 8470 21, or 8471 29, while subheading 8473 30 includes parts and accessories of the machines of heading 8471.

In summary, the document lists various Indian tariff items for machinery and tools, classified under different headings and subheadings. These items include machine tools for working metals, machinery for sorting, screening, separating, washing, crushing, grinding, mixing, or kneading earth, stone, ores, or other mineral substances, machinery for agglomerating, shaping, or moulding solid mineral fuels, ceramic paste, unhardened cements, plastering materials, or other mineral products in powder form, machinery for compacting or shaping textile, paper, rubber, plastic, or other materials, machinery for working wire, cable, or other flexible tubes, machine-tools for working stone, ceramics, concrete, asbestos-cement, or like mineral materials or for cold working glass, machine-tools (including machines for nailing, stapling, glueing, or otherwise assembling) for working wood, cork, bone, hard rubber, hard plastics, or similar hard materials, parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with the machines of headings 8456 to 8465, tools for working in the hand, pneumatic, hydraulic, or with self-contained electric or non-electric motor, machinery and apparatus for soldering, brazing, or welding, whether or not capable of cutting, other than those of heading 8515, and gas-operated surface tempering machines and appliances, calculating machines and pocket-size data recording, reproducing, and displaying machines with calculating functions; accounting machines, postage-franking machines, ticket-issuing machines, and similar machines, incorporating a calculating device; cash registers, automatic data processing machines and units thereof; magnetic or optical readers, machines for transcribing data on to data media in coded form, and machines for processing such data, not elsewhere specified or included, and other office machines.
Summary:

The document provided is a table listing various types of machinery and their corresponding tariff codes under the Harmonized System (HS). The HS is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers to classify traded products. Each code consists of six digits, with the first two digits identifying the chapter the product belongs to, and the following four digits specifying the product within that chapter. The table lists various types of machinery and their corresponding HS codes, along with some additional information such as the rate of import duty (in percentage) for certain categories.

The table is divided into several sections, each representing a different chapter of the HS system. Some of the sections include:

* Mixing or kneading machines (HS code 8474 31)
* Machines for mixing mineral substances with bitumen (HS code 8474 32)
* Machinery for forming foundry moulds of sand (HS code 8474 80)
* Machines for assembling electric or electronic lamps, tubes or valves or flash-bulbs, in glass envelopes (HS code 8475 10)
* Machines for manufacturing or hot working glass or glassware (HS code 8475 21)
* Automatic goods-vending machines (HS code 8476)
* Machinery for working rubber or plastics or for the manufacture of products from these materials (HS code 8477)

Within each section, the table lists the specific types of machinery and their corresponding HS codes, along with any relevant additional information such as the rate of import duty. For example, in the section for mixing or kneading machines (HS code 8474 31), the table lists concrete or mortar mixers (HS code 8474 31 10) and specifies that the import duty for these machines is 7.5%.

It is important to note that the tariff codes and rates listed in this table are specific to India and may differ from those in other countries. Additionally, the rates of import duty may be subject to change and should be verified with the relevant authorities.
Summary:

The document lists various goods related to mechanical and electrical machinery, along with their corresponding tariff codes and rates. The goods include special stainless steel, high-speed steel, needles, rollers, transmission shafts, crank shafts, bearing housings, gears, gear boxes, flywheels, pulleys, clutches, shaft couplings, toothed wheels, chain sprockets, gaskets, mechanical seals, machines and apparatus for the manufacture of semiconductor boules or wafers, machines and apparatus for the manufacture of semiconductor devices or of electronic integrated circuits, machines and apparatus for the manufacture of flat panel displays, machines and apparatus specified in Note 9(c) to this Chapter, parts and accessories, machinery parts, not containing electrical connectors, insulators, coils, contacts or other electrical features, not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter, ships’ or boats’ propellers and blades, electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof, sound recorders and reproducers, television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and parts and accessories of such articles.

The tariff codes for these goods range from 8482 to 8543, and the rates vary from 7.5% to 15%. The document also includes notes and headings that provide definitions and exceptions for certain goods. For example, Heading 8509 covers only electro-mechanical machines of the kind commonly used for domestic purposes, and Heading 8534 covers printed circuits obtained by forming on an insulating base, by any printing process, conductor elements, contacts, or other printed components.

In addition, the document specifies that the rates mentioned are ad valorem rates, which means that the duty is calculated as a percentage of the value of the goods. The value is determined based on the transaction value, which is the price actually paid or payable for the goods when sold for export to the country of importation. If there is no transaction value, the value is determined based on the other methods of valuation mentioned in the Customs Valuation Agreement.

It is important to note that the rates and rules mentioned in the document are subject to change and may vary depending on the country of importation and other factors. Therefore, it is recommended to consult the relevant authorities for the most up-to-date and accurate information.
Summary:

The given document is a table listing various electrical components and their corresponding tariff items, rates of duty, and descriptions. The components are categorized into different headings and subheadings, with each entry specifying the type of component, its function, and the applicable rate of duty.

The headings include electric motors and generators, electric generating sets and rotary converters, parts suitable for use solely or principally with the machines of heading 8501 or 8502, and electrical transformers, static converters, and inductors.

Under each heading, there are various subheadings that further classify the components based on their specific characteristics, such as output power, type of engine, and application. For example, under heading 8501, there are subheadings for DC motors, AC motors, and universal AC or DC motors, with each subheading having further classifications based on output power.

The tariff items for each component specify the rate of duty applicable to that component. The rates of duty vary depending on the type and characteristics of the component, with some components having a rate of 10% and others having a rate of 15%.

The document also includes a note on the classification of articles, which states that headings 8541 and 8542 shall take precedence over any other heading in the schedule, except in the case of heading 8523. There is also a definition of "information technology software" in Supplementary Note 366.

Overall, the document provides a detailed classification and tariff schedule for various electrical components, with specific descriptions and rates of duty for each component.
Summary:

The document outlines various Indian laws related to the import of specific goods. The goods are categorized under different headings and subheadings, each with a corresponding tariff code, and are subject to specific import duties. The headings include:

* Battery chargers, voltage regulators, and stabilizers (8504)
* Inductors, choke coils, and other parts (8504)
* Transformers and electro-magnets (8505)
* Primary cells and primary batteries (8506)
* Electric accumulators, including separators (8507)
* Vacuum cleaners (8508)
* Electro-mechanical domestic appliances (8509)
* Shavers, hair clippers, and hair-removing appliances (8510)
* Electrical ignition or starting equipment (8511)
* Electrical lighting or signalling equipment (8512)
* Portable electric lamps (8513)
* Industrial or laboratory electric furnaces and ovens (8514)
* Electric or laser welding machines (8515)
* Electric water heaters and space heating apparatus (8516)
* Telephone sets, including cellular networks (8517)

Each heading and subheading has a specific rate of import duty associated with it, ranging from 1% to 20%. For example, battery chargers, voltage regulators, and stabilizers have an import duty of 2%, while transformers and electro-magnets have an import duty of 4%. Additionally, some goods have specific conditions or exceptions to the import duty. For instance, primary cells and primary batteries have an import duty of 3%, but manganese dioxide, mercuric oxide, silver oxide, lithium, and air-zinc cells have a higher import duty of 15%.

In summary, the document outlines the specific Indian laws related to the import of various goods, including their corresponding tariff codes, import duties, and any specific conditions or exceptions.
This document appears to be a list of tariff items for various electronic goods, specifically telecommunications equipment and audio-visual recording and reproducing apparatus. The items are categorized under different headings and subheadings, each with a corresponding code number. Here are some key points from the document:

* The first section covers telecommunications equipment, including switching and routing apparatus, modems, high bit rate digital subscriber line (HDSL) systems, digital loop carrier systems, synchronous digital hierarchy (SDH) systems, multiplexers, and other related items.
* The second section covers ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) systems and related equipment, including ISDN terminal adaptors and X.25 pads.
* The third section covers subscriber end equipment, including set-top boxes for gaining access to the internet, attachments for telephones, and other related items.
* The fourth section covers parts for the above-mentioned equipment.
* The fifth section covers microphones, loudspeakers, headphones, earphones, audio-frequency electric amplifiers, and electric sound amplifier sets.
* The sixth section covers sound recording or reproducing apparatus, including telephone answering machines, audio compact disc players, compact disc changers, time code recorders, MP3 players, and other related items.
* The seventh section covers video recording or reproducing apparatus, including video tape recorders, video duplicating systems, and DVD players.
* The eighth section covers parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of headings 8519 or 8521.
* The ninth section covers discs, tapes, solid-state non-volatile storage devices, "smart cards" and other media for the recording of sound or of other phenomena, whether or not recorded, including matrices and masters for the production of discs, but excluding products of Chapter 37. This section includes magnetic media, optical media, and solid-state non-volatile storage devices.
* The tenth section covers transmission apparatus for radio-broadcasting or television, whether or not incorporating reception apparatus or sound recording or reproducing apparatus; television cameras, digital cameras and video camera recorders.
* The eleventh section covers radar apparatus, radio navigational aid apparatus and radio remote control apparatus.
* The twelfth section covers reception apparatus for radio broadcasting, whether or not combined, in the same housing, with sound recording or reproducing apparatus or a clock.
* The thirteenth section covers monitors and projectors, not incorporating television reception apparatus; reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radiobroadcast receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus.

It is important to note that the document also includes the percentage rate of duty for each item, which is not covered in this summary.
This document appears to be a list of tariff codes and their corresponding descriptions for various electrical and electronic devices, primarily for use in international trade. The codes are organized into several categories, including recording or reproducing apparatus, parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of headings 8525 to 8528, electrical signalling, safety or traffic control equipment for railways, tramways, roads, inland waterways, parking facilities, port installations or airfields (other than those of heading 8608), electrical sound or visual signalling apparatus, electrical capacitors, electrical resistors, printed circuits, electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for making connections to or in electrical circuits, and boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases, equipped with two or more apparatus of heading 8535 or 8536.

Within each category, the codes are further divided into subcategories based on specific characteristics of the devices, such as screen size, color, and use. For example, in the category of recording or reproducing apparatus, there are separate codes for apparatus without a video display or screen, and for television sets with different screen sizes. Similarly, in the category of electrical capacitors, there are separate codes for fixed capacitors designed for use in 50 or 60 Hz circuits, and for variable or adjustable (pre-set) capacitors.

The tariff codes are likely used by customs officials to determine the appropriate duty rate for imported goods. The descriptions associated with each code provide detailed information about the specific characteristics of the devices, which can be used to accurately classify the goods and apply the correct duty rate.

It is important to note that the tariff codes and descriptions in this document are specific to Indian laws and regulations, and may not be applicable in other countries. Additionally, the document does not include any information about the actual duty rates for the listed goods.
Summary:

The document provides the Customs Tariff Nomenclature of the Union under the Customs Act, 1962, specifically for various electrical and electronic components and equipment. The tariff items are classified under different headings and subheadings, each with specific rates of duty. The headings include:

* Heading 8535 or 8536, for electric control or distribution of electricity, including those incorporating instruments or apparatus of Chapter 90, and numerical control apparatus, other than switching apparatus of Heading 8517.
* Heading 8537, for parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of Headings 8535, 8536, or 8537.
* Heading 8539, for electric filament or discharge lamps including sealed beam lamp units and ultra-violet or infrared lamps, arc lamps, and light-emitting diode (LED) lamps.
* Heading 8540, for thermionic, cold cathode or photo-cathode valves and tubes, such as vacuum or vapor or gas-filled valves and tubes, mercury arc rectifying valves and tubes, cathode-ray tubes, television camera tubes, and other similar valves and tubes.
* Heading 8541, for diodes, transistors, and similar semi-conductor devices, photosensitive semi-conductor devices, including photo voltaic cells, whether or not assembled in modules or made up into panels, light-emitting diodes (LED), and mounted piezo-electric crystals.
* Heading 8542, for electronic integrated circuits.
* Heading 8543, for electrical machines and apparatus having individual functions, not specified or included elsewhere in this chapter.
* Heading 8544, for insulated (including enameled or anodized) wire, cable (including co-axial cable) and other insulated electric conductors, whether or not fitted with connectors; optical fiber cables, made up of individually sheathed fibers, whether or not assembled with electric conductors or fitted with connectors.

Under each heading, there are various subheadings with specific descriptions and rates of duty. For example, under Heading 8535 or 8536, there are subheadings for apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, for example, fuses, circuit-breakers, surge suppressors, and voltage limiters. Similarly, under Heading 8539, there are subheadings for sealed beam lamp units, other filament lamps, tungsten halogen lamps, discharge lamps, and ultra-violet or infra-red lamps.

The tariff rates vary for different items, with some items attracting basic customs duty (BCD) at 7.5%, 10%, 15%, or 20%. In addition to BCD, there are other duties, such as countervailing duty (CVD), anti-dumping duty (ADD), and safeguard duty (SGD), which may be levied on these items. The document also specifies the applicable rules of origin, valuation, and other related provisions.

In summary, the document provides a detailed classification and tariff schedule for various electrical and electronic components and equipment under the Indian Customs Tariff Nomenclature. It is essential to refer to this document for determining the applicable customs duty and other charges on these items.
Summary:

The document summarizes various Indian laws related to the import of specific goods. The goods are classified under different headings and subheadings, each with a specific rate of duty. The headings and subheadings include:

* 8544: Electric conductors for a voltage exceeding 1000V, including paper, plastic, and rubber insulated cables, and optical fiber cables.
* 8545: Carbon electrodes, carbon brushes, lamp carbons, battery carbons, and other articles of graphite or other carbon, with or without metal, of a kind used for electrical purposes.
* 8546: Electrical insulators of any material, including porcelain discs and strings, porcelain post insulators, porcelain pin insulators, porcelain core insulators, porcelain low tension insulators, and other insulators.
* 8547: Insulating fittings for electrical machines, appliances or equipment, being fittings wholly of insulating material apart from any minor components of metal incorporated solely for the purposes of assembly, other than insulators of heading 8546; electrical conduit tubing and joints therefor, of base metal lined with insulating material.
* 8548: Waste and scrap of primary cells, primary batteries and electric accumulators; spent primary cells, spent primary batteries and spent electric accumulators; electrical parts of machinery or apparatus, not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter.

The document also specifies the rate of duty for each heading and subheading, which ranges from 1[10%] to 4[7.5%]. The rates of duty are subject to changes as per the Third Schedule of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The document also includes notes and provisions related to the classification of goods, such as the exclusion of certain items from the scope of the headings and subheadings, and the application of the rates of duty to parts and accessories of the goods.
Summary:

The document provided is a list of customs tariff items and their corresponding rates of duty for various goods imported into India. The goods are classified under different headings and subheadings according to their nature and use. The rates of duty are given as a percentage of the customs value of the goods.

The heading that is relevant to the topic of Indian laws is 8608, which covers railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings; mechanical (including electro-mechanical) signalling, safety or traffic control equipment for railways, tramways, roads, inland waterways, parking facilities, port installations or airfields; parts of the foregoing. The subheadings under this heading include railway and tramway track fixtures and fittings, mechanical equipment for signalling or controlling road, rail or other vehicles, ships or aircraft, other traffic control equipment for railways, other traffic control equipment for roads or inland waterways including automatic traffic control equipment for use at ports and airports, and other.

It is important to note that this document is a customs tariff schedule, and it is not a legal document that outlines Indian laws related to railways or tramways. However, it does provide information on the classification and taxation of goods related to these modes of transportation.

In India, the railways are governed by the Indian Railways Act, 1989, which provides for the regulation, development and maintenance of railway services in the country. The act covers various aspects of railway operations, including the powers and duties of the railways administration, the rights and liabilities of railway employees, and the regulation of traffic and safety on railways.

Tramways, on the other hand, are governed by state laws, as they are considered to be a form of urban transportation. For example, in Kolkata, the capital city of the state of West Bengal, tramways are governed by the Calcutta Tramways Company Act, 1902. This act provides for the regulation and management of the tramway system in Kolkata, including the powers and duties of the tramways company, the rights and liabilities of tramway employees, and the regulation of traffic and safety on tramways.

In conclusion, while the document provided does not contain specific Indian laws related to railways or tramways, it does provide information on the classification and taxation of goods related to these modes of transportation. The railways in India are governed by the Indian Railways Act, 1989, while tramways are governed by state laws.
The document you provided appears to be a list of tariff items for motor vehicles and related parts under the Harmonized System (HS) code. The HS code is an internationally standardized system of names and numbers used to classify traded products. Each code represents a specific product, and the codes are organized into categories based on the type of product.

In this document, the HS codes starting with "87" refer to motor vehicles and parts thereof. The codes are further broken down into subcategories based on the type of vehicle and its specific characteristics. For example, the code "8703" refers to motor cars and other motor vehicles principally designed for the transport of persons (other than those principally designed for the transport of more than seven persons), including station wagons and racing cars.

The document also includes specifications for each subcategory, such as the cylinder capacity of the engine and the number of passengers the vehicle is designed to transport. Additionally, some codes include a percentage value in brackets, which refers to the ad valorem rate of customs duty that applies to that particular category.

It is important to note that this document is a tariff schedule, which means it outlines the rates of customs duty that apply to imported goods. It is not a legal document outlining Indian laws related to motor vehicles. However, it does provide useful information about the classification of motor vehicles and related parts under the HS code, which is used internationally for the purpose of trade.
Summary:

The document presents a list of goods and their corresponding tariff items under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The goods are categorized under various headings, such as gearboxes and parts, drive-axles, road wheels, suspension systems, radiators, silencers, clutches, steering wheels, safety airbags, tanks and armored fighting vehicles, motorcycles, cycles with auxiliary motors, carriages for disabled persons, parts and accessories of vehicles, baby carriages, trailers and semi-trailers, and aircraft and spacecraft. Each heading includes a description of the goods, the applicable tariff item number, and the rate of duty.

The tariff items for gearboxes and parts (heading 8708) include gearboxes, drive-axles with differential, road wheels and parts, suspension systems and parts, radiators and parts, silencers and exhaust pipes, clutches and parts, steering wheels, columns, and boxes, safety airbags with inflater system, and other parts and accessories. The rate of duty for these goods is 15%.

The tariff items for tanks and armored fighting vehicles (heading 8710) include tanks and other armored fighting vehicles, whether or not fitted with weapons, and parts of such vehicles. The rate of duty for these goods is 10%.

The tariff items for motorcycles (heading 8711) include motorcycles with reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cc, 50-250 cc, 250-500 cc, 500-800 cc, and exceeding 800 cc, as well as electric motor for propulsion. The rate of duty for these goods is 100% for motorcycles with reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cc, and 10% for other goods.

The tariff items for baby carriages and parts therof (heading 8715) include baby carriages and parts thereof. The rate of duty for these goods is 10%.

The tariff items for trailers and semi-trailers (heading 8716) include trailers and semi-trailers of the caravan type for housing or camping, self-loading or self-unloading trailers and semi-trailers for agricultural purposes, other trailers and semi-trailers for the transport of goods, hand propelled vehicles, animal drawn vehicles, and parts. The rate of duty for these goods is 10%.

The tariff items for aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof (heading 8801-8803) include balloons and dirigibles, gliders, hang gliders, and other non-powered aircraft, other aircraft, spacecraft, and suborbital and spacecraft launch vehicles, and parts of goods of heading 8801 or 8802. The rate of duty for these goods is 10% or 3%, depending on the type of aircraft.

The tariff items for parachutes and parts therof (heading 8804) include parachutes, dirigible parachutes, paragliders, rotochutes, and parts and accessories thereof. The rate of duty for these goods is 10%.

The tariff items for aircraft launching gear, deck-arrestor gear, ground flying trainers, and parts thereof (heading 8805) include aircraft launching gear, deck-arrestor gear, ground flying trainers, and parts thereof. The rate of duty for these goods is 10%.

The tariff items for ships, boats, and floating structures (heading 89) include hulls, unfinished or incomplete vessels, assembled, unassembled or disassembled, or complete vessels, unassembled or disassembled, and parts. The rate of duty for these goods is not specified in the document.

It is important to note that the rates of duty provided in this document are subject to change and may vary depending on the specific circumstances of each import transaction. Therefore, it is recommended to consult with a customs broker or other relevant authorities for the most up-to-date and accurate information.
Summary:

The document provided is a list of custom tariffs for various types of vessels and floating structures, classified under Chapter 89 of the Customs Tariff of India. The chapter is divided into several sections, each covering a specific type of vessel or floating structure.

Section I (8901) covers cruise ships, excursion boats, ferry-boats, cargo ships, barges, and similar vessels for the transport of persons or goods. These vessels are further classified into subheadings based on their type, with different rates of duty applied to each subheading. For example, subheading 8901 10 covers cruise ships, excursion boats, and similar vessels principally designed for the transport of persons, with a rate of duty of 10%.

Section II (8902) covers fishing vessels, factory ships, and other vessels for processing or preserving fishery products. Subheadings under this section include trawlers, other fishing vessels, and other vessels for processing or preserving fishery products, with different rates of duty applied to each subheading.

Section III (8903) covers yachts and other vessels for pleasure or sports, as well as rowing boats and canoes. Subheadings under this section include inflatable boats, sailboats, motorboats, canoes, and other vessels, with different rates of duty applied to each subheading.

Section IV (8904) covers tugs and pusher craft. The rate of duty for this section is 10%.

Section V (8905) covers light-vessels, fire-floats, dredgers, floating cranes, and other vessels for which navigability is subsidiary to their main function, as well as floating docks and floating or submersible drilling or production platforms. Subheadings under this section include dredgers, floating or submersible drilling or production platforms, floating docks, and other vessels, with different rates of duty applied to each subheading.

Section VI (8906) covers other vessels, including warships and lifeboats other than rowing boats. The rate of duty for this section is 10%.

Section XVII (8908) covers vessels and other floating structures for breaking up. The rate of duty for this section is 10%.

Additionally, the document includes a list of notes that provide further guidance on the classification of goods under this chapter. For example, Note 1 provides a list of goods that are not covered by this chapter, such as articles used in machines, appliances or for other technical uses, of vulcanised rubber, leather, composition leather, or textile material, or parts of general use of base metal or similar goods of plastics. Note 2 provides rules for the classification of parts and accessories for machines, apparatus, instruments, or articles of this chapter or Chapter 84, 85, or 91, based on their intended use.

The tariff rates provided in the document are subject to the Standard and Preferential rates of duty for the specified areas (1-5). The rates of duty range from 0% to 25%, depending on the type of vessel or floating structure and the specified area.
Summary:
The document appears to be a list of customs tariff codes for various products, primarily related to optical and photographic equipment. Here are some key points:

* The tariff codes are organized under Chapter 90 of the Harmonized System (HS) code, which covers optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking, scientific, and controlling instruments and apparatus.
* The document includes tariff codes for spectacles, frames, and mountings (9003), as well as for sunglasses (9004).
* There are also tariff codes for various types of binoculars and monoculars (9005), as well as for other optical telescopes and astronomical instruments (9005).
* The document includes tariff codes for cameras and photographic equipment, such as cameras designed for underwater use, for aerial survey, or for medical or surgical examination (9006).
* There are also tariff codes for cinematographic cameras and projectors (9007), as well as for image projectors and photographic enlargers and reducers (9008).
* The document includes tariff codes for electrostatic photocopying apparatus (9010), as well as for compound optical microscopes (9011) and other microscopes (9012).
* There are also tariff codes for liquid crystal devices (9013), as well as for direction finding compasses and other navigational instruments (9014).
* The document includes tariff codes for surveying instruments and appliances, such as theodolites and tachymeters (9015), as well as for balances of a sensitivity of 5cg or better (9016).
* There are also tariff codes for drawing, marking-out, or mathematical calculating instruments (9017), as well as for instruments and appliances used in medical, surgical, dental, or veterinary sciences (9018).

It's important to note that these tariff codes are subject to change and may vary by country. Additionally, the tariff rates associated with these codes may also vary depending on the country of import and other factors. This summary is intended to provide a general overview of the products covered by these tariff codes and should not be used as a definitive guide for customs clearance or other purposes.
Summary:

The document lists various medical instruments and appliances under Chapter 90 of the Indian Customs Tariff, along with their respective classification codes and applicable import duties. The items are categorized into different sections, including syringes, needles, catheters, dental drill engines, ophthalmic instruments, diagnostic instruments, surgical tools, artificial kidney (dialysis) apparatus, blood transfusion apparatus, anesthetic apparatus, ENT precision instruments, acupuncture apparatus, endoscopes, mechano-therapy appliances, massage apparatus, psychological aptitude-testing apparatus, ozone therapy, oxygen therapy, aerosol therapy, artificial respiration or other therapeutic respiration apparatus, breathing appliances, gas masks, orthopedic appliances, hearing aids, pacemakers, apparatus based on the use of X-rays or radiation, testing machines for mechanical properties of materials, hydrometers and similar floating instruments, thermometers, pyrometers, barometers, hygrometers, psychrometers, recording instruments, flow, level, pressure or other variables of liquids or gases, physical or chemical analysis instruments, microtomes, and parts and accessories. The import duties are mentioned as a percentage of the value of the goods, denoted as 'u' followed by the percentage rate. For example, 'u 1[10%]' indicates a 10% import duty.
Summary:
The document provided is a list of customs tariff items for various goods imported into India. The tariff items are organized by chapter and heading, with specific descriptions of the goods and their corresponding rates of duty. The chapters and headings relevant to Indian laws include Chapter 90, which covers measuring instruments and apparatus, and Chapter 91, which covers clocks and watches and parts thereof.

Chapter 90 includes several headings related to scientific instruments and apparatus. For example, heading 9027 covers polarimeters, viscometers, calorimeters, and other instruments for measuring surface or interfacial tension of liquids. Heading 9028 covers gas, liquid, or electricity supply or production meters, including calibrating meters. Heading 9029 covers revolution counters, production counters, taximeters, mileometers, pedometers, and speed indicators. Heading 9030 covers oscilloscopes, spectrum analyzers, and other instruments for measuring or checking electrical quantities. Heading 9031 covers measuring or checking instruments, appliances, and machines not specified or included elsewhere in this chapter, as well as profile projectors.

Chapter 91 includes heading 9101, which covers wrist-watches, pocket-watches, and other watches with cases of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal. Heading 9102 covers wrist-watches, pocket-watches, and other watches, other than those of heading 9101. Heading 9103 covers clock with watch movements, excluding clocks of heading 9104. Heading 9104 covers instrument panel clocks and clocks of a similar type for vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft, or vessels. Heading 9105 covers other clocks, including alarm clocks and wall clocks.

The rates of duty for the goods listed in the document are provided in the "Unit Rate of Duty" column. The rates of duty vary depending on the heading and subheading, with some goods subject to specific rates and others subject to ad valorem rates. The "Std. Prefnl." column indicates the standard preference rate of duty for certain countries or territories, as specified in the tariff schedule.

In summary, the document provides a comprehensive list of customs tariff items for various goods imported into India, with specific descriptions of the goods and their corresponding rates of duty. The chapters and headings relevant to Indian laws include Chapter 90, which covers measuring instruments and apparatus, and Chapter 91, which covers clocks and watches and parts thereof. The rates of duty vary depending on the heading and subheading, with some goods subject to specific rates and others subject to ad valorem rates.
This document lists various types of goods and their corresponding tariff classifications under the Indian Customs Tariff. The goods listed include time-registers, time-recorders, watch movements, clock movements, complete watch or clock movements, watch cases and parts, clock cases and parts, watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets, and other clock or watch parts. The tariff classifications are presented in a hierarchical manner, with each classification containing specific types of goods.

For example, under the classification "Watch Movements, Complete and Assembled," there are four sub-classifications: (1) electrically operated with mechanical display only or with a device to which a mechanical display can be incorporated, (2) electrically operated with opto-electronic display only, (3) with automatic winding, and (4) other. Each sub-classification contains specific types of goods, such as watches with mechanical display only or with opto-electronic display only, and watches with automatic winding.

Similarly, under the classification "Watch Cases and Parts Thereof," there are two sub-classifications: (1) cases of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal, and (2) cases of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated. Each sub-classification contains specific types of goods, such as cases of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal, and cases of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated.

The document also includes a section on musical instruments and their parts and accessories, as well as a section on arms and ammunition and their parts and accessories. The musical instruments section includes various types of stringed instruments, wind instruments, and percussion instruments, as well as musical boxes and other musical instruments not falling within any other heading of this chapter. The arms and ammunition section includes military weapons, revolvers and pistols, other firearms and similar devices, and parts and accessories of articles of headings 9301 to 9304.

In summary, this document provides a comprehensive list of goods and their corresponding tariff classifications under the Indian Customs Tariff. The goods listed include time-registers, time-recorders, watch movements, clock movements, complete watch or clock movements, watch cases and parts, clock cases and parts, watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets, and other clock or watch parts, as well as musical instruments and their parts and accessories, and arms and ammunition and their parts and accessories. The tariff classifications are presented in a hierarchical manner, with each classification containing specific types of goods.
Summary:
The document is a part of the Indian Customs Tariff, which lays out the classification and tax rates for various imported goods. This particular section, titled "Illuminated Name-Plates and the Like; Prefabricated Buildings," covers a range of items, primarily related to furniture and lighting.

The section begins by specifying what it does not cover, including pneumatic or water mattresses, certain types of mirrors, and parts of general use made of base metal or plastic. It also lists specific types of furniture that are excluded, such as furniture designed for refrigerating or freezing equipment, furniture for sewing machines, and furniture designed for games.

The section then outlines the rules for classifying certain types of furniture, such as seats, medical, surgical, dental, or veterinary furniture, and other furniture. The rules specify that seats must be designed for placing on the floor or ground, with specific rates of duty for different types of seats, such as those used for aircraft or motor vehicles. Medical, surgical, dental, or veterinary furniture has a rate of 10%, while other furniture has a rate of 20%.

The section also covers mattress supports, articles of bedding and similar furnishing, lamps and lighting fittings, and prefabricated buildings. The rules specify that mattress supports are classified separately from mattresses, and that certain types of lamps and lighting fittings, such as chandeliers and electric table, desk, bedside, or floor-standing lamps, have specific rates of duty. Prefabricated buildings have a rate of duty of 10%.

Overall, the document provides detailed rules and classifications for a range of imported goods related to furniture and lighting, with specific rates of duty for different types of items.
Summary:

The document provides information on the Indian Customs Tariff, specifically focusing on certain goods and their corresponding tariff rates. The goods mentioned are primarily related to recreational activities, sports, and entertainment. The document includes various headings and sub-headings, each representing a specific category of goods, along with their corresponding tariff rates.

Heading 9503 covers toys, dolls, and similar recreational models, whether or not working. The goods under this heading are classified according to their constituent material, such as wood, metal, or plastics. The tariff rate for these goods is 20%.

Heading 9504 covers video game consoles and machines, articles of funfair, table or parlour games, including pintables, billiards, special tables for casino games, and automatic bowling alley equipment. The tariff rate for these goods is also 20%.

Heading 9505 covers festive, carnival, or other entertainment articles, including conjuring tricks and novelty jokes. The goods under this heading are classified according to their intended use, such as Christmas festivities or magical equipment. The tariff rate for these goods is 20%.

Heading 9506 covers articles and equipment for general physical exercise, gymnastics, athletics, other sports, or outdoor games, not specified or included elsewhere in this chapter; swimming pools and paddling pools. The goods under this heading are classified according to their intended use, such as snow-skis, water-skis, golf clubs, and tennis rackets. The tariff rate for these goods is 20%.

Heading 9507 covers fishing rods, fish-hooks, and other line fishing tackle; fish landing nets, butterfly nets, and similar nets; decoy "birds" (other than those of heading 9208 or 9705) and similar hunting or shooting requisites. The goods under this heading are classified according to their intended use, such as fishing rods, fish-hooks, and fishing reels. The tariff rate for these goods is 20%.

Heading 9508 covers roundabouts, swings, shooting galleries, and other fairground amusements; traveling circuses, traveling menageries, and traveling theatres. The goods under this heading are classified according to their intended use, such as traveling circuses and traveling menageries. The tariff rate for these goods is 20%.

Chapter 96 covers miscellaneous manufactured articles, which includes various goods not covered in other chapters. The goods under this chapter are classified according to their intended use or constituent material. The tariff rate for these goods varies depending on the specific heading or sub-heading.

Note 1 of Chapter 96 excludes certain goods from this chapter, such as pencils for cosmetic or toilet uses, parts of umbrellas or walking-sticks, imitation jewellery, parts of general use, cutlery or other articles of Chapter 82 with handles or other parts of carving or moulding materials, articles of Chapter 90, musical instruments or parts or accessories thereof, articles of Chapter 93, articles of Chapter 94, articles of Chapter 95, or works of art, collectors’ pieces, or antiques.

Note 2 of Chapter 96 defines the term “vegetable or mineral carving material” to include hard seeds, pips, hulls, and nuts and similar vegetable materials of a kind used for carving, as well as amber, meerschaum, agglomerated substances, and similar mineral materials of a kind used for carving.

In summary, the document provides information on the Indian Customs Tariff for various recreational, sports, and entertainment goods, along with their corresponding tariff rates. The goods are classified according to their intended use or constituent material, and the tariff rates vary depending on the specific heading or sub-heading. The document also includes certain notes that exclude or define certain goods from specific chapters or headings.
Summary:

This document is a list of Indian tariff items under Chapter 96 of the Indian Customs Tariff, which covers miscellaneous manufactured articles. The list includes descriptions of the goods, unit rates of duty, and Harmonized System (HS) codes. Some notable items include:

* Worked ivory, bone, tortoiseshell, horn, antlers, coral, mother-of-pearl, and other animal carving materials (HS code 9601)
* Worked vegetable or mineral carving material and articles of these materials (HS code 9602)
* Brooms, brushes, hand-operated mechanical floor sweepers, not motorized, mops, and feather dusters (HS code 9603)
* Hand sieves and hand riddles (HS code 9604)
* Travel sets for personal toilet, sewing, or shoe or clothes cleaning (HS code 9605)
* Buttons, press-fasteners, snap-fasteners, and press studs, button moulds, and other parts of these articles; button blanks (HS code 9606)
* Slide fasteners and parts thereof (HS code 9607)
* Ball point pens, felt tipped and other porous-tipped pens and markers, fountain pens, stylograph pens, and other pens; duplicating styli; propelling or sliding pencils; pen holders, pencil holders, and similar holders; parts (including caps and clips) of the foregoing articles (HS code 9608)
* Pencils (other than pencils of heading 9608), crayons, pencil leads, pastels, drawing charcoals, writing or drawing chalks, and tailors' chalks (HS code 9609)
* Slates and boards, with writing or drawing surfaces, whether or not framed (HS code 9610)
* Date, sealing, or numbering stamps, and the like (including devices for printing or embossing labels), hand-operated composing sticks, and hand printing sets incorporating such composing sticks (HS code 9611)
* Typewriter or similar ribbons, inked or otherwise prepared for giving impressions, whether or not on spools or in cartridges; ink-pads, whether or not inked, with or without boxes (HS code 9612)
* Cigarette lighters and other lighters, whether or not mechanical or electrical, and parts thereof other than flints and wicks (HS code 9613)

The tariff rates listed in the document range from 0% to 30%, depending on the item. Some items have different rates for different types of goods within the same HS code. For example, high-value ballpoint pens and fountain pens with bodies or caps of precious metal or rolled precious metal have a higher duty rate (20%) compared to other ballpoint pens and fountain pens (10%).

It is important to note that this document only covers Indian tariff items under Chapter 96 of the Indian Customs Tariff and does not include all Indian tariff items or other Indian laws. Additionally, the rates listed in this document are subject to change and may vary depending on the specific circumstances of the import or export transaction. It is recommended to consult the most up-to-date and accurate information from the relevant Indian authorities or a licensed customs broker before engaging in any import or export activities involving these goods.
Summary:
The document provides a detailed description of various goods and their corresponding tariff rates under the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The goods are categorized under different headings and subheadings. The headings include Combs, Hair-slides and the Like, Hairpins, Curlers, Scent Sprays and Similar Toilet Sprays, Vacuum Flasks and Other Vacuum Vessels, Tailors’ Dummies and Other Lay Figures, Sanitary Towels (Pads) and Tampoons, Monopods, Bipods, Tripods and Similar Articles, Works of Art, Collectors’ Pieces and Antiques, and Project Imports. Each heading contains various subheadings that provide a more specific description of the goods. The tariff rates are mentioned in the form of a percentage of the value of the goods. For example, the tariff rate for Combs, Hair-slides and the Like is 10%, while for Scent Sprays and Similar Toilet Sprays, it is 20%. The document also includes notes that provide additional information about the classification of the goods and the application of the tariff rates. For instance, Note 1 states that the Chapter does not cover unused postage or revenue stamps, theatrical scenery, studio back-cloths, or pearls, natural or cultured, or precious or semi-precious stones. Similarly, Note 3 states that Heading 9703 does not apply to mass-produced reproductions or works of conventional craftsmanship of a commercial character, even if these articles are designed or created by artists. Overall, the document provides a comprehensive and detailed description of the Indian Customs Tariff Act and the classification and tariff rates of various goods.
Summary:

The document summarizes the Project Imports Regulations, 1986, under the Customs Act, 1962, of India. These regulations apply to the assessment and clearance of goods falling under Heading No. 98.01 of the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The regulations define various terms such as industrial plant, sponsoring authority, substantial expansion, and unit.

The regulations provide that assessment under Heading No. 98.01 is available only to those goods that are imported against one or more specific contracts, which have been registered with the appropriate Custom House in the manner specified in regulation 5. The registration of contracts must be made before any order is made by the proper officer of customs permitting the clearance of the goods for home consumption.

The regulations also provide that every importer claiming assessment of the goods falling under the said heading No. 98.01, on or before their importation, shall apply in writing to the proper officer at the port where the goods are to be imported or where the duty is to be paid for registration of the contract or contracts. The application shall specify the location of the plant or project, the description of the articles to be manufactured, produced, mined, or explored, the installed or designed capacity of the plant or project, and such other particulars as may be considered necessary by the proper officer for purposes of assessment under the said heading.

The regulations further provide that if any contract is amended, whether before or after registration, the importer shall make an application for registration of the amendments to the said contract to the proper officer. The application shall be accompanied by the original deed of contract relating to the amendments together with a true copy thereof and the documents, if any, permitting consequential amendments to the import trade control licence, wherever required.

Finally, the regulations require that the importer shall within three months from the date of clearance for home consumption of the last consignment of the goods or within such extended period as the proper officer may allow, submit a statement indicating the details of the goods imported together with necessary documents as proof regarding the value and quantity of the goods so imported in terms of this Regulation and any other document that may be required by the proper officer for finalisation of the contract.
Summary:
The document lists various organizations and their respective addresses, such as the Bhakra Beas Management Board, Central Power Research Institute, National Power Training Institute, and Power Grid Corporation of India. It also contains a table of notified projects for assessment under heading No. 98.01 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, which includes projects such as port mechanical ore handling plants, various pipeline projects, railway electrification projects, research and development projects, and water supply projects. The document also includes a second schedule of export tariffs for various goods, such as coffee, tea, black pepper, cardamom, turmeric, basmati rice, groundnut, raw sugar, de-oiled ground nut oil cakes, animal feed, tobacco, sillimanite, barytes, granite, mica, steatite, iron ore and concentrates, manganese ore, bauxite, other aluminum ores and concentrates, chromium ores and concentrates, ilmenite, manganese dioxide, hides, skins and leathers, raw wool, raw cotton, cotton waste, coir yarn, jute manufactures, hessian cloth and bags, jute canvas, jute webbings, jute tarpaulin cloth and manufactures thereof, sacking, pig iron and spiegeleisen, ferrous products obtained by direct reduction of iron ore, ferrous waste and scrap, remelting scrap ingots of iron or steel, granules and powders, iron and non-alloy steel, semi-finished products of iron or non-alloy steel, flat rolled products of iron or non-alloy steel, bars and rods, angles, shapes and sections, and wire. The rates of duty for these goods vary.
Summary:

The document appears to be a series of amendments to various sections of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The amendments are made by different acts passed in different years, ranging from 1976 to 2019. The amendments relate to various aspects of the Customs Tariff Act, such as the rate of duty, tariff items, and the interpretation of certain terms.

For instance, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2005, amended section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, to provide that the rate of duty on goods imported into India shall be 'Nil' if such goods are exported from India. The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2017, amended section 3 again to provide that the rate of duty on goods imported into India shall be the same as the rate of duty on such goods when exported from India.

The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2010, amended the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, to provide for the rate of duty on certain goods. The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2011, amended the Fifth Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, to provide for the rate of duty on certain goods.

The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2006, amended section 11 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, to provide that goods shall be valued at the transaction value, which is the price actually paid or payable for the goods when sold for export to India. The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2014, amended section 14 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, to provide that goods shall be classified according to the Harmonized System of Nomenclature.

The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2019, amended various sections of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, to provide for the rate of duty on certain goods. For instance, the rate of duty on certain fish and fish products has been reduced, while the rate of duty on certain chemicals has been increased.

In conclusion, the document is a series of amendments to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, made by different acts passed in different years. The amendments relate to various aspects of the Customs Tariff Act, such as the rate of duty, tariff items, and the interpretation of certain terms.
Summary:
The document is a list of amendments to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, which regulates the import and export of goods in India. The amendments include the substitution, insertion, and omission of various tariff items and subheadings related to different types of goods. Some of the notable changes include:

* The substitution of tariff items related to fish and fish products, such as "Oncorhynchus clarkii" being replaced with "Uclichthyidae" and the addition of new tariff items for specific types of fish.
* The substitution of tariff items related to molluscs, with new tariff items for specific types of molluscs being added.
* The substitution of tariff items related to vegetables, such as "MOLLUSCS, LIVE, FRESH, CHILLED, DRIED, SALTED OR IN BRINE" being replaced with "VEGETABLES, ROOTS AND TUBERS, FRESH, CHILLED, DRIED, SALTED OR IN BRINE".
* The substitution of tariff items related to fruits, such as "DEGELATINISED POWDER" being replaced with "FRUITS, NUTS AND OTHER EDIBLE PARTS OF PLANTS, WHETHER OR NOT GENERALLY EDIBLE WHEN RAW, DRIED, SALTED, IN SOLUTION, IN SUSPENSION OR UNDERGOING OTHER PROCESSES WHICH RESULT IN THE ALTERATION OF THE STATE PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF THE PRODUCTS OR OF SUBSTANCES DERIVED THEREFROM".
* The omission of tariff items related to certain types of fish and fish products.
* The insertion of new tariff items for specific types of goods, such as "LIVE, FRESH, CHILLED, DRIED, SALTED OR IN BRINE MOLLUSCS" and "LIVE, FRESH, CHILLED, DRIED, SALTED OR IN BRINE CRUSTACEANS".
* The substitution of note 4 with a new note related to the valuation of goods.

These amendments may have an impact on the import and export of the affected goods in India, and may also affect the customs duties and taxes payable on such goods. It is important to note that these amendments are subject to the effective date mentioned in the document.
Summary:

The document summarizes changes to the Indian Customs Tariff, specifically focusing on certain tariff items and entries related to them. The changes have been made through various Acts and Schedules, including the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and its amendments.

Tariff item 0810 30 00 and related entries were omitted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2006, and the Fourth Schedule. Tariff item 0904 22 12 and related entries were omitted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2018, and the Third Schedule.

Heading 0905, sub-heading 0905 00, tariff items 0905 00 10 to 0905 00 90, and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule. Similarly, sub-headings 0906 10, 0907, 0908 10, 0908 30, 0909 10, 0909 20, 0909 30, 0909 40, 0909 50, 0910 10, and related entries were also substituted or omitted by various Acts and Schedules.

Heading 1001, sub-heading 1001 10, tariff items 1001 10 10 and 1001 10 90, sub-heading 1001 90, tariff items 1001 90 10 to 1001 90 39, and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule. Similarly, headings 1002, 1003, 1004, and 1007, and related entries were also substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule.

Tariff item 1005 90 00 and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2019, and the Fifth Schedule. Heading 1007, sub-heading 1007 00, tariff items 1007 00 10 and 1007 00 90, and related entries were also substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule.

Sub-heading 1008 20, tariff items 1008 20 11 to 1008 20 39, and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule. Sub-heading 1008 30 and related entries were also omitted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule.

In heading 1102, tariff items 1102 10 00 and 1102 30 00 and related entries were omitted by various Acts and Schedules. Tariff item 1102 90 00 and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule.

Sub-heading 1106 10 and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2017, and the Third Schedule.

Heading 1201, sub-heading 1201 00, tariff items 1201 00 10 and 1201 00 90, and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule. Sub-heading 1202 10, tariff items 1202 10 11 to 1202 10 99, sub-heading 1202 20, tariff items 1202 20 10 and 1202 20 90, and related entries were also substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule.

Sub-heading 1207 10, tariff items 1207 10 10 and 1207 10 90, sub-heading 1207 20, tariff items 1207 20 10 and 1207 20 90, sub-heading 1207 40, tariff items 1207 40 10 and 1207 40 90, sub-heading 1207 50, tariff items 1207 50 10 and 1207 50 90, and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule. Sub-heading 1207 30 and related entries were omitted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2006, and the Fourth Schedule.

Tariff items 1209 10 00 to 1209 25 00 and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2011, and the Fifth Schedule. Tariff item 1209 26 00 and related entries were omitted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2006, and the Fourth Schedule.

Heading 1211 and related entries were substituted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2016, and the Fourth Schedule. Tariff item 1211 10 00 and related entries were omitted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2006, and the Fourth Schedule.

Sub-heading 1212 10, tariff items 1212 10 10 and 1212 10 90, sub-heading 1212 20, tariff items 1212 20 10 and 1212 20 90, sub-heading 1212 30, tariff items 1212 30 10 and 1212 30 90, and related entries were substituted or omitted by various Acts and Schedules.

Sub-heading 1301 10, tariff items 1301 10 10 to 1301 10 90, and related entries were omitted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2006, and the Fourth Schedule.

Heading 1403, sub-heading 1403 00, tariff items 1403 00 10 and 1403 00 90, and related entries were omitted by the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2006, and the Fourth Schedule.

In conclusion, the document summarizes various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff through different Acts and Schedules, specifically focusing on tariff items and related entries. The amendments include substitution, omission, and insertion of tariff items and related entries, which have been made to update and streamline the Indian Customs Tariff.
Summary:
This document appears to be a collection of amendments to various sections of a legal or regulatory code, specifically related to tariff items and subheadings under the heading numbers 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, and 25. The amendments involve changes to the percentage rates, insertion and omission of tariff items and subheadings, and substitution of descriptions for certain tariff items. Many of the amendments were made by various Acts, such as the Customs Tariff Act, and are effective from specific dates. Some of the notable changes include the omission of tariff items 1512 19 30, 1512 19 40, 1515 40 00, and 1517 90 20, and the substitution of descriptions for tariff items 1604 30 00, 1605 20 00, 1605 90 10 to 1605 90 90, and others. Additionally, there are changes to the percentage rates for certain tariff items under headings 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, and 25. The document also includes references to the Fourth and Fifth Schedules and the Second and Third Notifications, which are likely related to this regulatory code.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act through different Acts and amendment bills. The amendments are related to different sections and schedules of the Act, which deal with the classification of goods and the rate of customs duty applicable to them.

Some of the key amendments highlighted in the document are:

* Act 21 of 2006, s. 63(b) and the Fourth Schedule: This amendment omits certain entries related to tariff items 2508 20 10 and 2508 20 90 from the Fourth Schedule, which deals with the classification of chemical products.
* Act 22 of 2007, s. 114(i) and the Second Schedule: This amendment substitutes the entry in column (4) for all tariff items (except all the tariff items of headings 2504 and 2510) in the Second Schedule, which deals with the rate of customs duty for various goods.
* Act 21 of 2006, s. 63(b) and the Fourth Schedule: This amendment substitutes the heading 2513 and related tariff items with new ones, which deal with the classification of articles of iron or steel.
* Act 47 of 2016, s. 4: This amendment substitutes the entry "10%" with "7.5%" in column (4) for tariff item 2515 11 00, 2515 12 10, 2515 1220, and 2515 1290, which deal with the classification of chemical products.
* Act 22 of 2007, s. 114(i) and the Second Schedule: This amendment substitutes the entry in column (4) for all tariff items (except all the tariff items of headings 2504 and 2510) in the Second Schedule, which deals with the rate of customs duty for various goods.
* Act 47 of 2016, s. 4: This amendment substitutes the entry "10%" with "7.5%" in column (4) for tariff item 2516 11 00 and 2516 12 00, which deal with the classification of chemical products.
* Act 21 of 2006, s. 63(b) and the Fourth Schedule: This amendment omits certain entries related to tariff items 2516 12 00 to 2516 22 00 from the Fourth Schedule, which deals with the classification of chemical products.
* Act 22 of 2007, s. 114(i) and the Second Schedule: This amendment substitutes the entry in column (4) for all tariff items (except all the tariff items of headings 2504 and 2510) in the Second Schedule, which deals with the rate of customs duty for various goods.
* Act 21 of 2006, s. 63(b) and the Fourth Schedule: This amendment substitutes the sub-heading 2524 00 and related tariff items with new ones, which deal with the classification of articles of aluminum.
* Act 8 of 2011, s. 60(a)(ii) and the Fifth Schedule: This amendment inserts new entries related to tariff items 2528 10 00, 2528 90 10 to 2528 90 90, and sub-heading 2528 90 in the Fifth Schedule, which deals with the rate of customs duty for various goods.

The document also includes amendments related to headings 2529, 2601, 2620, 2701, 2707, 2710, 2711, 2712, 2713, 2715, 2801, 2802, 2803, 2804, 2805, 2811, 2812, 2813, 2814, 2815, 2816, 2817, 2818, 2823, 2824, 2825, 2826, 2831, 2832, 2833, 2834, 2835, 2836, 2837, 2838, 2839, 2841, 2842, 2843, 2844, 2845, 2846, 2847, 2848, 2849, 2851, 2852, 2853, 2854, 2855, 2856, 2857, 2916, 2917, 2918, 2926, 2927, and 2930.

In summary, the document provides details of various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act through different Acts and amendment bills, which deal with the classification of goods and the rate of customs duty applicable to them.
Summary:
The document summarizes amendments to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1985, specifically focusing on various changes made to the tariff items under Chapter 28, which deals with inorganic chemicals. These amendments have been made through various Acts, including the Finance Act, 2006, the Finance Act, 2007, the Finance Act, 2016, the Finance Act, 2019, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2011.

Some of the key changes made to the tariff items under Chapter 28 include:

* The omission of certain tariff items, such as 2812 10, 2812 10 10 to 2812 90 00, 2824 20 00, 2825 90 30, 2826 11, 2826 11 10 and 2826 11 20, 2827 33 00, 2827 34 00, 2827 36 00, 2827 39 10, 2830 20 00, 2830 30 00, 2833 23 00, 2833 26, 2833 26 10 and 2833 26 90, 2833 29 20, 2835 23 00, 2836 10 00 and 2836 70 00, 2838 00, 2839 20 00, 2841 10, 2841 10 10, 2841 10 90, 2841 20, 2841 20 10 and 2841 20 20, 2848 00, 2852 00 00, 2853 00, 2853 00 10 to 2853 00 99, and 2853 00 10 to 2853 00 99.
* The substitution of certain tariff items with new tariff items and entries, such as sub-heading 2812, tariff items 2812 10 10 to 2812 90 00 and the entries relating thereto, sub-heading 2826, tariff items 2826 20 10 and 2826 20 20 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2827, tariff items 2827 33 00, 2827 34 00 and 2827 36 00 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2830, tariff items 2830 20 00 and 2830 30 00 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2833, tariff item 2833 23 00 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2835, tariff items 2835 23 00 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2836, tariff items 2836 10 00 and 2836 70 00 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2838, sub-heading 2838 00, tariff items 2838 00 10 to 2838 00 30 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2839, tariff item 2839 20 00 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2841, sub-heading 2841 10, tariff items 2841 10 10, 2841 10 90, sub-heading 2841 20, tariff items 2841 20 10 and 2841 20 20 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2848, sub-heading 2848 00, tariff items 2848 00 10 to 2848 00 90 and the entries relating thereto, heading 2853, sub-heading 2853 00, tariff items 2853 00 10 to 2853 00 99 and the entries relating thereto.
* The insertion of new tariff items, such as sub-heading 2852, tariff items 2852 00 00 and the entries relating thereto.

These amendments have been made to update the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1985, in line with the changing international trade scenario and to ensure that the Indian customs tariff structure is in harmony with the Harmonized System of Nomenclature (HSN) followed by the World Customs Organization (WCO).
Summary:

The document summarizes amendments made to Indian laws related to customs tariffs. The amendments were made through various acts, including the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Finance Acts of 2006, 2007, 2011, 2016, and 2019. The document provides specific details about the changes made to different sections, headings, and tariff items of the customs tariff schedule.

Some of the key amendments include the substitution of entries in column (2), (3), or (4) of various tariff items, insertion of new tariff items, and omission of certain tariff items. The amendments also include changes to the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Schedules of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The effective dates of these amendments range from April 18, 2006, to January 1, 2020.

It is important to note that the document uses legal terminology and references to various acts and sections. Therefore, it may be necessary to refer to the relevant acts and sections for a better understanding of the amendments. Additionally, the document uses shorthand notations such as "w.e.f." which stands for "with effect from." It is essential to understand these notations to comprehend the timeline of the amendments.
Summary:

This document appears to be a compilation of various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, specifically relating to certain tariff items under various headings and sub-headings. The amendments include substitutions, insertions, and omissions of tariff items and entries, as well as changes to the descriptions of certain items. Many of the amendments were made by the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2006, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2007, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2016, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2019. The amendments also reference various notifications and schedules, which are likely related to the implementation of these changes. It is worth noting that many of the amendments include references to specific dates, indicating that they were intended to take effect on those dates.
Summary:

The document presented is a compilation of amendments made to different pages of a legal text, specifically the Customs Tariff Act of India. The amendments are a result of various Acts passed over the years, such as the Customs Tariff Act of 1975, Customs Tariff (Identification, Assessment and Collection of Anti-dumping Duty on Dumped Articles and for Determination of Injury) Act of 1995, Customs Tariff (Determination of Origin of Goods under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975) Rules, 1995, and other amending Acts like the Finance Act of 2007, Finance Act of 2016, Finance Act of 2019, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2018.

The amendments include changes to tariff items, headings, sub-headings, and entries in columns (2), (4), and (5) of the Customs Tariff Act. Some of the key changes include:

1. The substitution of various entries in column (4) for all tariff items under different headings and sub-headings, such as 2933, 2934, 2935, 2936, 2939, 2941, and 3001-3004, as a result of the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2018 and the Finance Act of 2019.
2. The insertion of new tariff items, headings, and sub-headings, such as the addition of tariff item 2933 39 17 under heading 2933 and the insertion of sub-heading 3002 10 by the Finance Act of 2016.
3. The omission of certain tariff items, headings, and sub-headings, such as the omission of tariff item 2933 19 90 under heading 2933, sub-heading 2939 21, tariff items 2939 21 10 to 2939 29 00, and the omission of heading 2936, tariff item 2936 10 00 and the entries relating thereto by the Finance Act of 2006.
4. The substitution of specific drugs, such as flunitrzepam, flurazepam, halazaepam, prednisone, and dehydrocortisone, under different headings and sub-headings as a result of various amending Acts.

These amendments are crucial for understanding the current Customs Tariff regime in India and are relevant for businesses, traders, and custom officials involved in import and export activities.
Summary:
The document summarizes various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, specifically focusing on changes made to various tariff items, subheadings, and headings under the Customs Tariff. These amendments were made through various Acts, including the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, the Finance Act, 2006, the Finance Act, 2007, the Finance Act, 2016, and the Finance Act, 2019.

Some of the key amendments include:

* Substitution of certain tariff items and subheadings under heading 3004 with new tariff items and subheadings, including those related to hormones and other products (w.e.f. 1-1-2020).
* Substitution of the entry in column (4) and (5) occurring against all the tariff items of heading 3004 (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).
* Omission of certain tariff items and subheadings, including those related to optical elements, ceramic enamelling, and certain chemicals (w.e.f. various dates).
* Substitution of the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items of certain headings and subheadings (w.e.f. various dates).

It is important to note that the amendments have been made under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and have come into effect on various dates as mentioned in the document. The amendments are specific to certain tariff items, subheadings, and headings, and have been made through various Acts. The changes include substitution, omission, and addition of certain tariff items and subheadings, and have been made to align the Indian Customs Tariff with international standards and to simplify the customs process.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The amendments are made through different Acts, such as Act 13 of 2018, Act 23 of 2019, Act 22 of 2007, Act 21 of 2006, and Act 8 of 2011. The amendments relate to various headings and tariff items, including headings 3302, 3303, 3304, 3305, 3306, 3307, 3402, 3406, 3506, 3507, 3702, 3705, 3805, 3808, and others. The amendments include substitution of entries in columns 2, 4, and 5, omission of certain tariff items, and insertion of new clauses. The amendments have been made effective from various dates, including 11-5-2007, 1-1-2007, 1-1-2012, 1-1-2017, 1-1-2020, and others. The document also refers to the Second Schedule, Fourth Schedule, and Fifth Schedule of the Customs Tariff Act. The amendments are primarily focused on changing the rates of customs duty on various goods imported into India.
Summary:
The document summarizes various amendments made to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, specifically focusing on changes to the Second, Fourth, and Fifth Schedules. The amendments were made by various Acts, including the Finance Act, 2006, the Finance Act, 2007, the Finance Act, 2016, the Finance Act, 2017, the Finance Act, 2019, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2021. The amendments include changes to tariff items, sub-headings, notes, and entries in columns (2), (4), and (5) of the Schedules. Some of the key changes include the omission of certain tariff items, the substitution of entries in columns (4) and (5) with new entries, and the insertion of new tariff items and sub-headings. The amendments cover a wide range of goods, including chemicals, plastics, rubber, textiles, machinery, and electrical equipment. The effective dates of the amendments vary, with some amendments coming into effect on the date of the respective Finance Act and others on specific dates mentioned in the Act.
This document appears to be a collection of amendments to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 of India. The amendments are organized by page number and include substitutions, omissions, and insertions of various tariff items and headings. Many of the amendments reference other acts or schedules, such as Act 22 of 2007, the Second Schedule, and the Fourth Schedule. These acts and schedules likely contain additional information or context for the amendments.

The amendments cover a wide range of tariff items, including items related to chemicals, plastics, rubber, textiles, and machinery. Some of the amendments involve changes to the rates of duty for certain tariff items, while others involve the addition or removal of tariff items and headings.

For example, on page 422, the entry in column (4) for all tariff items was substituted by Act 22 of 2007, s. 114(i) and the Second Schedule, with effect from May 11, 2007. Similarly, on page 432, the entry in column (4) for all tariff items, except for certain specified tariff items, was substituted by Act 22 of 2007, s. 114(i) and the Second Schedule, with effect from May 11, 2007.

Overall, this document is a collection of technical amendments to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 of India, and would likely be of interest to individuals or organizations involved in international trade or customs regulations in India.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1985. The amendments are made through different acts and notifications, including the Finance Acts of 2006, 2007, 2011, 2016, and 2019, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2007. The amendments relate to various tariff items, headings, sub-headings, and notes under Chapters 42 to 48 of the Act. The changes include the substitution, omission, insertion, and modification of tariff items, headings, and sub-headings, as well as the modification of sub-heading notes and Section XVII of the Act. The amendments also relate to the modification of the tariff item relating to pencils, agglomerated wood in logs, and laminated wood. The document also includes references to various Indian Standards (IS) specifications. The amendments have been made effective from various dates ranging from 1st January 2007 to 1st January 2020.
Summary:

This document appears to be a collection of amendments to various legal provisions related to Indian customs tariffs. The amendments are made by different acts passed in various years, such as the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Finance Acts of 2006, 2007, 2011, 2013, 2016, 2017, and 2019. The amendments affect various sections, clauses, entries, and tariff items of the customs tariff schedules, which are organized in pages.

Some of the key amendments include:

* The substitution of the word "or" with "and" in clause (p) of section 3(1) of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, by Act 8 of 2011, which means that both conditions must be fulfilled for the clause to apply.
* The substitution of the figure "65%" with "60%" in section 3(1) of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, by Act 21 of 2006, which reduces the threshold for the applicability of the section.
* The insertion of a new clause (aa) in section 3(7) of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, by Act 28 of 2016, which expands the scope of the section to cover more goods.
* The substitution of the words "obtained by a semi-chemical pulping process" with "obtained by a chemical pulping process" in the Fourth Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, by Act 8 of 2011, which changes the method of pulping for certain goods.
* The substitution of the entries in column (4) of the Second Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, by Act 21 of 2007, which changes the rates of duty for various tariff items.
* The omission of certain tariff items, such as 4802 30 00, 4809 10, 4811 51 00, 4811 59 00, 4814 30 00, 4815 00 00, 4816 10 00, 4816 30 00, 4817 10 00, 4818 41 10, and 4818 40 90, by various acts, which removes them from the customs tariff schedules.

The document also contains references to other legal instruments, such as the First, Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Schedules to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Central Excise Act, 1944, which provide more details on the interpretation and implementation of the amended provisions. The amendments are generally effective from the dates specified in the acts, such as 1 January 2007, 11 May 2007, 1 September 2014, 1 January 2020, etc.
Summary:

The document appears to be a series of amendments to various sections of the Indian Customs Tariff Act. The amendments include renumbering of clauses, substitution of tariff items and entries, and changes to the rates of customs duty. Some of the key changes include:

* Clause (f) has been renumbered as clause (e), clause (g) has been renumbered as clause (f), and clause (h) has been renumbered as clause (g) (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* The definitions at (e) to (ij) have been substituted with new definitions (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* Clause (k) has been renumbered as clause (ij) (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* Tariff items 5003 90 10 to 5003 90 90 and the entries relating thereto have been substituted with new tariff items and entries (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* The rate of customs duty for certain tariff items has been changed, including a reduction from 15% to 10% for certain items and an increase from 10% to 15% for others.
* Certain sub-headings and tariff items have been omitted (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).

It is important to note that the amendments are effective from various dates, as indicated in the document. Additionally, some of the amendments have been made by Act 21 of 2006, while others have been made by various notifications of the Customs Department.
Summary:
The document summarizes various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, specifically focusing on changes to the rates of customs duty for various goods. These changes include the substitution of fixed rates with ad valorem rates, the introduction of minimum rates, and the omission of certain tariff items and headings. The amendments were made through various notifications issued by the Indian government, with the majority of them taking effect on October 27, 2017. The goods affected by these amendments include various types of textiles, base fibers, and plastic products. The document also includes references to various sections and schedules of the Customs Tariff Act, as well as the Finance Act and the Central Excise Act. It is important to note that the document uses legal terminology and concepts, and therefore requires a certain level of familiarity with Indian customs and tax laws.
Summary:

The document summarizes amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act through various Acts and Schedules. The amendments relate to headings 5501 to 5516, which cover various types of articles of iron or steel. The amendments involve the substitution of tariff items with new ones, the omission of certain tariff items, and the substitution of all tariff items of certain sub-headings. The amendments were made by the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2006, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2007, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2011, and the Seventh and Second Schedules to these Acts. The amendments came into effect on various dates, ranging from April 18, 2006, to May 11, 2007, and January 1, 2012. The document also includes references to the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2016, and the Fourth Schedule to that Act, which relate to heading 5601 and sub-heading 5601 21.
Summary:

The document summarizes changes to the tariff schedule in India, specifically for Chapter 56, 57, 58, and 59. These changes were made through various acts and notifications, including the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Finance Acts of 2006, 2007, 2016, and 2019.

In Chapter 56, tariff items 5604 20 10 and 5604 20 90 were omitted by Act 21 of 2006, s. 67(b) The Seventh Schedule (w.e.f. 1-1-2007). Heading 5607, sub-heading 5607 10, tariff items 5607 10 10 and 5607 10 90 were also omitted by Act 21 of 2006, s. 67(b) The Seventh Schedule (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).

In Chapter 57, tariff items 5701 10 00, sub-heading 5701 90 and tariff items 5701 90 10 to 5701 90 20 were substituted by Act 23 of 2019, s. 88(b) and the Fifth Schedule, for tariff item 5701 10 00, sub-heading 5701 90 and tariff items 5701 90 10 to 5701 90 20 and the entries relating thereto (w.e.f. 1-1-2020).

In Chapter 58, tariff items 5801 10 00, 5801 22, 5801 23 00, 5801 24 00, and 5801 25 00 were omitted by various acts and notifications. Sub-heading 5801 34, the tariff items 5801 34 10 to 5801 35 00 and the entries relating thereto were also omitted.

In Chapter 59, tariff items 5901 10 00, 5901 21 00, 5901 22 00, 5901 23 00, 5901 24 00, 5901 25 00, 5901 26 00, 5901 27 00, 5901 28 00, 5901 29 00, 5901 30 00, 5901 31 00, 5901 32 00, 5901 33 00, 5901 34 00, 5901 35 00, 5901 36 00, 5901 37 00, 5901 38 00, 5901 39 00, 5901 40 00, 5901 41 00, 5901 42 00, 5901 43 00, 5901 44 00, 5901 45 00, 5901 46 00, 5901 47 00, 5901 48 00, 5901 49 00, 5901 50 00, 5901 51 00, 5901 52 00, 5901 53 00, 5901 54 00, 5901 55 00, 5901 56 00, 5901 57 00, 5901 58 00, 5901 59 00, 5901 60 00, 5901 61 00, 5901 62 00, 5901 63 00, 5901 64 00, 5901 65 00, 5901 66 00, 5901 67 00, 5901 68 00, 5901 69 00, 5901 70 00, 5901 71 00, 5901 72 00, 5901 73 00, 5901 74 00, 5901 75 00, 5901 76 00, 5901 77 00, 5901 78 00, 5901 79 00, 5901 80 00, 5901 81 00, 5901 82 00, 5901 83 00, 5901 84 00, 5901 85 00, 5901 86 00, 5901 87 00, 5901 88 00, 5901 89 00, 5901 90 00, 5901 91 00, 5901 92 00, 5901 93 00, 5901 94 00, 5901 95 00, 5901 96 00, 5901 97 00, 5901 98 00, and 5901 99 00 were omitted by various acts and notifications.

It is important to note that these changes were made to align the Indian tariff schedule with international standards and to promote trade. The changes affect various products, including textiles, machinery, and chemicals, and have implications for businesses and consumers in India and abroad.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1985. These amendments include changes to the Fourth Schedule, Second Schedule, and Fifth Schedule of the Act. The changes were made by various Acts such as the Finance Act, 2006, the Finance Act, 2007, the Finance Act, 2016, and the Finance Act, 2019. The amendments relate to specific tariff items and their corresponding rates, which have been substituted, inserted, or omitted. The changes came into effect on different dates, as mentioned in the document. The document provides a detailed list of all the tariff items affected by the amendments, along with the specific changes made to each of them. The amendments aim to modify the customs duty rates and tariff structure for various goods imported into India.
Summary:

This document lists changes made to the tariff items under various schedules of Indian law. These changes were made through various Acts, including the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. The changes include the substitution of certain tariff items with new ones, the omission of some tariff items, and the insertion of new tariff items. The effective dates of these changes range from January 1, 2007, to January 1, 2020.

The tariff items listed in the document pertain to various types of garments, textiles, and other related items. For example, tariff items 6111, 6112, and 6113 refer to knitted or crocheted pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats, and similar articles, while tariff items 6201, 6202, and 6203 refer to women's or girls' blouses, shirts, and vests, respectively.

The changes made to these tariff items include the substitution of certain tariff items with new ones that have different descriptions or rates of duty. For example, tariff item 6111 was substituted with a new tariff item that includes knitted or crocheted pullovers, cardigans, waistcoats, and similar articles, but excludes those of silk or silk waste. Similarly, tariff item 6201 was substituted with a new tariff item that includes women's or girls' blouses, shirts, and vests of cotton, but excludes those of silk or silk waste.

Some tariff items were omitted entirely, such as tariff item 6114, which was omitted by Act 22 of 2007, and tariff items 6117 20 to 6117 20 90, which were omitted by Act 21 of 2006.

New tariff items were also inserted in some cases, such as tariff item 6203 31 00, which was inserted by Act 23 of 2019, and tariff item 6203 39 10, which was inserted by the same Act.

Overall, this document provides a detailed list of changes made to various tariff items under Indian law, with specific reference to the Acts and schedules under which the changes were made. The changes affect various types of garments and textiles, and the effective dates of the changes range from 2007 to 2020.
Summary:

The document contains information about various tariff items under the Indian Customs Tariff Act, specifically focusing on textile and apparel items. The tariff items have been amended multiple times by different Acts and Notifications. Some of the key changes are as follows:

* Tariff item 6206 90 00 (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) has been substituted by Act 22 of 2007, s. 114(i) and the Second Schedule, for tariff item 6207 11 00. Similarly, tariff items 6207 19, 6207 21 00, 6207 22 00, 6207 91, 6207 92 00, 6207 99, 6208 11 00, 6208 19, 6208 21 00, 6208 22 00, 6208 29, 6208 91, 6208 92, 6208 99, 6209 10 00, 6209 20 00, 6210 20, 6210 30, 6210 40, 6210 50 00, 6211 11 00, 6211 12 00, 6211 21 00, 6211 22 00, 6211 29 00, 6211 31 00, 6211 32 00, 6211 33 00, 6211 39 00, 6211 41 00, 6211 42, 6211 43 00, 6211 49 00, 6212, 6213 10 00, 6213 90, 6214 10, 6214 20, 6214 30 00, 6214 40 00, 6214 90, 6215, 6216, and 6217 have been substituted or omitted by various Acts and Notifications.
* Tariff items 6301 20 00, 6302 21, and 6302 31 00 have been retained, while other tariff items under Chapter 63 have been substituted or omitted by various Acts and Notifications.
* The Notification No. 109/2008, dated 24-09-2008, has made several changes to various tariff items.
* Act 22 of 2007, s. 114(i) and the Second Schedule, has made several substitutions to various tariff items.
* Act 21 of 2006, s. 63(b) and the Fourth Schedule, has omitted several tariff items.
* Act 8 of 2011, s. 60(a)(ii) and the Fifth Schedule, has made several substitutions and omissions to various tariff items.
* Act 23 of 2019, s. 88(b) and the Fifth Schedule, has made several substitutions and omissions to various tariff items.

It is important to note that the changes have been made with effect from different dates, as indicated in the document. Therefore, it is essential to refer to the relevant date while applying these changes.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments made to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, specifically focusing on changes made to various headings, sub-headings, and tariff items. The amendments were made by various Acts, including the Finance Act, 2018, the Finance Act, 2011, the Finance Act, 2007, and the Customs Tariff Amendment Act, 2018. The changes include the substitution of rates, omission of certain tariff items, and the addition of new sub-headings. The amendments affect various products, including textiles, footwear, machinery, and chemicals. For example, tariff item 6401 91 10 and 6401 91 90 were omitted by Act 21 of 2006, and the rate of duty for certain products was increased from 20% to 30% by Act 13 of 2018. The document also refers to the Fourth and Second Schedules of various Acts, which provide details of the changes made to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. It is important to note that the amendments have different effective dates, ranging from 1st January 2007 to 1st January 2020.
Summary:
The document summarizes various amendments made to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, and the Second, Fourth, and Fifth Schedules of the Act. These amendments were made by several Acts, including the Finance Act, 2006, the Finance Act, 2007, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2015, the Finance Act, 2016, the Finance Act, 2018, and the Finance Act, 2019. The amendments relate to changes in the rates of customs duty, the addition and deletion of tariff items, and changes in the entries in columns (4) of the Schedules. The changes have been made for various tariff items under different headings, including 7103, 7104, 7106, 7107, 7108, 7109, 7110, 7111, 7112, 7117, 7210, and others. The amendments have been made effective from different dates, including 1st January 2007, 14th May 2015, 28th March 2018, and 1st January 2020. The summary also includes references to Notifications issued by the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, which further amend the rates of customs duty for specific tariff items.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, specifically focusing on changes to the tariff items under several headings. The amendments were made by various Acts, including the Customs Tariff Act of 1975, the Finance Act of 2015, the Finance Act of 2019, and others. The amendments include the substitution of tariff items, the omission of certain tariff items, and the addition of new tariff items.

The document also refers to the Second Schedule, the Fourth Schedule, and the Fifth Schedule of the Customs Tariff Act, which contain various provisions related to the tariff items. The Second Schedule provides the rate of additional duty of customs in terms of ad valorem, specific, or compound levy. The Fourth Schedule contains certain provisions related to the tariff items, such as the Note 1 in clause (f), which was omitted by the Finance Act of 2006. The Fifth Schedule contains the changes made by the Finance Act of 2019.

Some of the specific changes mentioned in the document include:

* The substitution of tariff items under heading 7304, such as tariff item 7304 23 90, which was substituted by the Finance Act of 2019.
* The omission of certain tariff items under headings 7226 and 7229, such as tariff items 7226 93 00 and 7226 94 00 under heading 7226, which were omitted by the Finance Act of 2006.
* The addition of new tariff items under heading 7404, such as tariff item 7404 00 21 and the entries relating thereto, which were added by the Finance Act of 2019.

Overall, the document summarizes various amendments to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, specifically focusing on changes to the tariff items under several headings. The amendments were made by various Acts and include the substitution, omission, and addition of tariff items. The document also refers to the Second Schedule, the Fourth Schedule, and the Fifth Schedule of the Customs Tariff Act, which contain various provisions related to the tariff items.
Summary:

This document appears to be a series of amendments to various sections of the Indian Customs Tariff Act, which governs the import and export of goods in India. The amendments are made by different Acts, including the Customs Tariff Act of 1975, the Finance Act of 2006, the Finance Act of 2007, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2011, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2012, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2016, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2019.

The amendments include changes to the tariff rates for various goods, as well as the omission of certain goods from the tariff schedule. Some of the goods that have been omitted include pot scourers and scouring or polishing pads, gloves, table, kitchen or other household articles and parts thereof, lead covered copper cable covered by ISRI code word ‘Relay’, zinc die cast slabs or pigs covered by ISRI code word 'Scull', and others.

The amendments also include substitutions of new tariff items for old ones, and changes to the descriptions of certain goods. For example, the tariff item for "new cupro nickel clips" has been omitted, and the tariff item for "aluminium drosses, spatterns, spellings, skimmings and sweepings covered by ISRI code word ‘Thirl’" has been added.

The amendments are organized by page number and section of the Customs Tariff Act, and each amendment includes a reference to the Act that made the change, the effective date of the change, and the specific changes made to the tariff schedule.
Summary:

The document appears to be a series of amendments to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1985. The amendments include the substitution of various tariff items and headings, the omission of certain tariff items and entries, and the insertion of new entries. The amendments also include references to various Schedules and Acts, such as the First, Second, Third, Fourth, and Eleventh Schedules, and the Customs Tariff Act, 1975.

Some specific examples of the amendments include:

* The substitution of tariff items 7901, 7902, 7903, 7904, and 7905 with new tariff items (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).
* The omission of tariff items 7906 00 10 and 7906 00 20 and related entries (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* The substitution of tariff item 7907 with a new tariff item (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).
* The omission of certain paragraphs in Note 1, in clause (d), under heading 8004 (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* The substitution of tariff items 8001, 8002, and 8003 with new tariff items and the entry "5%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).
* The omission of tariff items 8004 00 10, 8004 00 90, and related entries (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* The omission of tariff item 8005 00 00 and related entries (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* The omission of tariff items 8006 10 and 8006 00 20 and related entries (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* The substitution of tariff items 8007 with a new tariff item and the entry "10%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).

The document also includes amendments to headings 8101, 8102, 8103, 8104, 8105, 8106, 8107, 8108, 8109, and 8110, as well as the omission of certain tariff items and the insertion of new entries. The amendments cover a wide range of goods, including machinery, chemicals, and textiles. It is important to note that the amendments have various effective dates, with some taking effect on 1-1-2007, 11-5-2007, 1-1-2012, or 6-9-2014.
This document appears to be a collection of amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, 1975, through various acts and notifications. The amendments include changes to the tariff items, subheadings, notes, and entries in columns 2, 3, and 4 of the Customs Tariff Act.

Some of the key amendments include:

* Substitution of the term "machinery or plant" with "machinery, plant, electrical equipment or appliances" in certain sections of the Act.
* Insertion of a new subheading and entries related to certain types of machinery and equipment.
* Omission of certain tariff items and entries related to specific goods.
* Substitution of rates of duty for certain tariff items.
* Renumbering of certain subheadings and notes.

These amendments appear to be related to the classification, valuation, and rate of duty for various goods imported into India. It is important to note that these amendments have been made at different points in time, as indicated by the effective date of each amendment. Therefore, it is essential to refer to the relevant act or notification for the specific amendment to understand its full impact.
Summary:

The document provided is a compilation of amendments made to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. These amendments involve changes to various tariff items, sub-headings, and headings, as well as the omission of certain entries. The amendments were made by various Acts, including the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, the Finance Act, 2006, the Finance Act, 2007, the Finance Act, 2011, the Finance Act, 2014, the Finance Act, 2016, and the Finance Act, 2018. The amendments were also made by various notifications, including Notification No. 137/2006-Customs (N.T.), Notification No. 15/2007- (N.T.), and Notification No. 109/2008.

The amendments affect tariff items under various headings, including heading 8442, heading 8443, heading 8448, heading 8452, heading 8456, heading 8459, heading 8460, heading 8466, heading 8469, heading 8470, and heading 8471. The amendments involve changes to the descriptions of the tariff items, the rates of duty, and the goods covered by the tariff items.

Some of the key amendments include:

* The omission of tariff items 8442 10 00, 8442 20 10 to 8442 20 90, 8442 50 10 to 8442 50 90, and 8443 11 00 to 8443 5 1 00, sub-heading 8443 59, tariff items 8443 59 10 to 8443 59 90, sub-heading 8443 60, tariff items 8443 60 10 to 8443 60 90, sub-heading 8443 90, tariff items 8443 90 10 and 8443 90 90 and the entries relating thereto (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
* The substitution of the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items under heading 8442, heading 8443, heading 8448, heading 8452, heading 8456, heading 8459, heading 8460, heading 8466, heading 8469, heading 8470, and heading 8471 (w.e.f. various dates).
* The omission of tariff items 8471 60 21, 8471 60 22, 8471 60 23, 8471 60 26, 8471 60 27, and 8471 60 30 and the entries relating thereto (w.e.f. 01-01-2007).

It is important to note that the amendments were made at different points in time, and therefore, the effective date of each amendment may vary. Additionally, some of the amendments may have been superseded by subsequent amendments. It is recommended to consult the original Acts and notifications for a complete understanding of the amendments and their effective dates.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments made to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, specifically focusing on changes made to various tariff items, headings, and entries. The amendments were made by different Acts, including the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2007, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2014, the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2016, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 2018.

Some of the key amendments made to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, include:

* Substitution of tariff items 8472 90 90, 8473, and 8473 10 00 with new tariff items and entries (w.e.f. various dates).
* Substitution of the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items with new entries (w.e.f. various dates).
* Omission of tariff items 8473 30 50 and 8473 30 60 and the entries relating thereto (w.e.f. 01-01-2007).
* Substitution of the entry in column (3) against each of the tariff items with new entries (w.e.f. 06-08-2014).
* Omission of tariff items 8479 89 91 and the entries relating thereto (w.e.f. 01-01-2007).
* Substitution of the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items with new entries (w.e.f. various dates).
* Insertion of new tariff items and entries (w.e.f. various dates).
* Substitution of the heading, tariff items, and entries with new ones (w.e.f. various dates).
* Substitution of the entries in column (2), (3), and (4) with new entries (w.e.f. various dates).
* Omission of tariff items and entries relating thereto (w.e.f. various dates).

It is important to note that the amendments made to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, are complex and require a thorough understanding of the Act and the various amendments made to it. Therefore, it is recommended to consult the original document for a more detailed understanding of the changes made to the Act.
Summary:

The document contains information on various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act. Specifically, it details changes made to various tariff items under headings 8512, 8513, 8514, 8515, 8516, 8517, 8518, 8519, 8520, 8521, 8522, 8523, 8524, 8525, 8526, 8527, and 8528. These changes include the substitution of certain tariff items with new ones and the modification of the corresponding rates of duty.

For example, under heading 8512, tariff items 8512 10 00, 8512 20 10, 8512 20 20, 8512 2090, 8512 30 10, 8512 30 90, and 8512 40 00 have been substituted with the entry "15%" (w.e.f. 1-08-2019). Similarly, under heading 8513, tariff items 8513 10 10 have been substituted with the entry "10%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007), while tariff items of heading 8513 have been substituted with the entry "7.5%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).

Under heading 8514 & 8515, tariff items have been substituted with the entry "7.5%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007). Under heading 8516, tariff items have been substituted with the entry "10%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).

Under heading 8517, several tariff items have been substituted with new rates of duty, including tariff items 8517 12 10 and 8517 12 90, which have been substituted with the entry "10%" (w.e.f. 1-1-2020).

Under heading 8518, 8519, 8521, 8522, 8523, tariff items have been substituted with the entry "10%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).

Under heading 8524, several tariff items have been omitted (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).

Under heading 8525, tariff items have been substituted with the entry "7.5%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).

Under heading 8526, tariff items have been substituted with the entry "7.5%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).

Under heading 8527, tariff items have been substituted with the entry "10%" (w.e.f. 11-5-2007).

Under heading 8528, several tariff items have been substituted with new rates of duty, including tariff items 8528 41 00 to 8528 69 00 (w.e.f. 14-5-2016).

It is important to note that all the aforementioned changes are effective from the dates mentioned in the document. Additionally, the document also mentions the substitution of certain schedules, such as the Fourth Schedule, the Second Schedule, and the Fifth Schedule, with new versions of these schedules.
Summary:

This document appears to be a series of amendments to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, specifically related to various headings and tariff items within Chapter 85 (Electrical Machinery and Equipment and Parts Thereof; Sound Recorders and Reproducers, Television Image and Sound Recorders and Reproducers, and Parts and Accessories of Such Articles). The amendments involve changes to the applicable customs duty rates for these items. Here is a summary of the key changes:

1. Heading 8529: The customs duty rate has been changed to 7.5% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items, then to 10% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for specific tariff items, and finally to 15% (w.e.f. 28-3-2018) for other specific tariff items.
2. Heading 8530: The customs duty rate has been changed to 7.5% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items.
3. Heading 8531: The customs duty rate has been changed to 7.5% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items, then to 10% (w.e.f. 14-5-2016) for specific tariff items.
4. Heading 8532, 8533, 8534, 8535, and 8536: The customs duty rate has been changed to "u" (w.e.f. 6-8-2014) for all tariff items under these headings.
5. Heading 8535: The customs duty rate has been changed to 7.5% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items, then to 10% (w.e.f. 14-5-2016) for specific tariff items, and finally to 15% (w.e.f. 28-3-2018) for other specific tariff items.
6. Heading 8536: The customs duty rate has been changed to 10% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items, then to 10% (w.e.f. 14-5-2016) for all tariff items, and finally to 15% (w.e.f. 28-3-2018) for specific tariff items.
7. Heading 8537: The customs duty rate has been changed to 10% (w.e.f. 14-5-2016) for all tariff items.
8. Heading 8538: The customs duty rate has been changed to 7.5% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items, then to 15% (w.e.f. 28-3-2018) for specific tariff items.
9. Heading 8539: The customs duty rate has been changed to 10% (w.e.f. 14-5-2016) for all tariff items, then to 15% (w.e.f. 1-08-2019) for specific tariff items.
10. Heading 8540: The customs duty rate has been changed to 10% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items, with certain tariff items and entries omitted or substituted.
11. Heading 8541: The customs duty rate has been changed to 10% (w.e.f. 14-5-2016) for all tariff items, with certain tariff items and entries substituted.
12. Heading 8542: The customs duty rate has been changed for various tariff items and entries, with some omitted or substituted.
13. Heading 8543: The customs duty rate has been changed to 7.5% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items, with certain tariff items and entries omitted or substituted.
14. Heading 8544: The customs duty rate has been changed to "m" (w.e.f. 6-8-2014) for all tariff items, then to 10% (w.e.f. 14-5-2016) for all tariff items, and finally to 15% (w.e.f. 28-3-2018) for specific tariff items.
15. Heading 8545, 8546, and 8547: The customs duty rate has been changed to 7.5% (w.e.f. 11-5-2007) for all tariff items.

Please note that "w.e.f." stands for "with effect from."
This text appears to be a list of amendments to various sections of Indian tax law, specifically relating to customs duties. The amendments are listed in chronological order, with the date of implementation indicated in parentheses after the amending act.

The amendments affect various headings and tariff items in the customs tariff, which are used to classify goods for the purpose of determining the applicable customs duty rate. The amendments include changes to the duty rates for certain goods, as well as the addition or removal of certain goods from specific tariff items.

For example, the first amendment listed is the substitution of the tariff item "10%" for the tariff items of heading 8548, which was made by the Customs Tariff Act of 2007 (Act 22 of 2007) with effect from May 11, 2007. This means that goods that were previously classified under heading 8548 would now be subject to a customs duty rate of 10%.

Other amendments include the omission of certain tariff items, such as the figure "9501" and the word and figure "or 8606 20", and the substitution of certain tariff items with new ones. The text also includes references to the Second, Third, and Fourth Schedules, which are likely tables or lists of tariff items and their corresponding duty rates.

Overall, this text is a summary of various amendments to Indian customs tariff law, with a focus on changes to duty rates and the classification of goods.
Summary:

The document summarizes amendments made to the First Schedule of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, which deals with the classification of goods and their respective tariff rates. The amendments were made through various acts and notifications, including the Finance Acts of 2006, 2007, 2014, 2016, and 2018, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2019. The changes affect different headings and tariff items under Chapter 90 (Optical, photographic, cinematographic, measuring, checking, precision, medical or surgical instruments and apparatus; parts and accessories thereof) and Chapter 91 (Works of art, collectors' pieces and antiques).

Some of the notable amendments include:

1. The substitution of tariff items under heading 9010 (Spectacles, goggles, sunglasses, binoculars, prismatic compasses; parts and accessories thereof) with new tariff items and rates.
2. The substitution of tariff items under headings 9011, 9012, 9013, 9014, 9015, 9016, 9017, 9018, 9019, 9020, 9021, 9022, 9023, 9024, 9025, 9026, 9027, 9028, 9029, 9030, 9031, and 9032 with new tariff items and rates.
3. The omission of certain tariff items and entries relating to them under headings 9010, 9027, 9030, and 9101.
4. The substitution of the entry in column (4) (describing the goods) for certain tariff items under headings 9010, 9011, 9012, 9013, 9014, 9015, 9016, 9017, 9018, 9019, 9020, 9021, 9022, 9023, 9024, 9025, 9026, 9027, 9028, 9029, 9030, 9031, and 9032.
5. The substitution of the entry in column (3) (describing the rate of duty) for certain tariff items under heading 9026.

These amendments aim to modify the classification and tariff rates of various goods under Chapters 90 and 91, which may have implications for trade and commerce in India. It is essential to understand these changes to comply with the Customs Tariff Act and other relevant laws and regulations.
Summary:

This document pertains to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, which classifies imported and exported goods and imposes duties on them. The document includes various amendments to the Act, which have been made over time. Here are some key points:

* The document includes amendments made by various Acts, including the Customs Tariff Act of 1975, the Finance Act of 2007, the Finance Act of 2014, and the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2018.
* The amendments relate to various tariff items, which are classified under different headings and sub-headings. For example, tariff item 9105 relates to "Electric accumulators, including separators therefor, whether or not rectangular, but not fitted with built-in electric motors," and tariff item 9203 relates to "Photographic (other than cinematographic) plates and film in rolls or sheets, sensitized, and photographic paper in rolls or sheets, sensitized."
* The amendments include changes to the tariff rates, which are expressed as percentages of the value of the goods. For example, tariff item 9503 has a tariff rate of 20%.
* Some amendments relate to specific types of goods. For example, the amendment made by the Finance Act of 2014 excludes "Artillery weapons (for example, guns, howitzers and mortars)" from tariff item 9301.
* Other amendments relate to procedural matters, such as the omission of certain words or the substitution of new words. For example, the amendment made by the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act of 2018 substitutes the words "the entry in column (4) occurring against all the tariff items" with the words "the entry in column (3) against each of them in tariff items" in several places.

Overall, the document provides a detailed and technical overview of the Indian Customs Tariff Act and the various amendments that have been made to it. It is likely to be of interest to professionals in the field of international trade, as well as to anyone who is involved in importing or exporting goods to or from India.
Summary:

The document provides information on various amendments to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, particularly focusing on the tariff items, entries, and schedules. The following are the key points from the document:

* Act 28 of 2016, s. 141(ii) and the Third Schedule made several amendments to the tariff items and entries relating to them, such as tariff item 9505 10 00, 9505 90 90, and 9505 90 10, with an effective date of 1st January 2017 and 28th March 2018.
* Act 13 of 2018, s. 103(a) and the Second Schedule made similar amendments to the tariff items and entries, such as tariff items of headings 9506, 9507, 9508, and 9611 00 00, with an effective date of 28th March 2018.
* Act 22 of 2007, s. 114(i) and the Second Schedule made amendments to the tariff items and entries, such as all the tariff items, by substituting the entry "10%" for all of them, with an effective date of 11th May 2007.
* Act 8 of 2011, s. 60(a)(ii) and the Fifth Schedule made amendments to the tariff items and entries, such as tariff items 9608 10 10, 9608 10 90, 9608 20 00, 9608 31, 9608 31 10, 9608 31 90, 9608 39, 9608 39 10 to 9608 39 99, with an effective date of 1st January 2012.
* Act 21 of 2006, s. 63(b) and the Fourth Schedule made amendments to the tariff items and entries, such as heading 9614, tariff item 9614 20 00, sub-heading 9614 9090, tariff items 9614 90 10 to 9614 90 90, with an effective date of 1st January 2007.
* Act 23 of 2019, s. 88(a) and the Fourth Schedule made insertions to the tariff items and entries, such as tariff item 9611 00 00, with an effective date of 1st January 2020.
* Notification No. 05/2019-Customs dated 16-02-2019 made insertions to the tariff items and entries, with an effective date of 16th February 2019.

Overall, the document provides a summary of various amendments made to the Indian Customs Tariff Act, particularly focusing on the tariff items, entries, and schedules. The amendments were made by different acts and notifications, with varying effective dates. These amendments are significant as they affect the customs duties and tariffs on various goods imported into India.