Summary:
The Metal Corporation (Nationalisation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976, is an Act to provide for the taking over of the management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, after such undertaking is deemed to have been transferred to, and re-vested in, the said Corporation, and for the subsequent acquisition of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation for the purpose of enabling the Central Government, in the public interest, to exploit to the fullest extent possible, the zinc and lead deposits in and around Zawar area in the State of Rajasthan and to utilise those minerals in such manner as to subserve the common good. The Act is divided into seven chapters, with 25 sections and a schedule.

Chapter I, Preliminary, defines the short title and commencement of the Act, as well as the definitions of various terms used throughout the Act.

Chapter II, Taking Over of Management of the Undertaking of the Metal Corporation, deals with the transfer of management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation to the Central Government, the appointment of an Administrator to take over the management of the undertaking, and the powers and duties of the Administrator.

Chapter III, Acquisition of the Undertaking of the Metal Corporation, deals with the vesting of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation in the Central Government, the rights and obligations of the Central Government as the owner of the undertaking, and the transfer of contracts and liabilities to the Central Government.

Chapter IV, Payment of Amounts, deals with the payment of amounts to the Metal Corporation for the deprivation of management and the acquisition of the undertaking.

Chapter V, Management, etc., of the Undertaking of the Metal Corporation, deals with the management and control of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation by the Central Government.

Chapter VI, Provisions Relating to Employees of the Metal Corporation, deals with the transfer of employees of the Metal Corporation to the Central Government or a Government company, and the terms and conditions of their employment.

Chapter VII, Miscellaneous, deals with various miscellaneous provisions, including the overriding effect of the Act, the power to cancel or vary contracts, the protection of action taken in good faith, the delegation of powers, penalties, offences by companies, power to make rules, power to remove difficulties, abolition of Tribunal, etc., and repeal of Ordinance and saving.

The Schedule to the Act contains provisions relating to the transfer of certain properties to the Central Government.

Overall, the Act is intended to enable the Central Government to exploit the zinc and lead deposits in and around Zawar area in the State of Rajasthan and to utilise those minerals in such manner as to subserve the common good, by taking over the management and subsequently acquiring the undertaking of the Metal Corporation.