Summary:

The Delhi Police Act, 1978 (Act No. 34 of 1978) is an Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to the regulation of the police in the Union territory of Delhi. It is divided into two chapters:

Chapter I: Preliminary

* Section 1: Short title, extent and commencement. This Act may be called the Delhi Police Act, 1978. It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi. It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of July, 1978.
* Section 2: Definitions. This section defines various terms used throughout the Act. For example, "competent authority" refers to the Commissioner of Police or any other police officer specially empowered in that behalf by the Central Government. "Delhi police" or "police force" includes all persons appointed as special police officers and additional police officers, as well as all other persons who exercise any police function in any part of Delhi. "Place of public amusement" means any place where music, singing, dancing or game or any other amusement, diversion, or recreation or the means of carrying on the same is provided, to which the public are admitted either on payment of money or with the intention that money may be collected from those admitted.

Chapter II: Organisation, Superintendence and Control of the Police Force

* Section 3: One police force for the whole of Delhi. There shall be one police force for the whole of Delhi and all officers and subordinate ranks of the police force shall be liable for posting to any branch of the force including the Delhi Armed Police.
* Section 4: Superintendence of police force to vest in the Administrator. The superintendence of the Delhi police throughout Delhi shall vest in, and be exercisable by the Administrator and any control, direction or supervision exercisable by any officer over any member of the police force shall be exercisable subject to such superintendence.
* Section 5: Constitution of police force. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Delhi police shall consist of such number in the several ranks and have such organisation and such powers, functions and duties as the Administrator may, by general or special order, determine. The recruitment to, and the pay, allowances and all other conditions of service of the members of, the Delhi police shall be such as may be prescribed.
* Section 6: Commissioner of Police. For the direction and supervision of the police force in Delhi, the Administrator shall appoint a Commissioner of Police who shall exercise and perform such powers and duties and perform such functions as are specified by or under this Act.
* Section 7: Additional Commissioner of Police. The Administrator may appoint one or more Additional Commissioners of Police for the purposes of this Act. The Additional Commissioner of Police shall assist the Commissioner of Police in the exercise of his powers and the performance of his duties in such manner and to such extent, and exercise such powers and perform such duties of the Commissioner of Police and within such local limits, as the Administrator may, by general or special order, specify.
* Section 8: Deputy, Additional Deputy and Assistant Commissioners of Police. The Administrator may appoint one or more Deputy Commissioners of Police or Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police or Assistant Commissioners of Police for the purposes of this Act. Every Deputy Commissioner of Police or Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police or Assistant Commissioner of Police shall, under the orders of the Commissioner of Police, exercise such of the powers (except the power to make regulations) and perform such of the duties of the Commissioner of Police and within such local limits as may be specified in such orders.
* Section 9: Appointment of Principals of Police training institutions. The Administrator shall appoint a police officer not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner of Police to be the Principal of the Police Training School for Delhi. The Commissioner of Police may by general or special order assign to the Principal of the Police Training School such powers and duties as he may deem fit for the proper functioning of that School. The Administrator may establish a Police Training College for Delhi and appoint a police officer of appropriate rank to be the Principal of such College. The Commissioner of Police may by general or special order assign to the Principal of the Police Training College such powers and duties as he may deem fit for the proper administration of that College.
* Section 10: Constitution of police districts, sub-divisions and police stations. Subject to the control of the Administrator, the Commissioner of Police shall constitute police districts within Delhi, divide such police districts into police sub-divisions and specify the police stations comprised in each such sub-division, and define the limits and extent of such police districts, police sub-divisions and police stations.
* Section 11: Officers in charge of police districts, police sub-divisions and police stations. Each police district shall be under the charge of a Deputy Commissioner of Police who may be assisted in the discharge of his duties by one or more Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police. Each police sub-division shall be under the charge of an Assistant Commissioner of Police and each police station shall be under the charge of an Inspector of Police.
* Section 12: Appointment of subordinate ranks. Subject to such general or special orders in writing as the Administrator may make in this behalf, Inspectors of Police may be appointed by the Additional Commissioner of Police; and Sub-Inspectors of Police and other officers of subordinate rank may be appointed by the Deputy Commissioners of Police, Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police, Principal of the Police Training School, or the Inspector-General of Police.
Summary:

The document outlines various provisions related to the regulation, control, and discipline of the Delhi Police. According to Section 13, every police officer of the rank of Inspector and below shall receive a certificate of appointment upon enrolment. This certificate shall be issued under the seal of a specified officer and in a form specified by the Administrator. A certificate of appointment becomes null and void when the person named therein ceases to belong to the Delhi police or is suspended from the Delhi police.

Under Section 14, the powers, functions, and privileges vested in a police officer are suspended while the officer is under suspension from office. However, the person remains a police officer and is subject to the control of the same authorities to which they would have been subject if they had not been under suspension.

Section 15 grants the Commissioner of Police the authority to direct and regulate all matters of arms, drill, exercise, observation of persons and events, mutual relations, distribution of duties, study of laws, orders, and modes of proceedings, and all matters of executive detail or the fulfillment of their duties by the police force under them.

The Commissioner of Police also has the authority to investigate and regulate all matters of account connected with the Delhi police and all persons concerned shall be bound to give him reasonable aid and facilities in conducting such investigations and to conform to his orders consequent thereto (Section 16).

Section 17 allows the Commissioner of Police to appoint any able-bodied male person not less than eighteen years of age to be a special police officer to assist the Delhi police on any occasion when they have reason to apprehend the occurrence of any riot or grave disturbance of the peace in any area. The names of special police officers appointed under this section shall be published in such manner as may be prescribed.

Section 18 states that where additional police officers are required to be deputed under certain sections, the Commissioner of Police may appoint such number of additional police officers as they consider necessary. Every such additional police officer shall receive a certificate of appointment and have such of the powers, privileges, and immunities and perform such of the duties of a police officer as are specifically mentioned in the certificate.

Chapter III of the document outlines regulations for the administration of the police. The Commissioner of Police may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act or any other law for the time being in force regarding the inspection of the police force, determination of arms, accoutrements, clothing, and other necessaries, prescription of places of residence, institution, management, and regulation of any police fund, regulation of the distribution, movements, and location of the police, assignment of duties, regulation of the collection and communication of intelligence and information, and generally for the purpose of rendering the police efficient and preventing abuse or neglect of their duties (Section 19).

The Commissioner of Police may call for such returns, reports, and statements on any subject connected with the prevention and detection of crime, the maintenance of order, and the performance of the duties of his subordinates as such subordinates may be able to furnish to him (Section 20).

Under Section 21, the Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police Training College or School or any other officer of equivalent rank may award to any police officer of subordinate rank any of the following punishments: dismissal, removal from service, reduction in rank, forfeiture of approved service, reduction in pay, withholding of increments, or fine not exceeding one month's pay.

An appeal against any order of punishment passed against a police officer under Section 21 or the rules thereunder shall lie to the Administrator, Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police Training College or School, Assistant Commissioner of Police, or any other police officer of equivalent rank (Section 23).

Every police officer not on leave or under suspension shall be deemed to be always on duty and any police officer or any number or body of police officers allocated for duty in any part of Delhi may be employed on police duty in any other part of Delhi for so long as their services may be required in such other part of Delhi (Section 24).

Finally, the document outlines the circumstances under which a police officer of subordinate rank may resign (Section 25).
The document provided is related to the Police Regulations of the Delhi Police. It outlines the rules and procedures for resignation and withdrawal from duty for police officers of subordinate rank. According to the regulations, a police officer of subordinate rank who wishes to resign must give written notice to the appointing authority and cannot withdraw from duty until two months have elapsed or permission to resign has been granted. The regulations also state that a Head Constable or constable may be permitted to withdraw from duty on crediting two months' pay in lieu of notice.

Additionally, the regulations specify that certain police officers may not be permitted to resign before the expiry of a specific period. For example, inspectors, sub-inspectors, or assistant sub-inspectors of police whose appointments involve training at a Police Training College or Police Training School may not be permitted to resign within three years of successfully completing their training.

The regulations also outline the procedures for a police officer to fully discharge all debts due to the government or any police fund and return all government property, including certificate of appointment, arms, accoutrements, uniform, and any other government property in their possession.

Furthermore, the regulations state that if a police officer tenders their resignation on medical grounds and produces a certificate signed by a police surgeon or authorized medical officer declaring them to be unfit for further service, the appointing authority shall permit them to withdraw from duty upon discharging or giving a satisfactory security for the payment of any debt due from them as a police officer to the government or any police fund.

If a police officer resigns or withdraws from duty in contravention of these regulations, they shall be liable to forfeit all arrears of pay due to them and any other penalty under section 22 or any other law for the time being in force.

The document also includes regulations related to the delivery of certificate, arms, and other accessories by a person ceasing to be a police officer, the occupation and liability to vacate premises provided for police officers, and the power to make regulations for regulating traffic and for preservation of order in public places.
Summary:

The document outlines various regulations and powers granted to the Commissioner of Police in Delhi, India, for maintaining public order and safety. These regulations cover a wide range of activities, including the conduct of assemblies and processions, the use of loudspeakers and other noisy instruments, the setting of fires and lighting bonfires, and the operation of places of public amusement or entertainment. The Commissioner of Police is also granted the power to give directions to the public, specify routes and times for processions, prevent obstructions, keep order in public places, and make reasonable orders consequential to any order made under this section. Additionally, the Commissioner of Police may prohibit certain acts for the prevention of disorder, such as the carrying of weapons or the use of vehicles in a manner likely to cause danger or obstruction. These regulations are subject to various conditions and exceptions, and may be made after previous publication or in cases of emergency. The regulations also provide for the licensing and control of places of public amusement or entertainment, and the scrutiny of musical, dancing, mimetic, or theatrical performances for public amusement. The document also includes provisions for the registration of eating houses and the prescription of procedures and fees for obtaining licenses or permissions under these regulations. However, nothing in this section or any license or certificate of registration granted under any regulation made thereunder shall authorize any person to import, export, transport, manufacture, sell, or possess any liquor or intoxicating drug in respect of which a license, permit, pass, or authorization is required under any law relating to prohibition which is for the time being in force.
Summary:

The given document contains several sections related to the regulation of public order and safety in Delhi, India. The sections are as follows:

Section 29: This section outlines the prohibition of certain activities in public places, which includes carrying weapons or any article capable of causing physical violence, carrying corrosive substances or explosives, collecting or preparing stones or missiles, exhibiting persons or corpses, uttering cries or singing songs, delivering harangues or using gestures, and preparing, exhibiting, or disseminating pictures or symbols that may offend decency or morality or undermine the security of the State. The section also authorizes the seizure of any such article from any person found carrying it in contravention of the prohibition.

Section 30: This section empowers the Commissioner of Police to prohibit any assembly or procession whenever and for such time as he considers necessary for the preservation of public order. The prohibition cannot remain in force for more than fifteen days from the promulgation thereof, except with the approval of the Administrator for a further period not exceeding six months.

Section 31: This section authorizes any police officer of the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector and above to give directions for preventing serious disorder or breach of the law, maintaining public safety, and securing the peaceful and lawful conduct of proceedings at any place of public amusement or assembly or meeting. The section also provides for free access to every place of public amusement, assembly or meeting for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of sub-section (1) and to any direction made thereunder.

Section 32: This section empowers the Commissioner of Police to issue directions for preventing, prohibiting, controlling, or regulating the incidence or continuance of any vocal or instrumental music, sounds caused by the playing, beating, clashing, blowing, or use in any manner whatsoever of any instrument, appliance, or apparatus or contrivance which is capable of producing or reproducing sound, use of loudspeaker or other apparatus for amplifying any musical or other sound at such pitch or volume as may cause disturbance to others, or carrying on any trade, avocation, or operation resulting in or attended with noise. The section also provides for an opportunity of being heard in the matter before any direction is issued and for the rescission, modification, or alteration of any such order by the Commissioner of Police.

Section 33: This section empowers the Commissioner of Police to temporarily close or take possession of any building or other place and to exclude all or any persons therefrom or to allow access thereto to such persons only and on such terms as he shall deem expedient in order to prevent or suppress any riot or grave disturbance of peace. The section also provides for compensation for any loss or injury suffered by the lawful occupant of such building or place due to the action taken under sub-section (1) and for the determination of the amount of compensation payable and the person to whom such amount shall be payable in case of any dispute.

Section 34: This section empowers the competent authority to give orders as to the conduct of persons concerned towards each other and towards the public in any case of an actual or intended religious or ceremonial or corporate display or exhibition or organized assemblage in any street or public place, as to which or the conduct of, or participation in, which, it shall appear to the competent authority that a dispute or contention exists, which is likely to lead to grave disturbance of the peace. The section also provides for the publication of every such order and its subject to any judgment, decree, injunction, or order made by a court having jurisdiction.

Section 35: This section empowers the Commissioner of Police to take special measures and prescribe regulations to prevent the outbreak of any epidemic disease in any place in Delhi (being a place where on account of a pilgrimage, fair, or other such occurrence, large bodies of persons have assembled or are likely to assemble). The section also provides for the recovery of the expenses incurred by the Commissioner of Police in respect of the arrangements for sanitation and the preservation of order at or about the place of assembly from the Corporation or the municipality concerned.

Section 36: This section empowers the Commissioner of Police to temporarily reserve for any public purpose any street or other public place and prohibit persons from entering the area so reserved, except on such conditions as may be specified by him. The section also authorizes the Commissioner of Police to erect barriers on any street for the purpose of stopping temporarily vehicles and to make orders for regulating the use of such barriers.

Section 37: This section empowers the Commissioner of Police to make regulations prohibiting the disposal of the dead, whether by burial, cremation, or any other means, except at places set apart for the purpose. The section also provides for the display of notices specifying the places set apart for the disposal of the dead and the times at which and the conditions subject to which such disposal may be effected.
Summary:
The document outlines various laws and regulations related to the disposal of the dead, employment of additional police, and compensation for injuries or damages caused by unlawful assemblies in Delhi, India.

Under Section 2 of the document, regulations can be made for the disposal of the dead at places other than those set apart for that purpose, but only if no such places have been set apart. The Commissioner of Police or an authorized officer may grant permission for disposal at a different location if it is not likely to cause obstruction to traffic, disturbance of public peace, or any other objectionable reason. Regulations made under this section are subject to the conditions of previous publication and shall not be earlier than two months from the date of the draft of the proposed regulations.

Section 38 allows the Commissioner of Police to depute additional police to keep the peace, preserve order, enforce laws, or perform other duties imposed on the police at any place in Delhi. The cost of such additional police shall be determined by the Commissioner of Police and shall be employed for such period as he considers necessary. If the person upon whose application such additional police are employed makes a written requisition for their withdrawal, they shall be relieved from the cost thereof at the expiration of such period not exceeding one week from the date of the delivery of such requisition as the Commissioner of Police shall determine.

Section 39 authorizes the Administrator to specify a disturbed area in Delhi and employ additional police officers for a specified period if the area is in a disturbed or dangerous condition or the conduct of the inhabitants or any particular section or class of inhabitants renders it expedient to do so. The cost of such additional police may be recovered from all persons who are inhabitants of the disturbed area or specially from any particular section or class of such persons in such proportion as the Administrator may direct.

Section 40 permits the Administrator or the competent authority to depute additional police to any place where a large work or public amusement is being conducted, or where the behavior or apprehension of behavior of the persons employed on any railway, canal, or other public work necessitates the employment of additional police. The cost of such additional police shall be paid by the person by whom the work, public amusement, manufactory, or concern is being conducted or carried on.

Section 41 authorizes the Administrator to specify the area and period during which an unlawful assembly was held and determine the amount of compensation to be paid to any person or persons in respect of loss or damage or death or grievous hurt caused by the unlawful assembly. The amount of compensation shall be deemed to be a fine imposed under this section and shall be payable by the inhabitants of the disturbed area.

Section 42 provides for the referral of any dispute regarding the cost payable under sections 39 or 40 or the compensation determined under section 41 to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, whose decision shall be final.

Section 43 authorizes the recovery of any amount payable under sections 38, 39, 40, or 41 in the same manner as if it were an arrear of land revenue.

Section 44 requires the District Collector to pay, from the amounts recovered as compensation payable under section 41, such amount as he deems just and proper by way of compensation to any person who has suffered loss or damage to property or grievous hurt or to the legal heirs of any person who died, by reason of anything done in the prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly.

Section 45 authorizes the recovery of amounts payable under sections 39 and 41 in the manner provided in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Summary:
This document summarizes sections 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, and 52 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) regarding the powers of the Commissioner of Police in Delhi to disperse gangs, remove persons causing alarm or engaging in unlawful activities, and remove persons convicted of certain offences.

Under section 46, the Commissioner of Police may direct members of a gang or body of persons to conduct themselves in a certain way or to disperse and remove themselves from Delhi or a part thereof if their movement or encampment is causing or is calculated to cause danger to person or property or alarm or reasonable suspicion that unlawful designs are entertained by such gang or body of persons or by members thereof.

Under section 47, the Commissioner of Police may direct a person to conduct themselves in a certain way or to remove themselves from Delhi or a part thereof if their movements or acts are causing or are calculated to cause alarm, danger or harm to person or property, or if there are reasonable grounds for believing that such person is engaged or is about to be engaged in the commission of an offence involving force or violence or an offence punishable under certain chapters and sections of the Indian Penal Code or in the abetment of any such offence. The Commissioner of Police may also direct such person to remove themselves from Delhi or a part thereof if such person is so desperate and dangerous as to render their being at large in Delhi or in any part thereof hazardous to the community, or if they have been found habitually intimidating other persons by acts of violence or by show of force, or if they habitually commit affray or breach of peace or riot, or if they habitually make forcible collection of subscription or threaten people for illegal pecuniary gain for themselves or for others, or if they have been habitually passing indecent remarks on women and girls, or teasing them by overtures.

Under section 48, the Commissioner of Police may direct a person to remove themselves from Delhi or a part thereof if they have been convicted of certain offences under the Indian Penal Code, the Delhi Public Gambling Act, 1955, the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956, the Arms Act, 1959, the Customs Act, 1962, the Punjab Excise Act, 1955, the Opium Act, 1878, the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930, the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, or section 11 of the Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959, as in force in Delhi, or if they have been convicted on two or more occasions of an offence under the Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959, as in force in Delhi, or if they have been convicted on three or more occasions of an offence under section 105 or section 107 of this Act.

Under section 49, any direction made under section 46, section 47 or section 48 not to enter Delhi or any part thereof, shall be for such period as may be specified therein, and shall in no case exceed a period of two years from the date on which it was made.

Under section 50, before an order under section 46, section 47 or section 48 is made against any person, the Commissioner of Police shall inform him of the general nature of the material allegations against him and give him a reasonable opportunity of tendering an explanation regarding them. If such person makes an application for the examination of any witness to be produced by him, the Commissioner of Police shall grant such application and examine such witness. Any written explanation put in by such person shall be filed with the record of the case, and such person shall be entitled to be represented in the proceeding before the Commissioner of Police by a counsel.

Under section 51, any person aggrieved by an order made under section 46, section 47 or section 48 may appeal to the Administrator within thirty days from the date of the service of such order on him. The Administrator may confirm, vary or set aside the order appealed against after giving a reasonable opportunity to the appellant to be heard either personally or by a counsel and after such further inquiry, if any, as he may deem necessary. The order appealed against shall remain in force pending the disposal of the appeal, unless the Administrator otherwise directs.

Under section 52, an order passed by the Commissioner of Police under section 46, section 47 or section 48 or the Administrator under section 51 shall not be called in question in any court except on the ground that the Commissioner of Police or the Administrator, as the case may be, had not followed the procedure laid down in sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 50 or in section 51, as the case may be, or that there was no material before the Commissioner of Police or the Administrator, as the case may be, upon which he could have based his order, or in the case of an order made under section 47, that the order was not in conformity with the provisions of that section.
Summary:

This document outlines various provisions of Indian laws related to the removal of certain individuals from Delhi or specific parts of it, and the powers and duties of police officers in enforcing these provisions.

Under Section 50, if a person is ordered by the Administrator to remove themselves from Delhi or any part of it, and fails to do so or returns without permission, the Commissioner of Police may cause them to be arrested and removed in police custody to a specified place outside Delhi or the relevant part thereof.

Section 54 permits the Commissioner of Police or any other police officer to grant temporary permission for a person to return to Delhi or a part thereof, subject to certain conditions and the execution of a bond. Such permission may be revoked at any time, and the person must remove themselves outside Delhi or the relevant part thereof upon the expiry of the temporary period or the revocation of the permission. Failure to comply with these conditions may result in arrest and removal in police custody.

Section 55 requires every person against whom an order has been made under Sections 46, 47, or 48 to allow their measurements and photograph to be taken by a police officer in the prescribed manner if so required by the Commissioner of Police. Resistance to or refusal to allow the taking of such measurements or photographs is deemed to be an offence under Section 186 of the Indian Penal Code.

Section 57 prohibits the wearing in public of any dress or article of apparel resembling any uniform required to be worn by a member of the Armed Forces of the Union or any police force or force constituted by or under any law for the time being in force, if it is likely to prejudice the security of the State or the maintenance of public order.

Under Section 59, it is the duty of every police officer to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act or any rule, regulation, or order made thereunder and may take necessary measures to enforce compliance. However, certain conditions and procedures must be followed before a police officer can arrest a person for contravening any provision of this Act or any rule, regulation, or order made thereunder.

Section 60 outlines other duties of a police officer, including promptly serving every summons and obeying and executing every warrant or other order lawfully issued to him by the competent authority, and obtaining intelligence concerning the commission of cognizable offences or designs to commit such offences.
The document summarizes certain duties, powers, and responsibilities of police officers in India, as outlined in the Delhi Police Act, 1978. Some of the key points include:

* Section 59 outlines the duties of police officers, which include preventing and detecting crime, apprehending offenders, and maintaining public order.
* Under Section 61, police officers have the power to enter places of public resort without a warrant if they have reason to believe that the place is used for storing, selling, or consuming intoxicating drinks, narcotics, or for resort by loose and disorderly characters.
* Section 62 allows police officers to search suspected persons in a street or public resort if they have reason to believe that the person is in possession of stolen property.
* Section 63 empowers the Administrator to declare any specified service to be an essential service to the community and makes it the duty of every police officer to obey any order given by a superior officer in relation to any employment in connection with the service specified in the declaration.
* Section 64 permits a police officer of a rank superior to that of a constable to perform any duty assigned by law or by a lawful order to any officer subordinate to him.
* Section 65 requires all persons to comply with the reasonable directions given by a police officer in the discharge of his duties under this Act.
* Chapter VII of the Act deals with powers in relation to unclaimed property. It is the duty of every police officer to take temporary charge of all unclaimed property found by, or made over to, him or of all property found lying in any public street if the owner or person in charge of such property refuses or fails to remove the same.
* The Commissioner of Police is required to issue a proclamation specifying the articles of which such property consists and requiring that any person who may have a claim thereto shall appear before him or some other officer authorized in this behalf and establish his claim within six months from the date of such proclamation.
* If no person establishes his claim to such property within the period specified in the proclamation, the property, or such part thereof as has not already been sold, may be sold by auction under the orders of the Commissioner of Police and the proceeds thereof shall be credited to the Government.
* Section 70 empowers the Central Government to authorize the Commissioner of Police and certain other officers to exercise powers of District Magistrates and Executive Magistrates under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Overall, the Delhi Police Act, 1978 provides a comprehensive framework for the powers, duties, and responsibilities of police officers in India, with a focus on maintaining public order, preventing and detecting crime, and dealing with unclaimed property.
Summary:

The document outlines various sections of laws related to the powers of the Commissioner of Police, notifications, and offences and punishments in Delhi.

Under section 70, the Central Government has the power to empower the Commissioner of Police to exercise and perform the powers and duties of an Executive Magistrate and District Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. This power can also be given to any officer subordinate to the Commissioner of Police. These officers are subject to the general control of the Commissioner of Police, and their powers and duties are not subject to the control of the District Magistrate appointed under section 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Section 71 states that any notification made by the Central Government under section 70 must be laid before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days. If both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be made, the notification shall have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect.

Section 72, which has been omitted by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1980, stated that references to Judicial Magistrate of the first class in sections 108, 109 and 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 should not be construed as references to an Executive Magistrate.

Section 73 lays down the powers of a police officer in relation to offences under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. When in respect of an animal an offence punishable under sub-section (1) of section 11 or section 12 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 has been committed, a police officer may take the animal to the Metropolitan Magistrate, a veterinary officer, or an infirmary appointed under section 35 of the said Act for treatment and detention.

Section 74 empowers the Metropolitan Magistrate to direct the animal to be returned to the person from whose possession it was taken on such person giving security to the satisfaction of the Metropolitan Magistrate binding himself to produce the animal when required.

Section 75 states that the veterinary officer before whom an animal is brought under section 73 shall examine the animal and draw up a report of such examination.

Section 76 states that when an animal is detained in a dispensary or infirmary or other place under section 73, the animal shall be produced before a Metropolitan Magistrate with the least possible delay and in any case within a period not exceeding three days from the date on which it was so detained.

Section 77 empowers a police officer to unsaddle an animal or to unload it when he suspects that the animal is unfit to be employed in any work or labour.

Section 78 states that any police officer may arrest, without a warrant from a Magistrate, any person committing in his presence any offence punishable under clauses (a) to (m) (both inclusive) of sub-section (1) of section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.

Section 79 states that the provisions of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.

Sections 80 to 83 deal with various offences and punishments related to driving vehicles and animals in Delhi. These sections prohibit disregarding the rules of the road, causing obstruction or mischief by animal, exposing animal for hire, sale, etc., and causing any obstruction in a street.
The document outlines various laws related to public behavior and conduct in India. These laws are designed to maintain public order, cleanliness, and safety.

Section 80 outlines laws related to obstructing public ways. It is illegal to leave any vehicle or animal in a public place for longer than necessary, to use any part of a street or public place as a halting place for vehicles or cattle, or to leave any box, bale, package, or other things whatsoever in a public place for an unreasonable length of time. It is also illegal to expose anything for sale in a public place without proper authorization.

Section 84 prohibits driving, riding, loading, propelling, or leaving any animal or vehicle on a footway, and fastening any animal in such a way that it can stand across or upon such footway.

Section 85 prohibits exhibiting any mimetic, musical, or other performances that may attract crowds or carrying or placing bulky advertisements, pictures, figures, or emblems in any street or public place in a manner that may cause obstruction or annoyance to passersby or residents.

Section 86 prohibits slaughtering any animal, cleaning a carcass or hide, or bathing or washing one's person in or near to and within sight of a street or public place, except at a place set apart for the purpose.

Section 87 prohibits letting loose any horse or other animal in a street or public place in a negligent manner, suffering a ferocious dog to be at large without a muzzle, or setting on or urging a dog or other animal to attack, worry, or put in fear any person or horse or other animal.

Section 88 prohibits bathing or washing in, or by the side of, a public well, tank, reservoir, pond, pool, aqueduct, part of a river, stream, nullah, or other source or means of water supply in which such bathing or washing is forbidden by order of the competent authority.

Section 89 prohibits defiling or causing to be defiled the water in any public well, tank, reservoir, pond, pool, aqueduct, part of a river, stream, nullah, or other source or means of water supply, so as to render the same less fit for any purpose for which it is set apart.

Section 90 prohibits obstructing or inconveniencing a person bathing at a place set apart for the purpose by wilful intrusion or by using such place for any purpose for which it is not so set apart.

Section 91 prohibits wilfully and indecently exposing one's person in any street or public place or place of public resort or within sight of, and in such a manner as to be seen from, any street or public place or place of public resort, whether from within any house or building or not, or using indecent language or behaving indecently or riotously or in a disorderly manner in a street or public place or place of public resort or in any office, police station, or station house.

Section 92 prohibits wilfully pushing, pressing, hustling, or obstructing any passenger in a street or public place or by violent movements, menacing gestures, wanton personal annoyance, screaming, shouting, wilfully frightening horses or cattle or otherwise, disturbing the public peace or order.

Section 93 prohibits using threatening, abusive, or insulting words or behavior with intent to provoke a breach of the peace or whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned.

Section 94 prohibits flying a kite or any other thing so as to cause danger, injury, or alarm to persons, animals, or property.

Section 95 prohibits committing a nuisance by easing oneself, suffering a child under seven years of age to commit a nuisance, or spitting or throwing any dust, ashes, refuse, or rubbish so as to cause annoyance to any passerby.

Section 96 prohibits smoking or spitting in contravention of a notice displayed in any court, police station, police office, or building occupied by Government or any local body.

Section 97 imposes a fine of up to one hundred rupees or imprisonment for up to eight days for contravening any of the provisions of Sections 80 to 96.

Section 98 imposes a fine of up to three hundred rupees or imprisonment for up to one month, or both, for allowing cattle to stray in any street or to trespass upon any public or private property. The Metropolitan Magistrate trying an offence under sub-section (1) may order the accused to pay compensation not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees to any person for any damage caused to his property or the produce of his land by the cattle under the control of the accused trespassing on his land and order the forfeiture of the cattle in respect of which the offence has been committed.

Section 99 imposes a fine of up to one hundred rupees or imprisonment for up to one month, or both, for cruelly beating, goading, overworking, ill-treating, or torturing any animal.

Section 100 imposes a fine of up to one hundred rupees or imprisonment for up to seven days, or both, for wilfully entering or remaining in or upon any dwelling-house, premises, land, ground, building, monument, or structure belonging to Government or used for public purposes, or on any vehicle without satisfactory excuse.

Section 101 imposes a fine of up to one hundred rupees or imprisonment for up to three months, or both, for knowingly giving or causing to be given a false alarm of fire or damaging a fire alarm.

Section 102 imposes a fine of up to one hundred rupees or imprisonment for up to one month, or both, for being found under suspicious circumstances between sunset and sunrise.
Summary:

The following is a summary of Indian laws related to theft, gambling, and public order:

Under Section 54 of the Indian Penal Code, a person can be punished with imprisonment for up to three months for being found in a public place without a satisfactory explanation, such as if they are a reputed thief and cannot give a satisfactory account of themselves.

Under Section 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a person who has possession of stolen property or property fraudulently obtained and cannot give a satisfactory account of themselves can be punished with imprisonment for up to three months or a fine of up to 100 rupees, or both.

Under Section 104 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a pawn-broker, dealer in second-hand property, worker in metals, or anyone reasonably believed to be such a person who has received information about property suspected to have been transferred by certain offenses and is found in possession of such property must give information to the Commissioner of Police or a police station within 24 hours, or face a fine of up to 50 rupees per article of property.

Under Section 105 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, anyone who alters, melts, defaces, or puts away property referred to in Section 104 without the previous permission of the police can be punished with imprisonment for up to three years, a fine, or both, if the property is proven to be stolen or obtained through an offense punishable under certain sections of the Indian Penal Code.

Under Section 106 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, anyone who takes an article from a child under the age of 14 as a pawn, pledge, or security for a loan, or buys an article from such a child without the owner's knowledge and consent, can be punished with a fine of up to 100 rupees.

Under Section 107 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the keeper of a public place of amusement or entertainment who knowingly permits or suffers drunkenness, disorderly behavior, or gambling can be punished with a fine of up to 100 rupees.

Under Section 108 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, anyone who cheats at games or gambling in a street can be punished with imprisonment for up to one month or a fine of up to 200 rupees, or both, for the first offense, and with imprisonment for up to six months and a fine of up to 500 rupees for subsequent offenses.

Under Section 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, anyone who disobeys an order under Section 27 to vacate premises can be punished with imprisonment for up to three months, a fine of up to 500 rupees, or both.

Under Section 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, anyone who contravenes or abets the contravention of a regulation made under Section 28 or a condition of a license issued under such regulation can be punished with imprisonment for up to one month, a fine of up to 200 rupees, or both, for the first offense, and with imprisonment for up to six months and a fine of up to 500 rupees for subsequent offenses.

Under Section 111 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the holder of a license for a place of public amusement or entertainment is responsible for any offense committed by their servant or agent acting with their express or implied permission, unless they can prove that all due and reasonable precautions were taken to prevent the commission of such an offense.

Under Section 112 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, anyone who fails to obtain a license or certificate of registration for a place of public entertainment or eating house, or to renew such a license or certificate within the prescribed period, can be punished with a fine of up to 50 rupees.

Under Section 113 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, anyone who contravenes, disobeys, opposes, or fails to conform to an order given by a police officer under Section 29 can be punished with a fine of up to 200 rupees, and anyone who contravenes a notification or order made under certain sections of the Code of Criminal Procedure can be punished with imprisonment for up to one month, a fine of up to 200 rupees, or both.
Summary:

The document outlines various sections of the Indian law related to penalties for violating regulations and orders related to police duties and public safety. Here are the key sections and their summaries:

* Section 30: This section outlines penalties for violating regulations related to public gatherings and processions. The penalties include imprisonment for up to one year, a fine of up to 1,000 rupees, or both.
* Section 31: This section imposes a fine of up to 200 rupees for failing to comply with a direction given by a police officer.
* Section 114: This section imposes penalties for violating regulations, notices, or orders made under sections 35, 36, and 37. The penalties include imprisonment for up to three months, a fine of up to 200 rupees, or both.
* Section 115: This section imposes penalties for opposing or failing to conform to a direction issued under sections 46, 47, or 48, or abetting such opposition or failure. The penalties include imprisonment for not less than four months but which may extend to one year, and a fine.
* Section 116: This section imposes penalties for entering or returning to a restricted area without permission or overstaying after being permitted to return temporarily. The penalties include imprisonment for not less than six months but which may extend to two years, and a fine.
* Section 117: This section imposes penalties for contravening any order made under section 57. The penalties include imprisonment for up to three years, a fine, or both.
* Section 118: This section imposes penalties for opposing or failing to comply with a reasonable requisition made by a police officer under section 59. The penalties include imprisonment for not less than four months but which may extend to one year, and a fine.
* Section 119: This section imposes penalties for failing to conform to a direction given by a police officer under section 65. The penalties include a fine of up to 50 rupees.
* Section 120: This section prohibits dangerous performances without the previous permission of the Commissioner of Police and imposes penalties for violating this provision. The penalties include imprisonment for up to one year or a fine, or both.
* Section 121: This section imposes penalties for neglect or refusal to serve as a special police officer without sufficient cause. The penalties include a fine of up to 50 rupees, and cancellation of the certificate of appointment.
* Section 122: This section imposes penalties for making false statements or using false documents to obtain employment or release from employment as a police officer, and for misconduct by police officers. The penalties include imprisonment for up to three months, a fine of up to 100 rupees, or both.
* Section 123: This section imposes penalties for wilfully neglecting or refusing to deliver up a certificate of appointment or other article. The penalties include imprisonment for up to one month, a fine of up to 200 rupees, or both.
* Section 124: This section imposes penalties for vexatious entry, search, arrest, or detention by a police officer. The penalties include imprisonment for up to six months, a fine of up to 500 rupees, or both.
* Section 125: This section imposes penalties for vexatious delay in forwarding a person arrested to a Magistrate or other authority. The penalties include imprisonment for up to six months, a fine of up to 500 rupees, or both.
* Section 126: This section imposes penalties for unauthorized use of police uniforms. The penalties include a fine of up to 200 rupees.
* Section 127: This section grants the Commissioner of Police the power to make regulations regarding carrying weapons without authority.

Overall, the document outlines various penalties for violating regulations and orders related to police duties and public safety in India. These penalties serve as a deterrent to discourage individuals from engaging in behavior that could harm public safety or undermine the authority of law enforcement officers.
Summary:

The document outlines various sections of the Indian law, specifically focusing on the Delhi Police Act. The Act includes provisions related to the carrying of weapons in public places, the discretion of the Delhi police to prosecute certain offenses, the summary disposal of certain cases, and the prosecution for offenses under other enactments. The Act also includes provisions related to offenses committed by companies, the disposal of fees, rewards, and penalties, the rules, regulations, or orders not invalidated by defect of form or irregularity in procedure, and the presumption in prosecutions for contravention of orders made under certain sections. The Act also includes provisions related to the forfeiture of bond entered into by a person under sub-section (1) of section 54, the liability of police officers, and the bar to suits and prosecutions. The Act empowers the Administrator, Commissioner of Police, and other police officers to make orders and regulations for the effective implementation of the Act.
Summary:
This document outlines various provisions related to Indian laws, specifically focusing on the Acts, Articles, and legal terms related to the Delhi Police.

Section 80 of the Delhi Police Act, 1978, outlines the requirement for a plaintiff to serve a notice to the defendant before filing a suit, specifying the wrong complained of and providing a copy of the notice with the plaint. Failure to do so may result in the dismissal of the suit.

Section 141 of the Act specifies the conditions and restrictions for licenses and written permissions granted under the Act, which must be signed by a competent authority. The section also outlines the consequences of infringing or evading the conditions of such licenses and permissions.

Section 142 outlines the manner in which public notices, orders, and proclamations must be given under the Act. This includes affixing copies in conspicuous public places, proclaiming with beat of drums, advertising in local newspapers, and any other means deemed suitable.

Section 143 states that a written document signed by a competent authority, purporting to convey or set forth consent, approval, declaration, opinion, or satisfaction, is sufficient evidence thereof.

Section 144 allows for the use of a facsimile of the Commissioner of Police's signature on certain documents, including licenses, written permissions, notices, and other documents.

Section 145 outlines the process for seeking to annul, reverse, or alter any rule or order made under the Act. This includes submitting a memorial to the Administrator and, if rejected or unanswered, instituting a suit in the principal civil court of original jurisdiction.

Section 146 grants the Commissioner of Police the power to exercise all powers and discharge all functions of a District Magistrate under certain Acts. The Commissioner may also authorize certain officers to exercise these powers.

Section 147 allows the Administrator to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. These rules may provide for various matters, including recruitment, pay, allowances, and conditions of service for Delhi police officers, and the procedure for awarding punishments.

Section 148 outlines the notification and laying of rules and regulations made under the Act. Every rule and regulation made under the Act shall be made by notification in the Official Gazette and laid before each House of Parliament and the Metropolitan Council of Delhi.

Finally, Section 149 outlines the cesser of operation of certain enactments and savings, specifying that on the commencement of this Act, certain enactments shall cease to be in force in Delhi, but providing for the validity of actions taken under those enactments prior to their cessation.
Summary:

The document in question is a part of the Delhi Police Act of 1978, which provides for the establishment and regulation of the Delhi Police Force. The Act includes provisions that deal with the transition from previous laws to the present Act.

Section 149 of the Act states that any law in force in Delhi immediately before the commencement of this Act that is consistent with the present Act shall be deemed to have been made under this Act. Similarly, any references to provisions of the laws that have ceased to be in force shall be construed as references to the corresponding provisions of this Act.

Sub-section (2) of Section 149 states that the cesser of operation of an enactment specified in Schedule II shall not affect the validity, effect, or consequence of anything done or suffered under that enactment before the commencement of this Act. It also states that any right, privilege, obligation, or liability already acquired, accrued, or incurred under that enactment before the commencement of this Act shall continue to be in force. Additionally, any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred or inflicted under that enactment before the commencement of this Act shall also continue to be in force.

Section 150 of the Act states that the police force functioning in Delhi immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the police force constituted under this Act. Every member of the existing police force holding an office mentioned in Schedule III shall be deemed to be appointed to the office mentioned in the corresponding entry in that Schedule.

Section 151 of the Act provides for the removal of difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Act, the Central Government may make such provisions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. However, no such notification shall be issued after the expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.

Section 152 of the Act repeals the Delhi Police Ordinance, 1978, and states that anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

Schedule I of the Act lists the Central Acts and Delhi Acts that shall be in force in Delhi. Schedule II lists the enactments that have ceased to be in force in Delhi. Schedule III lists the posts to which the officers of the Delhi police shall be deemed to be appointed.