Summary:
The Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979, is an Act to provide for the alteration of boundaries of the States of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and for matters connected therewith. The Act is divided into six parts. Part I, titled 'Preliminary', includes two sections that define the short title and the definitions of various terms used in the Act. Part II, titled 'Alteration of Boundaries', includes three sections that deal with replacing fluctuating boundaries with fixed boundaries, transfer of territories, and amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution. Part III, titled 'Representation in the Legislatures', includes a section that deals with the construction of delimitation orders. Part IV, titled 'High Courts', includes two sections that deal with extending the jurisdiction of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and transferring proceedings to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, and extending the jurisdiction of the High Court at Allahabad and transferring proceedings to the High Court at Allahabad. Part V, titled 'Authorisation of Expenditure', includes two sections that deal with appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing appropriation Acts and reports relating to accounts of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. Part VI, titled 'Apportionment of Assets and Liabilities', includes six sections that deal with land and goods, arrears of taxes, right to recover loans and advances, refund of taxes collected in excess, deposits, contracts, liability in respect of actionable wrong, liability as guarantor of co-operative societies, items in suspense, apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement, power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases, and expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund. Part VII, titled 'Legal and Miscellaneous Provisions', includes six sections that deal with state financial corporations and state electricity boards, territorial extent of laws, power to adapt laws, power to construe laws, legal proceedings, transfer of pending proceedings, construction of boundary pillars, etc., validity of demarcation done before commencement of Act, effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws, power to remove difficulties, and power to make rules. The Act also includes a schedule and an annexure.