Summary:
The Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980 was enacted on 1st September, 1980 to establish a Board for the planning and integrated implementation of measures for the control of floods and bank erosion in the Brahmaputra Valley and for matters connected therewith. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, including Board, Brahmaputra Valley, Fund, Master Plan, member, prescribed, regulations, and rules.

Chapter I of the Act deals with preliminary matters. It includes three sections, namely short title and commencement, declaration as to expediency of control by the Union, and definitions.

Chapter II of the Act deals with the establishment of the Board. It includes seven sections, namely establishment and incorporation of the Brahmaputra Board, conditions of service of members, powers of Chairman and Vice-Chairman, General Manager, Financial Adviser, Chief Engineers, Secretary and other officers, and Advisory Committees.

Chapter III of the Act deals with the functions and powers of the Board. It includes four sections, namely limits of the Brahmaputra Valley, Master Plan for the control of floods, etc., in the Brahmaputra Valley, other functions of the Board, and conditions subject to which the Board may perform its functions.

Chapter IV of the Act deals with control by the Central Government. It includes one section, namely directions and instructions by the Central Government.

Chapter V of the Act deals with finance, accounts, and audit. It includes four sections, namely grants and loans by the Central Government, constitution of the Brahmaputra Board Fund, budget, and annual report.

Chapter VI of the Act deals with miscellaneous matters. It includes seven sections, namely disputes between the Board and the State Governments, removal, etc., of members, power to enter, members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants, protection of action taken in good faith, power to make rules, power to make regulations, and rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.

The Act also includes a Schedule that lists the names of the States and Union territories that constitute the Brahmaputra Valley.