The Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980, is a law in India that aims to prevent black marketing and maintain the supply of essential commodities to the community. The Act was enacted on February 12, 1980, and extends to the whole of India. The Act provides for the detention of certain persons who are believed to be acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of essential commodities.

The Act empowers the Central Government, a State Government, or any officer of the Central or State Government, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary or Secretary, to make a detention order directing that a person be detained if it is necessary to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of essential commodities. The Act defines "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodities essential to the community" as committing or instigating any offense punishable under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, or any other law relating to the control of production, supply, or distribution of any essential commodity, or dealing in any essential commodity with the intention of making a gain that may defeat or tend to defeat the provisions of that Act or other law.

A detention order may be executed at any place in India, and the person detained may be detained in a specified place and under specified conditions, including conditions as to maintenance, discipline, and punishment for breaches of discipline. The person detained may also be removed from one place of detention to another place of detention, whether within the same State or in another State, with the consent of the Government of that other State.

No detention order shall be invalid or inoperative merely because the person to be detained is outside the limits of the territorial jurisdiction of the Government or officer making the order, or because the place of detention is outside the said limits. If the person in respect of whom a detention order has been made absconds or is concealing himself, the appropriate Government or officer may make a report to a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, and the provisions of sections 82, 83, 84, and 85 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply in respect of the said person and his property as if the order directing that he be detained were a warrant issued by the Magistrate.

When a person is detained in pursuance of a detention order, the authority making the order shall communicate to him the grounds on which the order has been made and afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order to the appropriate Government. The appropriate Government may confirm the detention order and continue the detention of the person concerned for such period as it thinks fit, or revoke the detention order and cause the person to be released forthwith. The maximum period for which any person may be detained in pursuance of any detention order which has been confirmed is six months from the date of detention.

The Act also provides for the constitution of Advisory Boards, which shall consist of three persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High Court. The Advisory Board shall consider the grounds on which the detention order has been made and the representation, if any, made by the person affected by the order, and submit its report to the appropriate Government within seven weeks from the date of detention of the person concerned. The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a separate part thereof the opinion of the Advisory Board as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person concerned.