Summary:

The National Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (Act No. 42 of 1980) was enacted on 19th July, 1980. The Act aims to acquire and transfer the undertakings of Messrs. National Company Limited to ensure the continued manufacture, production, and distribution of articles made of jute, which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country.

The Act consists of four chapters:

Chapter I: Preliminary
Chapter II: Acquisition and Transfer of the Undertakings of the Company
Chapter III: Payment of Amounts
Chapter IV: Management, etc., of the Undertakings of the Company

Chapter I defines the short title and commencement of the Act, as well as the definitions of various terms used throughout the Act.

Chapter II deals with the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Company to the Central Government, as well as the general effect of such vesting. The Chapter also includes provisions for the transfer of undertakings from an existing Government company to a new Government company.

Chapter III outlines the payment of amounts to the Company, including the amount specified in section 8 and the amount computed in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), as well as the payment of further amounts for the deprivation of the Company of the management of its undertakings.

Chapter IV includes provisions for the management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company, including the general superintendence, direction, control, and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings owned by the Company.

The Act also includes a Schedule, which sets out the order of priorities for the payment of claims made under the Act. The Schedule is divided into two parts: Part I, which deals with employees' dues and secured loans, and Part II, which deals with amounts due to trade and other creditors and revenue, taxes, cesses, rules, or other dues to the Central Government, State Governments, and local authorities or State Electricity Board.

Overall, the National Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 aims to ensure the continued manufacture, production, and distribution of articles made of jute, which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country, by acquiring and transferring the undertakings of Messrs. National Company Limited to the Central Government. The Act includes provisions for the payment of amounts to the Company and the management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company, as well as a Schedule setting out the order of priorities for the payment of claims made under the Act.