Summary:
The Hind Cycles Limited and Sen-Raleigh Limited (Nationalisation) Act, 1980, is an Act to provide for the acquisition of the undertakings of the Hind Cycles Limited and Sen-Raleigh Limited to ensure the proper management of such undertakings and to secure the continued manufacture, production, and distribution of bicycles and their component parts and accessories, which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country.

The Act defines the two companies and the undertakings that are being acquired. It also specifies the date from which the Act will come into force.

Chapter I of the Act deals with the preliminary provisions, including the short title, commencement, and definitions.

Chapter II deals with the acquisition of the undertakings of the two companies and their vesting in the Central Government. The chapter also specifies the general effect of vesting and the liabilities of the two companies.

Chapter III deals with the payment of amounts to the two companies. It specifies the amount payable to each company and the rate of interest on the amount.

Chapter IV deals with the management, etc., of the undertakings of the two companies. It specifies the management of the undertakings, the duty of persons in charge of the management of the undertakings to deliver all assets, etc., and the duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession.

Chapter V deals with the provisions relating to employees of the two companies. It provides for the continuance of employees and their rights and privileges, and the transfer of service of officers and other employees.

Chapter VI deals with the Commissioner of Payments and his powers and duties.

The Act also contains provisions relating to the protection of action taken in good faith, delegation of powers, power to make rules, power to remove difficulties, and repeal and saving.

The First Schedule specifies the amount payable to each of the two companies.

The Second Schedule specifies the rate of interest payable on the amount.

The Third Schedule specifies the order of priorities for the discharge of liabilities of the two companies.

The Act applies to the whole of India and comes into force on the 15th day of October, 1980.