Summary:
THE SREE CHITRA TIRUNAL INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY, TRIVANDRUM, ACT, 1980 is an Act declaring the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced Studies in Specialities, Trivandrum, in the State of Kerala, as an institution of national importance. The Act establishes the Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum, as a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal. The Institute shall consist of members nominated or elected in the manner prescribed by the Act. The term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomination or election. The President of the Institute shall be nominated by the Central Government from among the members other than the Director. The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act or as may be prescribed by rules or regulations. The Institute may constitute a Governing Body and other committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power or discharging any function of the Institute or for inquiring into, or reporting or advising upon, any matter which the Institute may refer to them. The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as well as the Governing Body. The Director shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by regulations or as may be delegated to him by the Institute or the President or by the Governing Body or the Chairman. The objects of the Institute are to promote biomedical engineering and technology, to provide and demonstrate high standards of patient care in advanced medical specialities, and to develop post-graduate training programmes of the highest quality in advanced medical specialities and biomedical engineering and technology. The Institute may establish and maintain hospitals and research centers, hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles, institute and appoint persons to professorships, readerships, lecturerships and posts of any description, and do all other acts and things as may be necessary to further the objects specified in section 12. The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited all moneys provided by the Central Government and the Government of Kerala, all fees and other charges received by the Institute, all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers, and all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source. The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under this Act. The Institute shall prepare, in such form and at such time every year, as may be prescribed by rules, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Institute and shall forward to the Central Government such number of copies thereof as may be prescribed by rules. The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance-sheet in such form as the Central Government may, by rules, prescribe, and in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by that Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may be prescribed by rules and a copy of the report shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before both Houses of Parliament. The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by regulations, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit. The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act. If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any dispute arises between the Institute and the Central Government, the decision of the Central Government on such dispute shall be final. The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person who was employed in the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced Studies in Specialities, Trivandrum, immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, on and from such commencement, become an employee of the Institute and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to leave, pension, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same on the date of commencement of this Act if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by regulations: Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of any such person shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government. The Institute shall continue to provide facilities to the Government and people of the State of Kerala and the Central Government and such facilities shall not, in any respect, be less favourable to the said Governments and people than what were being provided to them before the commencement of this Act and shall be made available for such period and upon such terms and conditions (including those relating to any contributions to be made for the provision of such facilities) as may be agreed upon between the Institute, the Government of the State of Kerala and the Central Government. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, within a period of three years from the commencement of this Act, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. The Central Government, after consultation with the Institute, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. The Institute may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.