Summary:

THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND PRIVILEGES) ACT, 1982 is an Act to determine the emoluments, allowances, and privileges of Governors in India. The Act consists of 12 sections and a schedule.

Section 1 of the Act specifies the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. The Act extends to the whole of India and will come into force on a date notified by the Central Government.

Section 2 defines various terms used in the Act, including "ex-Governor," "Governor," "maintenance," "members of the family," "official residences," "rules," and "State."

Section 3 specifies the emoluments payable to every Governor, which is rupees three lakh fifty thousand per mensem. However, if a Governor is in receipt of a pension or any benefit by way of contributory provident fund, his emoluments shall be reduced by the pension equivalent of such benefit.

Section 4 provides for leave allowance to be granted to a Governor by the President. The President may determine the rate of leave allowance, which shall be reduced to the extent, if any, to which the emoluments of the Governor are liable to be reduced under the proviso to section 3.

Section 5 entitles a Governor to the use of his official residences throughout his term of office without payment of rent or charge. The furnishing or maintenance of such residences shall not fall on the Governor personally.

Section 6 provides that no charge shall fall on a Governor personally in respect of pay, allowances, or pension or other emoluments paid to, or facilities provided for, the members of the household establishment provided to the Governor.

Section 7 entitles a Governor and the members of his family to free medical attendance, accommodation, and treatment in hospitals maintained by the Central Government or the Government of any State during the term of his office and thereafter also.

Section 8 provides for the use of motor vehicles by a Governor without payment of rent or hire. The maintenance of such motor vehicles shall not fall on the Governor personally. The use of motor vehicles by the members of the family of a Governor shall be regulated by rules made in this behalf.

Section 9 provides for traveling allowance on assumption or vacation of office by a Governor. The traveling allowance shall be paid to the Governor and the members of his family and for the transport of his and his family's effects.

Section 10 entitles a Governor to allowances for renewing the furnishings and for the maintenance of the official residences.

Section 11 provides for other privileges and allowances to be paid to a Governor to enable him to discharge the duties of his office conveniently and with dignity. Such privileges and allowances include entertainment allowance, hospitality grant, household establishment expenses, office expenses, contract allowance, tour expenses, and such other allowances or expenses as may be provided for by rules.

Section 12 provides for additional expenses to be incurred by the President in respect of any allowances or for meeting any expenses with respect to any matter required by a Governor. The President may increase such amount or sanction such expenses to such extent as may be specified in such order.

Section 12A provides for the entitlement of an ex-Governor to secretarial assistance for the remainder of his life.

Section 13 empowers the President to make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. Every rule made by the President shall be laid before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days.

Section 14 validates every special order issued by the President in regard to the allowances, expenses, or privileges of any Governor before the commencement of this Act.

Section 15 provides that nothing contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder shall have effect so as to diminish the emoluments and allowances of any Governor during his term of office.

The schedule to the Act specifies the rates of daily allowance payable to a Governor for journeys performed in connection with his official duties.