Summary:

The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984 (Act No. 3 of 1984) is an Act to provide for the prevention of damage to public property and matters connected therewith. The Act extends to the whole of India, and it came into force on the 28th day of January, 1984.

The Act defines "mischief" as having the same meaning as in section 425 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). "Public property" means any property, whether immovable or movable, which is owned by, possessed by, or under the control of the Central Government, any State Government, any local authority, any corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, any company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any institution, concern, or undertaking which the Central Government may specify in the Official Gazette.

The Act provides for punishment for mischief causing damage to public property. Any person who commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any public property, other than public property of the nature referred to in sub-section (2), shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine. In the case of mischief causing damage to specific types of public property, such as buildings, installations, or other property used in connection with the production, distribution, or supply of water, light, power, or energy, the offender shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five years and with fine.

The Act also provides for punishment for mischief causing damage to public property by fire or explosive substance. Any person who commits an offence under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 3 by fire or explosive substance shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to ten years and with fine.

The Act also contains special provisions regarding bail. No person accused or convicted of an offence punishable under section 3 or section 4 shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless the prosecution has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release.

The Act also provides for savings and repeals. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. The Act repeals the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Ordinance, 1984 (Ord. 3 of 1984), and anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.