Summary:
The Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1984, is an Act of the Indian Parliament that provides for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited. The Act aims to secure the better utilization of the available infrastructure, modernize and increase the capacity for shipbuilding and ship repairing, and augment the production of grey iron, non-ferrous and alloy castings. The Act was enacted on August 23, 1984, with the purpose of reducing the import of ships, vessels, and craft, and augmenting the production of essential articles for the economy of the country.

Chapter I of the Act deals with preliminary provisions, including definitions and short title. Chapter II deals with the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Company and the vesting of the undertakings in the Central Government. The Act provides that the undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities, and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery, and equipment, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts, and all other rights and interests in or arising out of such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power, or control of the Company.

Chapter III deals with the payment of amounts to the Company, including the amount of rupees six hundred and fifty lakhs to be paid by the Central Government to the Company, and the payment of further amounts with simple interest at the rate of four percent per annum. The liabilities of the Company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government shall be discharged from the amount referred to in section 8 and also from the amount determined under sub-section (1) in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.

Chapter IV deals with the management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company, including the general superintendence, direction, control, and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, which shall vest in the Central Government or an existing or new Government company. The persons in charge of the management of the undertakings of the Company shall be bound to deliver to such Government company all assets, books of account, registers, and other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of the Company.

Chapter V deals with provisions relating to the employees of the Company, including the continuance of employees, provident fund and other funds, and the appointment of a Commissioner of Payments. The Commissioner shall be entitled to receive up to the specified date any money due to the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or in the existing, or new, Government company, and realized after the appointed day.

Chapter VI deals with the Commissioner of Payments, including the appointment of the Commissioner, the payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner, the deposit of the amount paid to the Commissioner, the records to be maintained by the Commissioner, and the interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account.

Chapter VII deals with miscellaneous provisions, including the Act to have overriding effect, contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the Government company, protection of action taken in good faith, delegation of powers, penalties, offences by companies, power to make rules, power to remove difficulties, and repeal and saving.

The Schedule to the Act sets out the order of priorities for the discharge of liabilities of the Company, including wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the Company, arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Companies to the provident fund, Employees’ State Insurance Fund, Life Insurance Corporation premium and any other arrear under any law for the time being in force, secured loans with interest advanced by public financial institutions and banks, statutory dues, unsecured loans with interest advanced by the public financial institutions, banks or other creditors, any credits availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or manufacturing operations, and any other loans or dues.

The Act provides for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited, with the purpose of securing the better utilization of the available infrastructure, modernizing and increasing the capacity for shipbuilding and ship repairing, and augmenting the production of grey iron, non-ferrous and alloy castings. The Act provides for the payment of amounts to the Company and the discharge of its liabilities in accordance with the priorities set out in the Schedule. The Act also provides for the management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company, including the general superintendence, direction, control, and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, which shall vest in the Central Government or an existing or new Government company. The Act also deals with provisions relating to the employees of the Company, including the continuance of employees, provident fund and other funds, and the appointment of a Commissioner of Payments.