Summary:

The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APFPEDA) Act, 1985, aims to provide for the establishment of an Authority for the development and promotion of exports of certain agricultural and processed food products and for matters connected therewith. The Act establishes the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority, which is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal. The Authority has the power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "export," "exporter," "member," "prescribed," "processing," "regulations," "Scheduled product," and "Special product." The Central Government may add to or omit from the First Schedule or the Second Schedule any agricultural or processed food product.

The Authority shall consist of a Chairman, ex officio members, members appointed by the Central Government to represent various Ministries, members appointed by the Central Government to represent various groups of industries, and members appointed by the Central Government to represent specialists and scientists in the field of agriculture, economics, and marketing of Scheduled products.

The Chairman is the chief executive of the Authority and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed. The Secretary of the Authority shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairman. The Authority may appoint such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.

The Act provides for the registration of exporters of Scheduled products. Every person exporting any one or more of the Scheduled products shall apply to the Authority to be registered as an exporter of the Scheduled product or Scheduled products. Registration once made shall continue to be in force until it is cancelled by the Authority.

The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts. The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him.

The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting, or otherwise controlling the import or export of the Scheduled products. Any person who contravenes any order made under this section shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

The Authority shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.

The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and development of the export of the Scheduled products, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.

Any person who, being required by or under this Act to furnish any return, fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made hereunder other than the provisions, the punishment for the contravention whereof has been provided for in sections 19, 22 and 23, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.

Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.

No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be instituted except with previous sanction of the Central Government.

No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government, or the Authority or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Authority or such committee, or any officer or other employee of the Central Government or of the Authority or any other person authorised by the Central Government or the Authority, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.

The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act (not being the power to make rules under section 32) may also be exercised in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, by such officer or authority as may be specified therein.

If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act should cease to be imposed or if it considers necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to such extent and either indefinitely or for such period as may be specified in the notification, the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act.