Summary:

The Spices Board Act, 1986, is an Act to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of export of spices and for the control of cardamom industry including the control of cultivation of cardamom and matters connected therewith. The Act consists of seven chapters, with 42 sections and a schedule.

Chapter I, Preliminary, includes sections 1 and 2. Section 1 deals with the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act, while section 2 provides definitions for various terms used in the Act.

Chapter II, The Spices Board, includes sections 3 to 7. Section 3 deals with the constitution and incorporation of the Board, while section 4 deals with the Secretary and other officers of the Board. Section 5 deals with Advisory Committees, and section 6 deals with the transfer of assets and liabilities of the Cardamom Board and the Spices Export Promotion Council to the Board. Section 7 deals with the functions of the Board.

Chapter III, Registration of Owners of Cardamom Estates, includes sections 8 to 10. Section 8 deals with the registration of owners of cardamom estates, while section 9 provides for the power of the State Government to make rules. Section 10 deals with returns to be made by registered owners.

Chapter IV, Certificate for Export of Spices, includes sections 11 to 15. Section 11 deals with no person to export spices without a certificate, while section 12 deals with the grant of a certificate. Section 13 deals with the cancellation, suspension, etc., of a certificate, and section 14 deals with an appeal. Section 15 deals with the power to permit export without a certificate.

Chapter V, Control by the Central Government, includes sections 16 to 19. Section 16 deals with the power to control price and distribution of cardamom, while section 17 deals with the power to prohibit or control import of cardamom. Section 18 deals with the power of the Central Government to issue directions, and section 19 deals with the power of the Central Government to supersede the Board.

Chapter VI, Finance, Accounts, and Audit, includes sections 20 to 25. Section 20 deals with grants and loans by the Central Government, while section 21 deals with the Board Fund. Section 22 deals with the budget, and section 23 deals with the annual report. Section 24 deals with accounts and audit, and section 25 deals with the annual report and auditor's report to be laid before Parliament.

Chapter VII, Miscellaneous, includes sections 26 to 42. Section 26 deals with penalties for making false returns, while section 27 deals with penalties for obstructing an officer or member of the Board in the discharge of his duties and for failure to produce books and records. Section 28 deals with penalties for contravention of order relating to control of price, etc., while section 29 deals with penalties for contravention of section 11 or any order made under section 17. Section 30 deals with other penalties, while section 31 deals with offences by companies. Section 32 deals with the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, to apply to export of spices and import of cardamom. Section 33 deals with previous sanction of the Central Government, while section 34 deals with delegation. Section 35 deals with members, officers, and employees of the Board to be public servants, while section 36 deals with protection of action taken in good faith. Section 37 deals with the power to enter, while section 38 deals with the power to make rules. Section 39 deals with the power to make regulations, while section 40 deals with rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. Section 41 deals with the power to remove difficulties, and section 42 deals with repeal and savings.

The Schedule to the Act includes a list of spices that are covered under the Act.