Summary:

The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 (Act No. 60 of 1986) is an Act that prohibits the indecent representation of women through advertisements or in publications, writings, paintings, figures, or any other manner. The Act defines "indecent representation of women" as any depiction that has the effect of being indecent, derogatory, or denigrating to women, or is likely to deprave, corrupt, or injure public morality or morals.

The Act has several provisions to enforce its prohibition. Section 3 prohibits the publication or exhibition of advertisements containing indecent representation of women. Section 4 prohibits the production, sale, distribution, circulation, or sending by post of any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, representation, or figure that contains indecent representation of women. However, certain exceptions are provided for publications related to science, literature, art, learning, or religious purposes.

Section 5 of the Act provides for powers to enter and search any place where an offence under this Act is being committed. The section also allows for the seizure of any advertisement or any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, representation, or figure that contravenes the provisions of this Act.

Section 6 provides for penalties for contravention of the provisions of Section 3 or Section 4. The penalty for the first conviction is imprisonment for a term that may extend to two years and a fine that may extend to two thousand rupees. For a second or subsequent conviction, the penalty is imprisonment for a term of not less than six months but which may extend to five years and also with a fine of not less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.

Section 7 provides for the liability of companies for offences under this Act. If an offence has been committed by a company, every person who was in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time the offence was committed, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Section 8 provides that offences under this Act are bailable and cognizable. Section 9 provides protection to the Central Government, State Government, or any officer of the Central Government or any State Government for anything done in good faith under this Act.

The Act also empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. Every rule made under this Act is required to be laid before each House of Parliament for a total period of thirty days. Any modification or annulment of the rule by both Houses of Parliament before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.