Summary:
The National Housing Bank Act, 1987 (Act No. 53 of 1987) establishes a bank called the National Housing Bank (NHB) to promote housing finance institutions at local and regional levels and provide financial and other support to such institutions. The NHB is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and may acquire, hold and dispose of property, and contract, in its own name. The head office of the NHB shall be at New Delhi or at such other place as the Central Government may specify. The authorized and paid-up capital of the NHB is three hundred and fifty crores of rupees, which may be increased up to two thousand crore rupees or such other amount as may be determined by the Central Government. The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of the NHB vests in the Board of Directors, which shall exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the NHB. The Board shall act on business principles with due regard to public interest. The Board consists of a Chairman and a Managing Director, two directors from amongst experts in various fields, two directors from institutions involved in providing funds for housing or engaged in housing development or have experience in the working of financial institutions or scheduled banks, two directors elected by shareholders other than the Central Government and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government, one director from out of the directors of the Reserve Bank, three directors from amongst the officials of the Central Government, and two directors from amongst the officials of the State Government. The Chairman, the Managing Director, and other directors shall hold office for a term of three years, and shall receive such salary and allowances and be governed by such terms and conditions of service as the Central Government may specify. The Central Government may remove the Chairman or the Managing Director, or any other director, at any time before the expiry of his term of office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal.
The document outlines the rules and regulations for the Board of Directors of the National Housing Bank, a financial institution established by the Government of India to provide funding and support for housing finance institutions. The document includes provisions for the appointment, qualifications, disqualifications, and vacation of office of directors; the powers and duties of the Chairman and Managing Director; the holding of meetings and the making of decisions by the Board; and the establishment and functions of the Executive Committee and other committees. The document also specifies the kinds of business that the National Housing Bank may transact, including making loans and advances, subscribing to or purchasing securities, guaranteeing the financial obligations of housing finance institutions, and undertaking research and surveys on housing-related matters. The National Housing Bank is also authorized to borrow money and accept deposits on certain terms and conditions.
Summary:
The document outlines various provisions related to the National Housing Bank, a financial institution in India established under the National Housing Bank Act, 1987. The Act empowers the National Housing Bank to borrow money from the Reserve Bank, receive remuneration, commission, and other considerations, and receive gifts, grants, donations, or benefactions from the government or any other source. The Central Government can guarantee the bonds and debentures issued by the National Housing Bank. The bank may borrow foreign currency from any bank or financial institution in India or elsewhere, subject to the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, and with the previous approval of the Central Government. The bank may grant financial assistance on the security of immovable property, which shall be a charge on such property. The bank may transfer its rights and interests in any loan or advance made, or any amount recoverable, to any other person by execution or issue of any instrument or by transfer of any instrument by endorsement. The bank has the right to acquire, by transfer or assignment, the rights and interests of any institution in relation to any loan or advance made, or any amount recoverable by such institution. The bank may recover any amount due to it in the same manner as arrears of land revenue. The bank may impose conditions while entering into any transaction with any borrowing institution and may call for repayment before the agreed period under certain circumstances. The bank shall have free access to all records of any institution or person seeking credit facilities from the bank or the institution.
Title: Summary of Indian Laws Related to the National Housing Bank

The document summarizes various sections of Indian laws related to the National Housing Bank (NHB), which is a specialized financial institution for housing.

Section 21 (1) of the NHB Act, 1987, empowers the NHB to request copies of records from any institution or person to which it has made a loan or advance. The institution or person is required to comply with this request.

Section 22 of the NHB Act, 1987, states that the validity of any loan or advance made by the NHB cannot be questioned solely on the grounds of non-compliance with other laws or any resolution, contract, or instrument relating to the constitution of the borrowing institution. However, this provision does not enable any company or cooperative society to obtain a loan or advance if their instrument of constitution does not empower them to do so.

Section 23 of the NHB Act, 1987, prohibits the NHB from making any loan or advance on the security of its own bonds or debentures.

Section 24 (1) of the NHB Act, 1987, authorizes the NHB to inspect any institution to which it has made a loan or advance or granted any other financial assistance. The NHB may cause an inspection to be made by one or more of its officers and shall supply a copy of its report on such inspection to the institution. Section 24 (2) requires every officer, employee, or person in charge of the whole or part of the affairs of the institution to produce all books, accounts, and other documents in their custody or power and to furnish any statements or information relating to the affairs of the institution as may be required by the officer making the inspection.

Section 25 (1) of the NHB Act, 1987, empowers the NHB to direct any institution to submit credit information in such form and within such time as may be specified by the NHB from time to time. Every institution is bound to comply with any directions issued under sub-section (1), notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, instrument, or agreement relating to the secrecy of its dealings with its constituents. Section 25 (2) allows the NHB to collect credit information or other information from the Central and State Governments, local authorities, the Reserve Bank, any bank, or such financial or other institutions as the Reserve Bank may specify.

Section 26 of the NHB Act, 1987, permits the NHB to publish any credit information or other information obtained by it under this Act in such consolidated form or in any other form as it thinks fit if it considers it in the public interest to do so.

Section 27 of the NHB Act, 1987, empowers the NHB to provide advisory services to the Central and State Governments, local authorities, and other agencies connected with housing in respect of formulation of overall policies aimed at promoting the growth of housing and housing finance institutions and legislation relating to matters having a bearing on shelter, housing, and human settlement.

Chapter V of the NHB Act, 1987, deals with provisions relating to housing finance institutions. Section 28 of the NHB Act, 1987, defines the term "deposit" as having the meaning assigned to it in section 45I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. Section 29 of the NHB Act, 1987, states that the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to deposits accepted by a housing finance institution which is a firm or an unincorporated association of individuals.

Section 29A of the NHB Act, 1987, requires every housing finance institution which is a company to obtain a certificate of registration issued under this Chapter and to have a net owned fund of ten crore rupees or such other higher amount as the Reserve Bank may specify before it can commence housing finance as its principal business or carry on the business of housing finance as its principal business.

Section 29A (2) of the NHB Act, 1987, requires every housing finance institution which is a company to make an application for registration to the Reserve Bank in such form as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.

Section 29A (4) of the NHB Act, 1987, empowers the Reserve Bank to inspect the books of a housing finance institution and require the National Housing Bank to inspect the books of such institution and submit a report to the Reserve Bank for the purpose of considering the application.

Section 29A (5) of the NHB Act, 1987, permits the Reserve Bank to grant a certificate of registration subject to such conditions as it may consider fit to impose if it is satisfied that the conditions specified in sub-section (4) are fulfilled.

Section 29A (6) of the NHB Act, 1987, authorizes the Reserve Bank to cancel a certificate of registration granted to a housing finance institution if such institution ceases to carry on the business of a housing finance institution in India, has failed to comply with any condition subject to which the certificate of registration had been issued to it, at any time fails to fulfill any of the conditions referred to in clauses (a) to (g) of sub-section (4), or fails to comply with any direction issued by the Reserve Bank or the National Housing Bank under the provisions of this Chapter or to maintain accounts in accordance with the requirement of any law or any direction or order issued by the Reserve Bank or the National Housing Bank under the provisions of this Chapter or to submit or offer for inspection its books of account and other relevant documents when so demanded by an inspecting authority of the Reserve Bank or the National Housing Bank.
Summary:
The National Housing Bank Act, 1987, governs the regulation and functioning of housing finance institutions in India. The Act grants the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) the power to oversee and regulate these institutions, including their registration, maintenance of assets, and issuance of prospectuses or advertisements soliciting deposits.

Under the Act, a housing finance institution must maintain a minimum net owned fund, calculated as the aggregate of its paid-up equity capital and free reserves, after deducting accumulated losses, deferred revenue expenditure, and other intangible assets. The amount is further reduced by investments in shares of subsidiaries, companies in the same group, and other housing finance companies, as well as the book value of debentures, bonds, outstanding loans and advances, and deposits with subsidiaries and companies in the same group, to the extent they exceed ten percent of the net owned fund.

Every housing finance institution must invest and continue to invest in India in unencumbered approved securities, valued at a price not exceeding the current market price of such securities, an amount which, at the close of business on any day, shall not be less than five percent or such higher percentage not exceeding twenty-five percent, as the RBI may specify, of the deposits outstanding at the close of business on the last working day of the second preceding quarter. Additionally, the institution must maintain in India in an account with a scheduled bank in term deposits or certificate of deposits (free of charge or lien) or in deposits with the National Housing Bank or by way of subscription to the bonds issued by the National Housing Bank, or partly in such account or in such deposit or partly by way of such subscription, a sum which, at the close of business on any day, together with the investment made under sub-section (1) shall not be less than ten percent or such higher percentage not exceeding twenty-five percent, as the RBI may specify, of the deposits outstanding in the books of the housing finance institution at the close of business on the last working day of the second preceding quarter.

The RBI may require every housing finance institution to furnish a return to it in such form, in such a manner and for such period as may be specified by the RBI. If the amount invested by a housing finance institution at the close of business on any day is less than the rate specified under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), such housing finance institution shall be liable to pay to the National Housing Bank, in respect of such shortfall, a penal interest at a rate of three percent per annum above the bank rate on such amount by which the amount actually maintained or invested falls short of the specified percentage, and where the shortfall continues in the subsequent quarters, the rate of penal interest shall be five percent per annum above the bank rate on such shortfall for each subsequent quarter.

Every housing finance institution which is a company shall create a reserve fund and transfer therein a sum not less than twenty percent of its net profit every year as disclosed in the profit and loss account and before any dividend is declared. No appropriation of any sum from the reserve fund including any sum in the special reserve which has been taken into account for the purposes of reserve fund in terms of sub-section (1), shall be made by such housing finance institution except for the purpose as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time and every such appropriation shall be reported to the National Housing Bank and the Reserve Bank within twenty-one days from the date of such withdrawal.

The RBI may regulate or prohibit the issue by any housing finance institution which is a company of any prospectus or advertisement soliciting deposits of money from the public and specify the conditions subject to which any such prospectus or advertisement, if not prohibited, may be issued.
Summary:

The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has the authority to establish policies and issue directions to all or any housing finance institutions that are companies. These directions may pertain to income recognition, accounting standards, provision for bad and doubtful debts, capital adequacy, and deployment of funds. The RBI may also issue directions to housing finance institutions regarding the purpose and maximum amount of advances or financial accommodation, and investments in shares and other securities. Additionally, the RBI may issue directions to housing finance institutions that accept deposits, including credit rating, interest rates, and deposit periods. The National Housing Bank (NHB) has the power to collect information from housing finance institutions regarding deposits and may require them to furnish statements, information, or particulars. Every housing finance institution that accepts deposits must comply with any direction given under this Chapter. The auditor of a housing finance institution must enquire whether the institution has furnished the required statements, information, or particulars relating to deposits and report to the NHB and RBI if it has not. The NHB may direct a special audit of the accounts of a housing finance institution in relation to any transaction or class of transactions or for a specified period. The RBI may prohibit a housing finance institution from accepting deposits if it violates any provision or fails to comply with any direction or order given by the NHB or RBI. The RBI may also direct a housing finance institution not to sell, transfer, or deal with its property and assets without prior written permission. The NHB may file an application for winding up of a housing finance institution if it is unable to pay its debt, has been disqualified to carry on the business of a housing finance institution, has been prohibited from receiving deposits, or if its continuance is detrimental to the public interest or to the interest of depositors.
Summary:
The document is a section of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, which outlines the regulations for housing finance institutions that accept deposits from the public. Section 34 allows the National Housing Bank to inspect any housing finance institution that accepts deposits at any time, and requires the institution to provide all necessary documents and information to the inspecting authority. Section 35 prohibits any person from soliciting deposits for a housing finance institution without authorization and compliance with any orders made by the National Housing Bank. Section 35A treats any information related to a housing finance institution as confidential and restricts its disclosure, except in certain circumstances. Section 35B grants the Reserve Bank the power to exempt a housing finance institution from certain provisions of the act if it is deemed necessary. Section 36 states that the provisions of this chapter take precedence over any other laws or instruments. Section 36A authorizes the National Housing Bank to order a housing finance institution to repay deposits if it fails to do so according to the terms and conditions. Section 36B allows depositors to nominate a person to receive the deposit in the event of their death, and this nomination takes precedence over any other claims to the deposit.
Summary:

This document outlines provisions related to housing finance institutions in India. It defines key terms such as "Appellate Tribunal," "approved institution," "assistance," "borrower," "dues," and "recovery officer." The document establishes procedures for the appointment of recovery officers and outlines the process for applying to the recovery officer for the sale of pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated, or assigned property in the event of a borrower's default. The recovery officer has the power to make interim orders, consider claims of set-off or counter-claims, and enforce orders. The document also specifies the process for transferring property and the rights of transferees. Additionally, it outlines the role of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate in assisting the recovery officer in taking charge of property. The document establishes the Appellate Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction, powers, and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.
Summary:

The document outlines the composition, qualifications, term of office, staff, salaries, and removal of the Presiding Officer of the Appellate Tribunal, which is a body established to hear appeals related to the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993. The Presiding Officer is appointed by the Central Government and must be a District Judge or have been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and held a post in Grade II for at least three years. The Presiding Officer holds office for five years or until they reach the age of 65, whichever comes first. The Central Government provides the Appellate Tribunal with officers and employees, and the Presiding Officer supervises their work. The salary and allowances of the Presiding Officer and the terms and conditions of their service are determined by the Central Government. If a vacancy arises in the office of the Presiding Officer, the Central Government may appoint another person to fill the vacancy. The Presiding Officer may resign from their office by giving notice to the Central Government, and they may be removed from office by the Central Government on the grounds of misbehavior or incapacity after an inquiry by a Judge of a High Court. The orders appointing the Presiding Officer cannot be questioned, and the proceedings of the Appellate Tribunal cannot be challenged on the grounds of any defect in its establishment. The Appellate Tribunal has the jurisdiction to hear appeals against orders made by the recovery officer under the Act. An appeal may be filed by any person aggrieved by an order of the recovery officer within 45 days of receiving a copy of the order. The Appellate Tribunal shall dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible and endeavor to do so within six months from the date of receipt of the appeal. Where an appeal is preferred by a borrower, such appeal shall not be entertained by the Appellate Tribunal unless the borrower has deposited 75% of the amount due from him as determined by the recovery officer. The recovery officer and the Appellate Tribunal have the powers of a civil court for the purposes of discharging their functions under the Act. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to an application made to the recovery officer. The Presiding Officer, other officers and employees of an Appellate Tribunal and the recovery officer are deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or against the Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal or against the recovery officer for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any rule or regulation or order made thereunder. No Court or other authority shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters specified in this Chapter, except the Supreme Court and a High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
Summary:

The National Housing Bank (NHB) is required to establish a General Fund for all its payments and may create special funds, reserves, or other funds as directed by the Central Government. The balance sheet and accounts of the NHB must be prepared and maintained in a prescribed form and balanced and closed as of June 30 each year. After making provisions for bad debts, depreciation, and other necessary or expedient matters, the NHB must transfer surplus funds to the Central Government after 15 years, following its establishment. The NHB's accounts must be audited by qualified auditors appointed by the Reserve Bank, who shall have access to all books, accounts, vouchers, and other documents of the NHB. The auditors may examine any director, officer, or employee of the NHB and shall make a report to the NHB on the annual balance sheet and accounts. The NHB must furnish information and returns to the Reserve Bank as required. The NHB must make an annual report on the trend and progress of housing in the country and suggest measures for its development. The NHB may appoint officers and employees, determine their terms and conditions, and depute them to any institution. The NHB may receive or take on deputation any officer or employee from any institution. The NHB or the Reserve Bank shall not divulge any information relating to its constituents except as required by law. No act or proceeding of the Board or any committee shall be questioned on the ground of a vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Board or committee. Any arrangement between the NHB and a housing finance institution that provides for the appointment of directors by the NHB shall be valid and effective.
Summary:

The document outlines several sections of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, which pertain to Indian laws regarding the National Housing Bank. Section 46 provides protection from legal action for the National Housing Bank, its directors, officers, employees, and authorized persons for any loss or damage caused in good faith while discharging their duties under the Act or any other law. Section 47 indemnifies every director of the National Housing Bank against all losses and expenses incurred while discharging their duties, except those caused by their own wilful act or default. Section 47A states that the amount due on deposits, bonds, or securities shall vest in and be payable to the nominee in case of the depositor's death, subject to any right, title, or interest of any other person to such deposits, bonds, or securities. Section 49 imposes penalties on anyone who wilfully makes a false statement or wilfully omits to make a material statement in any return, balance-sheet, or other document or information required or furnished under the Act, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and a fine. Section 50 states that where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who was in charge of and responsible for the company's conduct of business at the time the offence was committed shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Section 51 states that no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer of the National Housing Bank or the Reserve Bank, and no court other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a court superior thereto shall try any such offence. Section 52A gives the National Housing Bank or the Reserve Bank the power to impose a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees or five lakh rupees, or twice the amount involved in such contravention or default, where the amount is quantifiable, whichever is more, on a housing finance institution which is a company for contravention or default under the Act.
Summary:

The document summarizes various sections of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987. Section 36JA imposes a penalty on housing finance institutions that fail to comply with certain provisions of the Act. The penalty may be imposed by the National Housing Bank or the Reserve Bank and must be paid within 30 days of notice. Failure to pay the penalty may result in levying it through a direction made by the principal civil court. The court will issue a certificate specifying the sum payable, which will be enforceable in the same manner as a decree made by the court in a civil suit. No complaint can be filed against a housing finance institution in any court of law for any contravention or default in respect of which a penalty has been imposed.

Section 53 states that the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, shall apply to the National Housing Bank as if it were a bank. Section 54 states that no provision of law relating to the winding up of companies shall apply to the National Housing Bank, and it shall not be placed in liquidation except by order of the Central Government.

Section 54A empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. The rules may provide for qualifications for appointment as a recovery officer, salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal, salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officers of the Appellate Tribunal, and the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Presiding Officers of the Appellate Tribunals.

Section 55 empowers the Board to make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. The regulations may provide for the fees and allowances payable to the directors for attending the meetings of the Board or its committees, the times and places at which the Board may meet and the rules of procedure that may be followed, the number of members that the Executive Committee may consist, the functions that it may discharge, and the times and places at which it shall meet and the rules of procedure that it may follow.

The First Schedule contains a Declaration of Fidelity and Secrecy that must be signed by every director, member of the committee, auditor, advisor, officer, or other employee of the National Housing Bank. The declaration states that the person will faithfully, truly, and to the best of their skill and ability execute and perform the duties required of them and will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the National Housing Bank. The Third Schedule contains a declaration referred to in Section 16A of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, which must be signed by the borrower in consideration of the assistance sanctioned by the National Housing Bank. The declaration states that the immovable property specified in the Annexure shall constitute security for the assistance.
Summary:

The document provided is a collection of amendments made to various sections of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987. The Act was amended multiple times over the years, with the most recent amendment being made by the National Housing Bank Amendment Act, 2019. The amendments made to the Act include changes to the definition of certain terms, modification of the powers and functions of the National Housing Bank, changes to the provisions related to the appointment and removal of directors, changes to the provisions related to the borrowing and lending powers of the National Housing Bank, and changes to the provisions related to the accounts and audit of the National Housing Bank.

Some of the key amendments made to the Act include:

* The power to make regulations was transferred from the Central Government to the National Housing Bank.
* The provision for consultation with the Reserve Bank of India was omitted in several sections.
* The requirement for the National Housing Bank to report to the Reserve Bank of India was also omitted in several sections.
* The power to make orders was transferred from the authorized officer to the National Housing Bank.
* The power to issue directions was expanded to include the power to issue directions to housing finance companies, primary lending institutions, and other institutions.
* The power to make schemes was expanded to include the power to make schemes for the promotion of housing finance.
* The power to make regulations was expanded to include the power to make regulations for the management and administration of the National Housing Bank.
* The power to make rules was expanded to include the power to make rules for the management and administration of the National Housing Bank.

Overall, the amendments made to the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, have expanded the powers and functions of the National Housing Bank and have given it greater autonomy in the management and administration of its affairs.