Summary:

THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU REORGANISATION ACT, 1987

Act ID: ACT NO. 18 OF 1987

Enactment Date: [23rd May, 1987.]

This Act provides for the reorganisation of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and for matters connected therewith. The Act is divided into nine parts, each containing various sections that outline the provisions for the reorganisation of the Union territory.

Part I, Preliminary, defines key terms used throughout the Act.

Part II, Reorganisation of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, establishes the formation of the State of Goa and the Union territory of Daman and Diu, and repeals certain provisions related to the First Schedule of the Constitution.

Part III, Representation in the Legislatures, outlines the allocation of seats in the Council of States, the House of the People, and the Legislative Assembly. It also provides for the election of members to the Council of States and the House of the People, and establishes the parliamentary constituencies for the Union territory of Daman and Diu.

Part IV, High Court, establishes a common High Court for the States of Maharashtra and Goa, and for the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. It also outlines the powers and jurisdiction of the common High Court, and provides for the transfer of proceedings from the existing High Court to the common High Court.

Part V, Authorisation of Expenditure and Distribution of Revenues, authorises the President to authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Goa pending its sanction by the Legislative Assembly, and determines the grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Goa and the share of that State in the Union duties of excise, estate duty and taxes on income.

Part VI, Assets and Liabilities, outlines the distribution of assets and liabilities between the State of Goa and the Union, including land, goods, cash balances, arrears of taxes, right to recover loans and advances, investments in and loans, etc., to certain corporate bodies, assets and liabilities of State undertakings, refund of taxes collected in excess, certain deposits, and pensions granted by the Administrator.

Part VII, Provisions as to Arrangements, Corporation and Inter-State Agreements, provides for the continuance of certain arrangements, provision as to co-operative banks, general provisions as to statutory corporations, temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits, special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases, special provision as to income-tax, and continuance of existing facilities in certain institutions.

Part VIII, Provisions as to Services, outlines provisions relating to All India Services, provisions relating to other services, provisions as to continuance of officers in the same posts, and powers of Central Government to give direction.

Part IX, Legal and Miscellaneous Provisions, includes provisions related to the repeal of certain Acts, power to adapt laws, power to construe laws, provisions as to continuance of courts, etc., effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws, power to remove difficulties, and power to make rules.

The Act also includes two Schedules, which have been repealed. The First Schedule was related to the reorganisation of the Union territory, and the Second Schedule was related to the distribution of assets and liabilities.

Overall, the Act aims to reorganise the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and establish a common High Court for the States of Maharashtra and Goa, and for the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. It also outlines the distribution of assets and liabilities between the State of Goa and the Union, and provides for the continuance of certain arrangements and services.