Summary:
The Tezpur University Act, 1993 establishes and incorporates a teaching and residential university in the state of Assam at Tezpur. The university aims to disseminate and advance knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in various branches of learning, promote innovations in teaching-learning processes, inter-disciplinary studies, and research, educate and train manpower for the development of the state of Assam, and promote the intellectual, academic, and cultural development of the people of the state. The university has the power to grant diplomas, certificates, degrees, or other academic distinctions, institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships, and other teaching or academic positions, recognize institutions of higher learning, and appoint persons working in other universities or organizations as teachers of the university. The university also has the power to create administrative, ministerial, and other posts, cooperate or collaborate with other universities or authorities, establish campuses, special centers, specialized laboratories, or other units for research and instruction, institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals, and prizes, establish and maintain colleges, institutions, and halls, make special arrangements for the residence, discipline, and teaching of women students, appoint on contract or otherwise visiting professors, emeritus professors, consultants, scholars, and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the university, and determine standards of admission to the university. The university's jurisdiction extends to the whole of the state of Assam, and it is open to persons of either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race, or class. Every student of the university (other than a student who pursues a course of study by distance education system) shall reside in a hall or hostel or under such conditions as may be prescribed by the ordinances. The President of India shall be the Visitor of the university. The university shall have a Chancellor, a Vice-Chancellor, a Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Deans of Schools, a Registrar, a Finance Officer, and such other officers as may be declared by the statutes to be officers of the university. The Board of Management is the principal executive body of the university, and the Planning and Academic Committee, the Academic Council, the Planning Board, the Boards of Studies, the Finance Committee, and other authorities are the other authorities of the university. The statutes, ordinances, and regulations made under the act shall be published in the official gazette and be laid before parliament.