Summary:
THE EMPLOYMENT OF MANUAL SCAVENGERS AND CONSTRUCTION OF DRY LATRINES (PROHIBITION) ACT, 1993 (ACT NO. 46 OF 1993) was enacted on 5th June, 1993, with the objective of prohibiting the employment of manual scavengers and the construction or continuance of dry latrines. The Act aims to protect and improve the human environment and eliminate the dehumanizing practice of manual scavenging.

The Act applies to the whole of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tripura, and West Bengal, and to all the Union territories. It also applies to any other State which adopts this Act by resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution.

The Act defines various terms, including "dry latrine," "environment," "environmental pollutant," "environmental pollution," "Executive Authority," "HUDCO," "latrine," "manual scavenger," "notification," "prescribed," "State Government," and "water-seal latrine."

Chapter II of the Act prohibits the employment of manual scavengers and the construction or maintenance of dry latrines, subject to certain conditions. The State Government may exempt any area, category of buildings, or class of persons from any provisions of this Act or from any specified requirement contained in this Act or any rule, order, notification, or scheme made thereunder.

Chapter III of the Act deals with implementing authorities and schemes. The State Government may appoint an Executive Authority to exercise jurisdiction within a specified area and confer powers and impose duties on him to ensure that the provisions of this Act are properly carried out. The Executive Authority may specify the officer or officers subordinate to him who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any of the duties, so conferred or imposed. The Executive Authority shall try to rehabilitate and promote the welfare of the persons who were engaged in or employed for as manual scavengers in any area in respect of which a notification under sub-section (1) of section 3 has been issued.

The State Government may make one or more schemes for regulating conversion of dry latrines into, or construction and maintenance of, water-seal latrines, rehabilitation of the persons who were engaged in or employed for as manual scavengers in any area in respect of which a notification under sub-section (1) of section 3 has been issued, and administration of such schemes. The schemes may provide for a time-bound phased programme for the conversion of dry latrines into water-seal latrines, provision of technical or financial assistance for new or alternate low-cost sanitation to local bodies or other agencies, construction and maintenance of community latrines and regulation of their use on pay and use basis, construction and maintenance of shared latrines in slum areas or for the benefit of socially and economically backward classes of citizens, registration of manual scavengers and their rehabilitation, specification and standards of water-seal latrines, procedure for conversion of dry latrines into water-seal latrines, and licensing for collection of fees in respect of community latrines or shared latrines.

Chapter IV of the Act deals with penalties and procedure. Any person who fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, or the rules or schemes made or orders or directions issued thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both, and in case the failure or contravention continues, with additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention continues after the conviction for the first such failure or contravention.

If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act. No prosecution for any offence under this Act shall be instituted except by or with the previous sanction of the Executive Authority. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except upon a complaint made by a person generally or specially authorized in this behalf by the Executive Authority. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act unless the complaint thereof is made within three months from the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to the knowledge of the complainant.

Chapter V of the Act deals with miscellaneous provisions. The Central Government may, in relation to its functions under this Act, from time to time, require any person, officer, State Government, or other authority to furnish to it, any prescribed authority or officer, any reports, returns, statistics, accounts, and other information as may be deemed necessary. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government or any officer or other employee of the Government or any authority constituted under this Act or executing any scheme made under this Act or any member, officer, or other employee of such authority or authorities in respect of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in pursuance of this Act or the rules or schemes made, or the orders or directions issued, thereunder. The provisions of this Act, the rules, schemes, or orders made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act, custom, tradition, contract, agreement, or other instrument. If any act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act and also under any other Act, then, the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable to be punished under the other Act, and not under this Act.