Summary:
The National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 was enacted on 30th December, 1999. This Act aims to provide for the constitution of a body at the National level for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act defines various terms such as autism, Board, Chief Executive Officer, Member, mental retardation, multiple disabilities, notification, persons with disability, registered organisation, regulations, severe disability, and Trust.

The Act establishes the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities, which is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and is empowered to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract. The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of the Trust is vested in a Board, which may exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the Trust.

The Board consists of a Chairperson, nine members appointed from amongst the registered organisations, eight members nominated by the Central Government to represent various Ministries or Departments, three members nominated by the Board representing associations of trade, commerce and industry engaged in philanthropic activities, and the Chief Executive Officer, who is also the Member-Secretary, ex officio.

The Act also lays down the terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members, the procedure for filling casual vacancies, and the disqualifications for membership. The Board is required to meet at least once in three months, and all questions are decided by a majority of votes of the Members present and voting.

The Chief Executive Officer is appointed by the Central Government and is responsible for exercising such powers and performing such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson. The Board is also required to appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary to carry out the objectives of the Trust.

The Act specifies the objects of the Trust, which include enabling and empowering persons with disability to live as independently and as fully as possible within and as close to the community to which they belong, strengthening facilities to provide support to persons with disability to live within their own families, extending support to registered organisations to provide need-based services during the period of crisis in the family of persons with disability, dealing with problems of persons with disability who do not have family support, promoting measures for the care and protection of persons with disability in the event of death of their parent or guardian, evolving procedure for the appointment of guardians and trustees for persons with disability requiring such protection, and facilitating the realisation of equal opportunities, protection of rights and full participation of persons with disability.

The Act empowers the Trust to receive funds from the Central Government, receive bequests of movable property from any person for the benefit of persons with disability, and provide financial assistance to registered organisations for carrying out approved programmes. The Act also defines the term 'approved programme' and specifies that preference shall be given to women with disability, persons with severe disability, and senior citizens with disability while earmarking funds for approved programmes.

The Act lays down the procedure for registration of associations of persons with disability, or any association of parents of persons with disability or a voluntary organisation, whose main object is promotion of welfare of persons with disability. The Board may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire for carrying out the objects of the Trust.

The Act also establishes local level committees for such area as may be specified by the Board. A local level committee consists of an officer of the civil service of the Union or of the State, not below the rank of a District Magistrate or a District Commissioner of a district, a representative of a registered organisation, and a person with disability as defined in the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.

The Act empowers the local level committee to consider applications for appointment of a guardian for a person with disability, and to recommend the appointment of a guardian for a person with disability who needs a guardian. The local level committee is required to consider whether the person with disability needs a guardian, and the purposes for which the guardianship is required.

Every person appointed as a guardian of a person with disability under this Chapter is required to either have the care of such person of disability and his property or be responsible for the maintenance of the person with disability.

The Act lays down the procedure for removal of a guardian and the duties of a guardian. The Act also specifies that the expression 'relative' includes any person related to the person with disability by blood, marriage or adoption.

The Act lays down the procedure for inspection of books and documents in the possession of the Board by any registered organisation, and the procedure for evaluating the pre-funding status of registered organisations seeking financial assistance from the Trust.

The Act requires the Board to hold an annual general meeting of registered organisations, and to send a notice of the annual general meeting along with a statement of accounts and records of its activities during the preceding year to every registered organisation at such time as may be determined by regulations.

The Act specifies the procedure for the maintenance of accounts and other relevant records, and the preparation of an annual statement of accounts of the Trust. The accounts of the Trust are required to be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him, and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit is payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

The Act requires the Trust to furnish to the Central Government such reports, returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time. The Central Government may also issue directions on questions of policy to the Board, and the decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not is final.

The Act empowers the Central Government to supersede the Board for a period of not more than six months if it has reason to believe that the Board is unable to perform or has persistently made default in the performance of the duties imposed on it.

The Act provides for the exemption of the Trust from tax on income under the Income-tax Act, 1961, and the protection of action taken in good faith by the Central Government, the Trust, or any member of the Board or Chief Executive Officer or any officer or other employee of the Trust or any other person authorised by the Board to perform duties under this Act.

The Act provides that all Members, Chief Executive Officer, other officers and employees of the Trust shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

The Act also empowers the Board to delegate its powers to the Chairperson or any member or any officer of the Trust or any other person subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the order.

The Act authorises the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act, and the Board to make regulations consistent with this Act and rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act is required to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.