Summary:

THE DESIGNS ACT, 2000 is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to protection of designs. The Act has 48 sections divided into 11 chapters and one schedule.

Chapter I, Preliminary, includes sections 1 and 2, which deal with short title, extent and commencement, and definitions, respectively.

Chapter II, Registration of Designs, includes sections 3 to 10, which deal with the Controller and other officers, prohibition of registration of certain designs, application for registration of designs, registration to be in respect of particular article, publication of particulars of registered designs, and power of Controller to make orders regarding substitution of application, etc.

Chapter III, Copyright in Registered Designs, includes sections 11 to 15, which deal with copyright on registration, restoration of lapsed designs, procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of lapsed designs, rights of proprietor of lapsed design which have been restored, and requirements before delivery on sales.

Chapter IV, Industrial and International Exhibitions, includes section 21, which deals with provisions as to exhibitions.

Chapter V, Legal Proceedings, includes section 22, which deals with piracy of registered design.

Chapter VI, Fees, includes section 24, which deals with fees.

Chapter VII, Powers and Duties of Controller, includes sections 32 to 36, which deal with powers of Controller in proceedings under Act, exercise of discretionary power by Controller, power of Controller to take directions of the Central Government, refusal to register a design in certain cases, and appeals to the High Court.

Chapter VIII, Evidence, etc., includes sections 37 to 42, which deal with evidence before the Controller, certificate of Controller to be evidence, evidence of documents in patent office, applications and notices by post, declaration by infant, lunatic, etc., and avoidance of certain restrictive conditions.

Chapter IX, Agency, includes section 43, which deals with agency.

Chapter X, Powers, etc., of Central Government, includes sections 44 to 47, which deal with reciprocal arrangement with the United Kingdom and other convention countries or group of countries of inter-governmental organisations, report of the Controller to be placed before Parliament, protection of security of India, and power of Central Government to make rules.

Chapter XI, Repeal and Savings, includes section 48, which deals with repeal and savings.

The Schedule includes forms for registration of designs.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "article", "Controller", "copyright", "design", "High Court", "legal representative", "original", "Patent Office", "prescribed", and "proprietor of a new or original design". The Act also specifies the classes of articles in which designs can be registered.

The Act provides for the registration of designs, which gives the registered proprietor exclusive rights to apply the design to any article in the class in which the design is registered. The Act also provides for the restoration of lapsed designs, subject to certain conditions.

The Act prohibits the registration of certain designs, such as those that are not new or original, have been disclosed to the public, are not significantly distinguishable from known designs or combination of known designs, or comprise scandalous or obscene matter.

The Act provides for legal proceedings for infringement of registered designs, and specifies the remedies available to the registered proprietor.

The Act also provides for the payment of fees for various services provided by the Controller, such as registration of designs, restoration of lapsed designs, and obtaining certified copies of registered designs.

The Act empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.

The Act repeals the Designs Act, 1911, and provides for the continuation of certain proceedings, registrations, and notifications made under the repealed Act.

In summary, THE DESIGNS ACT, 2000 provides for the registration and protection of designs in India, and specifies the procedures and requirements for registration, restoration, and legal proceedings for infringement of registered designs. The Act also provides for the payment of fees for various services provided by the Controller, and empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.