The Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 (Act No. 30 of 2000) was enacted on the 25th of August, 2000. This Act aims to reorganize the existing State of Bihar and covers various aspects related to it. The Act consists of three parts, namely, Part I - Preliminary, Part II - Reorganisation of the State of Bihar, and Part III - Representation in the Legislatures.

Part I of the Act contains two sections, namely, Short title and Definitions. Section 1 states that this Act may be called the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000. Section 2 provides various definitions of the terms used in the Act.

Part II of the Act deals with the reorganisation of the State of Bihar. Section 3 states that a new State named Jharkhand will be formed, comprising certain territories of the existing State of Bihar. These territories include the districts of Bokaro, Chatra, Deogarh, Dhanbad, Dumka, Garhwa, Giridih, Godda, Gumla, Hazaribagh, Kodarma, Lohardaga, Pakur, Palamau, Ranchi, Sahebganj, Singhbhum (East), and Singhbhum (West). Upon the appointed day, these territories will cease to be part of the existing State of Bihar. Section 4 states that the State of Bihar will comprise the territories of the existing State of Bihar other than those specified in Section 3. Section 5 amends the First Schedule to the Constitution, adding a reference to the State of Jharkhand and specifying the territories that will form part of the new State. Section 6 states that the State Governments of Bihar and Jharkhand will have the power to alter the name, area, or boundaries of any district or other territorial division in the State after the appointed day.

Part III of the Act deals with the representation in the Legislatures. The Council of States is covered in Section 7, which amends the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, renumbering certain entries and adding a new entry for the State of Jharkhand. Section 8 states that the sitting members of the Council of States representing the existing State of Bihar shall be deemed to have been elected to fill the seats allotted to the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, as specified in the First Schedule to this Act. The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.

The House of the People is covered in Section 9, which amends the Representation of the People Act, 1950, allocating 40 seats to the successor State of Bihar and 14 seats to the successor State of Jharkhand. Section 10 amends the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, as directed in the Second Schedule to this Act. Section 11 states that every sitting member of the House of the People representing a constituency which, on the appointed day, stands allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to the successor State of Bihar or Jharkhand, shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so allotted. The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.

The Legislative Assembly is covered in Section 12, which states that the number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand shall be 243 and 81, respectively. Section 13 deals with the allocation of sitting members, stating that every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from a constituency which, on the appointed day, stands allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Jharkhand shall cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of Bihar and shall be deemed to have been elected to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of Jharkhand from that constituency as so allotted. All other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar shall continue to be members of the Legislative Assembly of that State. Section 14 states that the period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172 shall, in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Bihar or Jharkhand, be deemed to have commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar. Section 15 states that the persons who immediately before the appointed day are the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar shall continue to be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of that Assembly on and from that day. The Legislative Assembly of Jharkhand shall choose two members of that Assembly to be Speaker and Deputy Speaker, as soon as may be after the appointed day.
The document to summarize is the Jharkhand Act 2000, which outlines the creation of the state of Jharkhand from the state of Bihar. The Act includes provisions for the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council of Jharkhand, the delimitation of constituencies, and the High Court of Jharkhand.

The Legislative Assembly of Jharkhand will have 81 members, including 24 Scheduled Caste members, 6 Scheduled Tribe members, and 27 other members. The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative Assembly of Bihar will apply to the Legislative Assembly of Jharkhand until new rules are made.

The Legislative Council of Jharkhand will have 75 seats, with 24 seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, 6 seats reserved for Scheduled Tribes, and 27 seats for other members. The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bihar) Order, 1951 will be amended to reflect these changes.

All sitting members of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Bihar will continue to be members of that Council till they retire on the expiration of their present term of office. The person who is the Chairman or Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Bihar will continue to hold that position in the Legislative Council of Jharkhand.

The Election Commission will determine the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, as well as the assembly constituencies into which each State will be divided. The Election Commission will also make adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the parliamentary constituencies in each successor State.

The High Court of Jharkhand will have its principal seat at a place appointed by the President. The Judges and division courts of the High Court of Jharkhand may sit at other places in the State of Jharkhand as the Chief Justice may appoint.

Such of the Judges of the High Court at Patna holding office immediately before the appointed day as may be determined by the President will cease to be Judges of the High Court at Patna and become Judges of the High Court of Jharkhand. The persons who become Judges of the High Court of Jharkhand will rank in that Court according to the priority of their respective appointment as Judges of the High Court of Patna.

The High Court of Jharkhand will have, in respect of any part of the territories included in the State of Jharkhand, all such jurisdiction, powers and authorities as, under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of that part of the said territories by the High Court at Patna.

Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate on the roll of the Bar Council of the existing State of Bihar may give his option in writing, within one year from the appointed day to the Bar Council of such existing State, to transfer his name on the roll of the Bar Council of Jharkhand. On such option so given, his name shall be deemed to have been transferred on the roll of the Bar Council of Jharkhand with effect from the date of the option so given.
Summary:

The document outlines the laws and procedures for the establishment of the High Court of Jharkhand, which was created after the state of Jharkhand was formed on November 15, 2000. The laws and procedures are based on the Indian Constitution and other relevant Acts.

Section 2 of the document specifies that advocates who were entitled to practice in the High Court at Patna or any subordinate court thereof before the appointed day will also be recognized as entitled to practice in the High Court of Jharkhand or any subordinate court thereof. The right of audience in the High Court of Jharkhand will be regulated in accordance with the same principles as in the High Court at Patna.

Section 29 states that the law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court at Patna will apply in relation to the High Court of Jharkhand with necessary modifications. This includes the power of the High Court of Jharkhand to make rules and orders with respect to practice and procedure.

Section 30 specifies that the law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court at Patna will apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Jharkhand.

Section 31 states that the law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the form of writs and special processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court at Patna will apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Jharkhand.

Section 32 specifies that the law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court at Patna with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers will apply in relation to the High Court of Jharkhand.

Section 33 states that the law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court at Patna and the Judges and division courts thereof will apply in relation to the High Court of Jharkhand.

Section 34 specifies that the High Court at Patna will have no jurisdiction in respect of the transferred territory, except for certain proceedings that are certified by the Chief Justice of the High Court to be proceedings which are ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of Jharkhand.

Section 35 states that any person who is an advocate entitled to practice or an attorney entitled to act in the High Court at Patna and so authorized to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Jharkhand under section 34 shall have the right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Jharkhand in relation to those proceedings.

Section 36 defines the terms "proceedings" and "High Court" for the purposes of section 34.

Section 37 specifies that nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Jharkhand of any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority having power to make such provision.

Part V of the document deals with the authorization of expenditure and distribution of revenues. Section 38 authorizes the Governor of Bihar to authorize expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Jharkhand as he deems necessary for any period not more than six months beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand.

Section 39 deals with reports relating to accounts of Bihar State. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India referred to in clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of that State.

Section 40 deals with the distribution of revenue. The President shall, by order, determine the share of States of Bihar and Jharkhand in the total amount payable to the existing State of Bihar on the recommendation of the Finance Commission constituted under article 280 of the Constitution, in such manner as he thinks fit.

Part VI of the document deals with the apportionment of assets and liabilities. Section 41 specifies that the provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment of the assets and liabilities of the existing State of Bihar immediately before the appointed day. The successor States shall be entitled to receive benefits arising out of the decisions taken by the predecessor State and the successor States shall be liable to bear the financial liabilities arising out of the decisions taken by the existing State of Bihar. The apportionment of assets and liabilities would be subject to such financial adjustment as may be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of the assets and liabilities amongst the successor States. Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled through mutual agreement, failing which by order, by the Central Government on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

Section 42 deals with land and goods. Subject to other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles and other goods belonging to the existing State of Bihar shall be apportioned between the successor States in such manner as may be prescribed. The President may make an order for the apportionment of such land, stores, articles and other goods.
Summary:

This document discusses the division of assets and liabilities between the states of Bihar and Jharkhand after the transfer of territory. According to Section 42, immovable property, including land and any rights over such property, will pass to the state in which the property is located. Goods, excluding coins, bank notes, and currency notes, will pass to the state in whose territory the goods are located, except in cases where the Central Government directs otherwise for a just and equitable distribution. Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilization in particular institutions, workshops, or undertakings, or on particular works under construction, will pass to the successor state in whose territories such institutions, workshops, undertakings or works are located. Section 43 deals with treasury and bank balances, which will be divided between the two states according to the population ratio. Arrears of taxes will belong to the successor state in which the property is situated, and the right to recover arrears of any other tax or duty will belong to the successor state in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day. The right to recover loans and advances made before the appointed day will belong to the successor state in which the area is included on that day, except for loans or advances made to any person or institution outside that state, which will belong to the State of Bihar. Investments and credits in certain funds will be apportioned in the ratio of population of the successor states, except for securities held in investments made from the Calamity Relief Fund of the existing State of Bihar, which will be divided in the ratio of the area of the territories occupied by the successor states. Public debt will be apportioned in the ratio of population of the successor states, and the individual items of liabilities to be allocated to the successor states and the amount of contribution required to be made by one successor state to another will be such as may be ordered by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. Floating debt will be the liability of the state in whose territories the undertaking is located, and the liability of the existing State of Bihar to refund any tax or duty collected in excess will be the liability of the successor state in whose territories the property is situated.
Summary:

The document outlines the distribution of liabilities and assets of the existing State of Bihar between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand.

Section 51 states that the liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any civil deposit or loan fund deposit shall be the liability of the State in whose area the deposit has been made. The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any charitable or other endowment shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area the institution entitled to the benefit of the endowment is located or of the State to which the objects of the endowment under the terms thereof, are confined.

Section 52 states that the liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of the provident fund account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be the liability of the State to which that Government servant is permanently allotted.

Section 53 states that the liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pensions and other retirement benefits shall pass to, or be apportioned between, the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand in accordance with the provisions contained in the Eighth Schedule to this Act.

Section 54 states that any contract made by the existing State of Bihar before the appointed day shall be deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power of the State to which the purposes of the contract relate. The rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue under any such contract shall be rights or liabilities of the State of Jharkhand or the State of Bihar, as the case may be.

Section 55 states that any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than breach of contract of the existing State of Bihar shall, if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as from that day, are the territories of either of the successor States of Bihar or Jharkhand, be a liability of that successor State. In any other case, it shall be initially a liability of the State of Bihar, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand or, in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.

Section 56 states that any liability of the existing State of Bihar as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co-operative society or other person shall, if the area of operations of such society or person is limited to the territories which, as from that day, are the territories of either of the States of Bihar or Jharkhand, be a liability of that successor State. In any other case, it shall be initially a liability of the State of Bihar, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand or, in default of such agreements, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.

Section 57 states that if any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance with that provision.

Section 58 states that the benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing State of Bihar not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of Bihar in the first instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand or, in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.

Section 59 states that where the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned between them in a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the manner agreed upon.

Section 60 states that where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government is of opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed day by either of the States, that it is just and equitable that property or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the other successor State, or that a contribution towards that liability should be made by the other successor State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner between the two States, or the other State shall make to the State subject to the liability such contribution in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the two State Governments, by order, determine.

Section 61 states that all sums payable either by the State of Bihar or by the State of Jharkhand to the other States or by the Central Government to either of those States, by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State by which such sums are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India.

Section 62 states that the Bihar State Electricity Board, State Warehousing Corporation and State Road Transport Corporation shall continue to function in those areas in respect of which they were functioning immediately before the appointed day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as may, from time to time, be issued by the Central Government. These corporations shall cease to function as from, and shall be deemed to be dissolved on such date as the Central Government may, by order, appoint. Upon such dissolution, its assets, rights and liabilities shall be apportioned between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand in such manner as may be agreed upon between them within one year of the dissolution or if no agreement is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, determine.
Summary:
The document outlines provisions related to the dissolution of the Bihar State Electricity Board and the Bihar State Warehousing Corporation, as well as the continuation and reconstitution of the Bihar State Financial Corporation. It also includes provisions for the continuance of certain existing road transport permits.

Under Section 62, the Bihar State Electricity Board and the Bihar State Warehousing Corporation are to be dissolved three months after the appointed day, unless a mutual agreement is reached between the successor States or the Central Government intervenes. Any outstanding dues owed to the coal supplier by the Board must be paid with interest at a rate of two percent higher than the Cash Credit interest until the dues are liquidated.

Under Section 63, the Central Government may give directions to maintain previous arrangements for the generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water in certain areas if it is in the interests of that area.

Under Section 64, the Bihar State Financial Corporation will continue to function in the areas where it was operating before the appointed day, subject to the provisions of this section and any directions issued by the Central Government. The Central Government may direct that the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951, shall have effect with such exceptions and modifications as may be specified. The Board of Directors of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, consider a scheme for the reconstitution or reorganization or dissolution of the Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved, it shall be submitted to the Central Government for its sanction.

Under Section 65, each of the companies specified in the Ninth Schedule shall continue to function in the areas in which it was operating immediately before the appointed day. The Central Government may issue directions in relation to such functioning.

Under Section 66, any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the existing State of Bihar or any part thereof shall continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of which it was functioning and operating immediately before the appointed day, subject to such directions as may be issued by the Central Government.

Under Section 67, a permit granted by the State Transport Authority of the existing State of Bihar or any Regional Transport Authority in that State shall, if such permit was, immediately before the appointed day, valid and effective in any area in the transferred territory, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after that day subject to the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 as for the time being in force in that area. The Central Government may, after consultation with the successor State Government or Governments concerned add to, amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the Authority by which the permit was granted. No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor States under any such permit.
Summary:
The document discusses various provisions related to Indian laws, specifically focusing on the reorganization of the State of Bihar into the States of Bihar and Jharkhand.

Section 68 outlines special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases. If a body corporate, co-operative society, or commercial or industrial undertaking is reconstituted, reorganized, amalgamated, or dissolved as a result of the reorganization of the State of Bihar, any workman employed by such entity who is transferred or re-employed by another body corporate, co-operative society, or undertaking will not be entitled to compensation under certain sections of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. However, if the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or re-employment are not less favorable, and the employer is legally liable to pay compensation in the event of retrenchment, then the workman will be entitled to compensation.

Section 69 deals with special provisions as to income-tax. Where the assets, rights, and liabilities of a body corporate carrying on business are transferred to another body corporate which carries on the same business, the losses or profits or gains sustained by the first body corporate shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with rules made by the Central Government. The share of loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Section 70 deals with continuance of facilities in certain State institutions. The Government of the State of Bihar or Jharkhand shall continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State in respect of certain institutions located in that State. The facilities shall not be less favorable to such people than what were being provided to them before the appointed day. The period and terms and conditions for the continuance of facilities shall be agreed upon between the two State Governments or fixed by order of the Central Government.

Section 71 deals with provisions relating to All-India Services. In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service, and Indian Forest Service for the existing State of Bihar, there shall be two separate cadres, one for the State of Bihar and the other for the State of Jharkhand, in respect of each of these services. The initial strength and composition of the State cadres shall be determined by the Central Government. The members of each of the said service borne on the Bihar cadre shall be allocated to the State cadres in such manner and with effect from such date as the Central Government may specify.

Section 72 deals with provisions relating to services in Bihar and Jharkhand. Every person who is serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar shall provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Bihar, unless required to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of the State of Jharkhand. The Central Government shall determine the successor State to which every person shall be finally allotted for service, and such allotment shall take effect from such date as may be agreed upon between the Governments concerned or determined by the Central Government.

Section 73 deals with other provisions relating to services. Nothing in Section 72 shall affect the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State. The conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day in the case of any person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Bihar or to the State of Jharkhand shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.

Section 74 deals with provisions as to continuance of officers in the same post. Every person who is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar in any area which on that day falls within any of the successor States shall continue to hold the same post or office in that successor State.

Section 75 deals with the establishment of Advisory Committees by the Central Government to assist in the discharge of its functions under this Part and to ensure fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this Part.

Section 76 deals with the power of the Central Government to give directions to the State Government of Bihar and the State Government of Jharkhand for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Part.
The document you provided is about the management and development of water resources in India, specifically the Ganga and Sone rivers. The document includes provisions for the establishment of a Ganga and Sone Management Board (GSMB) to administer, construct, maintain and operate water resource projects in relation to the Ganga and Sone rivers for various purposes such as irrigation, rural and urban water supply, hydro power generation, navigation, industries and any other purpose specified by the Central Government.

The GSMB will consist of a whole-time Chairman and two whole-time members appointed by the Central Government, representatives of the Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh, and two representatives of the Central Government.

The functions of the GSMB include regulating the supply of water and power generated at the projects referred to in sub-section (1) of section 78 to the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh, examining the requirement of funds for various projects, deciding the withdrawal of water from the reservoirs during the construction period for irrigation and power purposes, devising programme of resettlement for persons displaced as a result of Irrigation Projects, construction of remaining or new works connected with the development of the water resource project, and any other functions entrusted to it by the Central Government.

The GSMB may employ such staff as it may consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. The Government of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh shall at all times provide the necessary funds to the Board to meet all expenses required for the discharge of its functions. The Board shall be under the control of the Central Government and shall comply with such directions as may from time to time be given to it by that Government.

The Board shall exercise jurisdiction in regard to any of the projects referred to in sub-section (1) of section 78 over headwork (barrages, dams, reservoir, regulating construction), part of canal network and transmission lines necessary to deliver water or power to the States concerned.

The Central Government may, for the purpose of enabling the Board to function efficiently, issue such directions to the State Governments concerned, or any other authority, and the State Governments, or the other authority shall comply with such directions.

The Board may also make regulations consistent with this Act and orders made thereunder, to provide for regulating the time and place of meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business.
Summary:

The document to summarize is a legal text pertaining to the State of Bihar and Jharkhand in India. The text includes provisions related to the powers and functions of the Board of Directors, legal and miscellaneous provisions, and schedules related to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976.

The legal and miscellaneous provisions include provisions related to the amendment of the Act, territorial extent of laws, power to adapt laws, power to construe laws, power to name authorities, legal proceedings, transfer of pending proceedings, right of pleaders to practice in certain cases, effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws, and power to remove difficulties.

The First Schedule relates to the allocation of seats to the State of Bihar and Jharkhand in the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the Indian Parliament. The Second Schedule relates to the delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies in the State of Bihar and Jharkhand. The Schedule includes changes to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, such as the addition of new constituencies, the omission of certain constituencies, and the substitution of certain constituencies with new names and categories.

Overall, the document contains legal provisions and schedules related to the State of Bihar and Jharkhand, including provisions related to the powers and functions of the Board of Directors, legal and miscellaneous provisions, and schedules related to the delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies.
Summary:

This document presents the Jharkhand Parliamentary Constituencies and Assembly Constituencies, including their names and the areas they cover. The Parliamentary Constituencies are divided into 10 constituencies, numbered 1 to 10, and the Assembly Constituencies are divided into 81 constituencies, numbered 1 to 81. Each constituency is associated with a specific district and sub-division, and is made up of various police stations and gram panchayats (GPs). For example, the Rajmahal (ST) Parliamentary Constituency includes the Rajmahal, Boarijor, Barhait, Litipara, Pakaur, and Maheshpur (ST) police stations, while the Rajmahal Assembly Constituency includes the Rajmahal and Sahebganj police stations. The document also includes a table showing the serial number, name, and extent of each constituency.
Summary:
The document outlines the delimitation of constituencies and the election of members to the Bihar Legislative Council. It includes information on the creation of new constituencies in the state of Jharkhand, which was previously part of Bihar. The constituencies are divided by district, and the document specifies the name and extent of each constituency. It also includes information on the amendment of the delimitation of council constituencies, as well as amendments to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950. The document also specifies the investments and credits in certain funds, and the apportionment of liability in respect of pensions and other retirement benefits. It is important to note that the document uses specific legal terms and references to other orders and acts, and it is written in a formal and legalistic style.
Summary:

The document outlines the distribution of liabilities and assets of the existing State of Bihar to its successor states, Jharkhand and Bihar. The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pensions and other retirement benefits granted before the appointed day and drawn in any area outside the territories of the existing State shall be the liability of the State of Bihar paying subject to adjustments to be made in accordance with paragraph 3. The liability in respect of the pensions and other retirement benefits of any officer serving immediately before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar and retiring on or after that day, shall be that of the successor State granting him the pension and other retirement benefits, but the portion of the pension and other retirement benefits attributable to the service of any such officer before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar shall be allocated between the successor States in the population ratio.

The Ninth Schedule of the document contains a list of State-Owned Corporations/Companies of the existing State of Bihar, which will be inherited by the successor states. The Tenth Schedule of the document contains a list of Training Institutions/Centers of the existing State of Bihar, which will also be inherited by the successor states.

The document also includes various notifications and amendments, including the substitution of certain words and phrases, and the omission of certain police stations from the list of notified areas. These notifications and amendments were made on various dates, as indicated in the document.