Summary:
The Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 2001, provides for the constitution of a welfare fund for the benefit of advocates. The Act defines "advocate" as a person whose name has been entered in the State roll prepared and maintained by a State Bar Council under section 17 of the Advocates Act, 1961, and who is a member of a State Bar Association or State Advocates' Association. The Act defines "appropriate Government" as, in the case of advocates admitted on the roll of a Bar Council of a State, the State Government; and in the case of advocates admitted on the roll of a Bar Council of a Union territory, the Central Government. The Act establishes a Trustee Committee, which is a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property. The Trustee Committee shall consist of the Advocate-General of a State, the Secretary to the appropriate Government in the Law Department or Ministry, the Secretary to the appropriate Government in the Home Department or Ministry, the Chairman of the State Bar Council, the Government Pleader or the Public Prosecutor, as may be nominated by the appropriate Government, and two advocates to be nominated by the State Bar Council. The Trustee Committee shall administer the Fund, which shall be held and applied by the Trustee Committee subject to the provisions of this Act. The Trustee Committee shall receive applications for admission or re-admission as members to the Fund, and dispose of such applications within ninety days from the date of receipt thereof. The Trustee Committee shall record in the minutes book of the Trustee Committee, its decisions on the applications. The Trustee Committee shall pay to the members of the Fund or their nominees or legal heirs, as the case may be, the amounts at the rates specified in Schedule I. The Trustee Committee shall send such periodical and annual reports as may be prescribed, to the appropriate Government and the State Bar Council. The Trustee Committee shall communicate to the applicants, by registered post with acknowledgment due or through electronic mode, the decisions of the Trustee Committee in respect of applications for admission or re-admission as members to the Fund or claims to the benefit of the Fund. The Trustee Committee shall do such other acts as are or may be directed by the State Bar Council and the appropriate Government. The Trustee Committee may borrow, from time to time, any sum required for carrying out the purposes of this Act, with the prior approval of the appropriate Government and the State Bar Council. The Trustee Committee shall deposit all monies and receipts forming part of the Fund in any scheduled bank or invest the same in debt instruments of any corporation owned or controlled by the appropriate Government or in loans floated by the appropriate Government or in any other manner as the State Bar Council may, from time to time, direct with the prior approval of the appropriate Government. All amounts due and payable under this Act and all expenditure relating to the management and administration of the Fund shall be paid out of the Fund. The Trustee Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts and annual report in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. The accounts of the Trustee Committee shall be audited annually by a chartered accountant appointed by the State Bar Council. The accounts of the Trustee Committee as audited by the chartered accountant together with his audit report shall be forwarded to the State Bar Council by that Committee and the State Bar Council may issue such directions, as it deems fit, to the Trustee Committee in respect thereof. The Trustee Committee shall comply with the directions issued by the State Bar Council under sub-section (3). The Trustee Committee shall pay from the Fund the charges for the audit as may be fixed by the State Bar Council. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall be the chief executive authority of the Trustee Committee and responsible for carrying out its decisions. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall represent the Trustee Committee in all suits and proceedings for and against the Trustee Committee. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall authenticate by his signature all decisions and instruments of the Trustee Committee. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall operate bank account of the Trustee Committee jointly with the Chairperson. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall convene meetings of the Trustee Committee and prepare minutes of such meetings. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall attend meetings of the Trustee Committee with all the necessary records and information. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall maintain such forms, registers and other records as may be prescribed from time to time and do all correspondence relating to the Trustee Committee. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall prepare an annual statement of business transacted by the Trustee Committee during a financial year. The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall do such other acts as are or may be directed by the Trustee Committee and the State Bar Council. The State Bar Council shall pay to the Fund annually an amount equal to twenty per cent. of the enrolment fee received by it under clause (f) of section 24 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961). Any association of advocates known by any name which is registered as an association before the date of commencement of this Act may, before the date to be notified by a State Bar Council in this behalf, apply for recognition to the State Bar Council in such form as may be prescribed. Any association of advocates known by any name which is registered as an association on or after the date of commencement of this Act may, within three months from the date of its registration as an association, apply for recognition to the State Bar Council in such form as may be prescribed. Every application for recognition under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be accompanied by,— (a) a copy of the rules or bye-laws of the association; (b) names and addresses of office bearers of the association; (c) a list of members of the association containing the name, address, age, enrolment number and date of enrolment with the State Bar Council and the ordinary place of practice of each member. The State Bar Council may, after such enquiry as it deems necessary, recognise the association and issue a certificate of recognition in such form as may be prescribed. The decision of the State Bar Council on any matter regarding recognition of an association under sub-section (4) shall be final. In this section, "registered" means registered or deemed to be registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or any other law for the time being in force. Every State Bar Association and State Advocates’ Association shall, on or before the 15th day of April of every year, furnish to the State Bar Council a list of its members as on the 31st day of March of that year. Every State Bar Association and State Advocates’ Association shall inform the State Bar Council of any change in the membership including admissions and re-admissions within thirty days of such change. Every State Bar Association and State Advocates’ Association shall inform the State Bar Council of the death or other cessation of practice or voluntary suspension of practice of any of its members within thirty days from the date of occurrence thereof. Every State Bar Association and State Advocates’ Association shall inform the State Bar Council of such other matters as may be required by the State Bar Council from time to time.