Summary:

THE DELIMITATION ACT, 2002 (ACT NO. 33 OF 2002) is an Act to provide for the readjustment of the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State, the division of each State and each Union territory having a Legislative Assembly into territorial constituencies for elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States and Union territories and for matters connected therewith.

Section 1 of the Act states that this Act may be called the Delimitation Act, 2002.

Section 2 of the Act provides definitions for various terms used in the Act.

Section 3 of the Act deals with the constitution of the Delimitation Commission, which consists of three members - a Judge of the Supreme Court appointed by the Central Government, the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner nominated by the Chief Election Commissioner, and the State Election Commissioner of the concerned State.

Section 4 of the Act specifies the duties of the Commission, which include readjusting the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State, and dividing each State and Union territory having a Legislative Assembly into territorial constituencies for elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States and Union territories.

Section 5 of the Act deals with associate members, who are nominated by the Speaker of the House of the People and the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of each State to assist the Commission in its duties.

Section 6 of the Act deals with casual vacancies in the office of the Chairperson, member, or associate member of the Commission.

Section 7 of the Act provides for the procedure and powers of the Commission, which include summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses, requiring the production of any document, and requisitioning any public record from any court or office.

Section 8 of the Act deals with the readjustment of number of seats in the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of each State.

Section 9 of the Act deals with the delimitation of constituencies.

Section 10 of the Act deals with the publication of orders and their date of operation.

Section 10A of the Act allows for the deferment of delimitation in certain cases.

Section 10B of the Act states that the final orders relating to readjustment of number of seats and delimitation of constituencies in respect of the State of Jharkhand have no legal effect.

Section 11 of the Act provides for the power to maintain delimitation orders up-to-date.

Section 12 of the Act repeals the Delimitation Act, 1972.

The Schedule to the Act provides for the determination of the number of seats in the House of the People to be allocated to each State and the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of the State.

The Act was enacted on 3rd June, 2002.