Summary:

The Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003 (Act No. 45 of 2003) was enacted on 11th September, 2003. The Act aims to provide for the constitution of a Central Vigilance Commission to inquire or cause inquiries to be conducted into offenses alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 by certain categories of public servants of the Central Government, corporations established by or under any Central Act, Government companies, societies and local authorities owned or controlled by the Central Government.

The Act consists of 5 chapters, namely, Preliminary, The Central Vigilance Commission, Functions and Powers of the Central Vigilance Commission, Expenses and Annual Report, and Miscellaneous.

Chapter I, Preliminary, contains the short title and definitions of terms used in the Act.

Chapter II, The Central Vigilance Commission, deals with the constitution of the Central Vigilance Commission, appointment of the Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners, terms and conditions of their service, removal from office, and their ineligibility for certain appointments and further employment.

Chapter III, Functions and Powers of the Central Vigilance Commission, specifies the functions and powers of the Commission, which include superintendence over the functioning of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, giving directions to the Delhi Special Police Establishment, inquiring or causing inquiries or investigations to be made, reviewing the progress of investigations and applications for sanction of prosecution, and tendering advice to the Central Government.

Chapter IV, Expenses and Annual Report, deals with the expenses of the Commission, which are to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the duty of the Commission to present annually a report as to the work done by the Commission.

Chapter V, Miscellaneous, contains provisions relating to protection of action taken in good faith, Central Vigilance Commissioner, Vigilance Commissioner and staff to be public servants, report of any inquiry made on reference by Commission to be forwarded to that Commission, power to call for information, consultation with Commission in certain matters, power to make rules, power to make regulations, notification, rule, etc., to be laid before Parliament, power to remove difficulties, provisions relating to existing Vigilance Commission, appointments, etc., of officers of Directorate of Enforcement, amendment of Act 25 of 1946, repeal and saving, schedule, and the form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Central Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance Commissioner.

The Schedule to the Act contains the form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Central Vigilance Commissioner or Vigilance Commissioner.

The Act applies to the whole of India and comes into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.