Summary:

The National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004 (Act No. 2 of 2005) establishes the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions (NCMEI) to protect the educational rights of minorities. The Act defines a minority as a community notified as such by the Central Government. A Minority Educational Institution is defined as a college or an educational institution established and administered by a minority or minorities.

The NCMEI consists of a Chairperson and three members appointed by the Central Government. The Chairperson must be a member of a minority community and have been a Judge of a High Court. The Members must also be members of a minority community and have eminence, ability, and integrity. The term of office for the Chairperson and Members is five years.

The Act provides for the rights of a minority to establish a Minority Educational Institution. The competent authority, appointed by the appropriate Government, shall grant a no objection certificate for the establishment of any educational institution of their choice by the minorities. The applicant shall be entitled to commence and proceed with the establishment of a Minority Educational Institution in accordance with the rules and regulations, as the case may be, laid down by or under any law for the time being in force.

The Act also provides for the rights of a Minority Educational Institution to seek affiliation. A Minority Educational Institution may seek affiliation to any University of its choice subject to such affiliation being permissible within the Act under which the said University is established.

The NCMEI has the power to advise the Central Government or any State Government on any question relating to the education of minorities that may be referred to it. The Commission can enquire, suo motu, or on a petition presented to it by any Minority Educational Institution, or any person on its behalf into complaints regarding deprivation or violation of rights of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice and any dispute relating to affiliation to a University and report its finding to the appropriate Government for its implementation.

The Commission has the power to investigate into the complaints relating to deprivation of the educational rights of minorities. The Commission may, for the purpose of conducting any investigation pertaining to a complaint under this Act, utilise the services of any officer of the Central Government or any State Government with the concurrence of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.

The Act provides for the maintenance of proper accounts and other relevant records and preparation of an annual statement of accounts by the NCMEI. The accounts of the NCMEI shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him.

The Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers and other employees of the NCMEI are deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.

The Act came into force on the 11th day of November, 2004.