Summary:

The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 is an Act to provide for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under the Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the family and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act extends to the whole of India and came into force on 26th October, 2006.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "aggrieved person", "child", "compensation order", "custody order", "domestic incident report", "domestic relationship", "domestic violence", "dowry", "Magistrate", "medical facility", "monetary relief", "notification", "prescribed", "Protection Officer", "protection order", "residence order", "respondent", "service provider", "shared household", and "shelter home".

The Act provides for the appointment of Protection Officers and their duties and functions. The Protection Officer is required to assist the Magistrate in the discharge of his functions under the Act, make a domestic incident report, make an application for relief, ensure that the aggrieved person is provided legal aid, maintain a list of service providers, provide shelter to the aggrieved person, get the aggrieved person medically examined, ensure that the order for monetary relief is complied with, and perform such other duties as may be prescribed.

The Act provides for the registration of service providers and their powers. A service provider registered under the Act shall have the power to record the domestic incident report, get the aggrieved person medically examined, and ensure that the aggrieved person is provided shelter in a shelter home.

The Act provides for the duties of the Government to ensure that the provisions of the Act are given wide publicity, the Central Government and State Government officers are given periodic sensitization and awareness training, effective co-ordination between the services provided by concerned Ministries and Departments dealing with law, home affairs including law and order, health and human resources is established, and protocols for the various Ministries concerned with the delivery of services to women under this Act including the courts are prepared and put in place.

The Act provides for the procedure for obtaining orders of reliefs. An aggrieved person or a Protection Officer or any other person on behalf of the aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking one or more reliefs under this Act. The relief sought for may include a relief for issuance of an order for payment of compensation or damages without prejudice to the right of such person to institute a suit for compensation or damages for the injuries caused by the acts of domestic violence committed by the respondent.

The Act provides for the right to reside in a shared household. Every woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to reside in the shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial interest in the same. The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared household or any part of it by the respondent save in accordance with the procedure established by law.

The Act provides for protection orders. The Magistrate may, after giving the aggrieved person and the respondent an opportunity of being heard and on being prima facie satisfied that domestic violence has taken place or is likely to take place, pass a protection order in favour of the aggrieved person and prohibit the respondent from committing any act of domestic violence, aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence, entering the place of employment of the aggrieved person or, if the person aggrieved is a child, its school or any other place frequented by the aggrieved person, attempting to communicate in any form, whatsoever, with the aggrieved person, including personal, oral or written or electronic or telephonic contact, alienating any assets, operating bank lockers or bank accounts used or held or enjoyed by both the parties, jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent or singly by the respondent, including her stridhan or any other property held either jointly by the parties or separately by them without the leave of the Magistrate, causing violence to the dependants, other relatives or any person who give the aggrieved person assistance from domestic violence, or committing any other act as specified in the protection order.

The Act provides for residence orders. While disposing of an application under sub-section (1) of section 12, the Magistrate may, on being satisfied that domestic violence has taken place, pass a residence order restraining the respondent from dispossessing or in any other manner disturbing the possession of the aggrieved person from the shared household, directing the respondent to remove himself from the shared household, restraining the respondent or any of his relatives from entering any portion of the shared household in which the aggrieved person resides, restraining the respondent from alienating or disposing off the shared household or encumbering the same, restraining the respondent from renouncing his rights in the shared household except with the leave of the Magistrate, or directing the respondent to secure same level of alternate accommodation for the aggrieved person as enjoyed by her in the shared household or to pay rent for the same, if the circumstances so require.

The Act provides for monetary reliefs. The Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetary relief to meet the expenses incurred and losses suffered by the aggrieved person and any child of the aggrieved person as a result of the domestic violence and such relief may include, but not limited to, the loss of earnings, the medical expenses, the loss caused due to the destruction, damage or removal of any property from the control of the aggrieved person, and the maintenance for the aggrieved person as well as her children, if any, including an order under or in addition to an order of maintenance under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force.

The Act provides for custody orders. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Magistrate may, at any stage of hearing of the application for protection order or for any other relief under this Act grant temporary custody of any child or children to the aggrieved person or the person making an application on her behalf and specify, if necessary, the arrangements for visit of such child or children by the respondent.

The Act provides for compensation orders. In addition to other reliefs as may be granted under this Act, the Magistrate may on an application being made by the aggrieved person, pass an order directing the respondent to pay compensation and damages for the injuries, including mental torture and emotional distress, caused by the acts of domestic violence committed by that respondent.

The Act provides for power to grant interim and ex parte orders. In any proceeding before him under this Act, the Magistrate may pass such interim order as he deems just and proper. If the Magistrate is satisfied that an application prima facie discloses that the respondent is committing, or has committed an act of domestic violence or that there is a likelihood that the respondent may commit an act of domestic violence, he may grant an ex parte order on the basis of the affidavit in such form, as may be prescribed, of the aggrieved person under section 18, section 19, section 20, section 21 or, as the case may be, section 22 against the respondent.

The Act provides for court to give copies of order free of cost. The Magistrate shall, in all cases where he has passed any order under this Act, order that a copy of such order, shall be given free of cost, to the parties to the application, the police officer in-charge of the police station within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the respondent resides, and any service provider located within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court and if any service provider has registered a domestic incident report, to that service provider.

The Act provides for duration of orders. A protection order made under section 18 shall be in force till the aggrieved person applies for discharge. If the Magistrate, on receipt of an application from the aggrieved person or the respondent, is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances requiring alteration, modification or revocation of any order made under this Act, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing pass such order, as he may deem appropriate.

The Act provides for relief in other suits and legal proceedings. Any relief available under sections 18, 19,20, 21 and 22 may also be sought in any legal proceeding, before a civil court, family court or a criminal court, affecting the aggrieved person and the respondent whether such proceeding was initiated before or after the commencement of this Act. Any relief referred to in sub-section (1) may be sought for in addition to and along with any other relief that the aggrieved person may seek in such suit or legal proceeding before a civil or criminal court.

The Act provides for jurisdiction. The court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, within the local limits of which the person aggrieved permanently or temporarily resides or carries on business or is employed, the respondent resides or carries on business or is employed, or the cause of action has arisen, shall be the competent court to grant a protection order and other orders under this Act and to try offences under this Act. Any order made under this Act shall be enforceable throughout India.

The Act provides for procedure. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all proceedings under sections 12,18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 and offences under section 31 shall be governed by the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the court from laying down its own procedure for disposal of an application under section 12 or under sub-section (2) of section 23.

The Act provides for appeal. There shall lie an appeal to the Court of Session within thirty days from the date on which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggrieved person or the respondent, as the case may be, whichever is later.

The Act provides for protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Protection Officer for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.

The Act provides for Act not in derogation of any other law. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law, for the time being in force.

The Act provides for power of Central Government to make rules. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

The Act provides for power of Central Government to make rules. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

The Act provides for the Schedule. The Schedule provides for the list of offences under the Indian Penal Code, 1860.