Summary:
THE ACTUARIES ACT, 2006 is an Act to provide for regulating and developing the profession of Actuaries in India. The Act establishes the Institute of Actuaries of India (IAI) as the regulatory body for the profession of Actuaries in India. The Act defines an Actuary as a person skilled in determining the present effects of future contingent events or in finance modelling and risk analysis in different areas of insurance, or calculating the value of life interests and insurance risks, or designing and pricing of policies, working out the benefits, recommending rates relating to insurance business, annuities, insurance and pension rates on the basis of empirically based tables and includes a statistician engaged in such technology, taxation, employees' benefits and such other risk management and investments.

The Act provides for the incorporation of the IAI and the transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of the Actuarial Society to the IAI. The objects of the IAI include promoting, upholding and developing the standards of professional education, training, knowledge, practice and conduct amongst Actuaries, promoting the status of the Actuarial profession, regulating the practice by the members of the profession of Actuary, promoting, in the public interest, knowledge and research in all matters relevant to Actuarial science and its application, and doing all such other things as may be incidental or conducive to the above objects or any of them.

The Act provides for the entry of names in the register of members, and the recognition of foreign qualifications and training for the purposes of enrolment. The IAI is required to hold an annual general meeting every year, and the Council is required to elect three of its members to be the President, Vice-President and Honorary Secretary of the IAI. The Council may constitute such committees from amongst its members as it deems necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.

The Act provides for the finances of the IAI, and the appointment of officers and employees of the IAI. The Council may invest any money for the time being standing to the credit of the fund in any security as it may deem prudent consistent with the considerations of security of such investments and maximum returns thereon. The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fund distinguishing capital account from revenue account.

The Act provides for the maintenance of a register of members, and the removal of names from the register. The Council may re-enter the name of a member whose name has been removed from the register for reasons mentioned in clauses (b), (c), (d) and (e) of section 24, by an order, and on paying such fees, and after satisfying such conditions and requirements as may be specified.

The Act defines professional or other misconduct, and provides for disciplinary proceedings against members of the IAI. The Disciplinary Committee shall make an inquiry in respect of any information or complaint received by the Council under the provisions of this Act, and shall submit a report to the Council within such time as may be prescribed. The Council may, after considering the report of the Disciplinary Committee, take any one or more of the following actions, namely:— (a) reprimand the member; or (b) remove the name of the member from the register permanently or for such period, as it thinks fit; or (c) impose such fine as it may think fit, which may extend to five lakh rupees.

The Act provides for appeals to the Appellate Authority against the orders of the Council. The Appellate Authority may, after calling for the records of any case, revise any order made by the Council under section 30 and may confirm, modify or set aside the order.

The Act provides for penalties for falsely claiming to be a member, etc., using name of Institution, awarding degrees of actuarial science, etc., companies not to engage in actuarial practice, unqualified person not to sign documents, and offences by companies.

The Act provides for the dissolution of the Actuarial Society of India registered under the Societies Registration Act. The Society known as the Actuarial Society of India registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) and the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 (Bombay Act XXXIX of 1950) shall stand dissolved and thereafter no person shall make, assert or take any claims or demands or proceedings against the dissolved society or against any officer thereof in his capacity as such officer except in so far as may be necessary, for enforcing the provisions of this Act.

The Act provides for miscellaneous provisions including the power of the Central Government to issue directions to the Council, protection of action taken in good faith, members, etc., to be public servants, power of Central Government to make rules, power of Council to make regulations, power of Central Government to issue directions for making or amending regulations, and laying of rules and regulations.