Summary:
The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006, establishes the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board to regulate the refining, processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing, and sale of petroleum, petroleum products, and natural gas, excluding production of crude oil and natural gas. The Act applies to refining, processing, storage, transportation, distribution, marketing, and sale of petroleum, petroleum products, and natural gas, excluding production of crude oil and natural gas.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, including "affiliate code of conduct," "Appellate Tribunal," "appointed day," "authorised entity," "auto liquefied petroleum gas," "Board," "Bureau of Indian Standards," "Chairperson," "city or local natural gas distribution network," "common carrier," "CNG station," "compressed natural gas or CNG," "contract carrier," "dealer," "distributor," "entity," "exchange of products," "high speed diesel," "kerosene or superior kerosene oil," "liquefied natural gas terminal," "liquefied petroleum gas," "local distribution entity," "marketing service obligations," "maximum retail price," "member," "motor spirit," "natural gas," "notification," "notified petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas," "oil company," "petroleum," "pipeline access code," "prescribed," "regulations," "restrictive trade practice," "retail outlet," "retail service obligations," "rules," "Secretary," and "transportation rate."

The Act is divided into ten chapters. Chapter I, Preliminary, contains short title, extent, commencement and application. Chapter II, Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, establishes the Board, sets out its qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other members, and terms of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and other members. Chapter III, Functions and Powers of the Board, sets out the functions and powers of the Board. Chapter IV, Registration and Authorisation, sets out the registration and authorisation of entities. Chapter V, Settlement of Disputes, sets out the powers of the Board to settle disputes. Chapter VI, Appeals to Appellate Tribunal, sets out the Appellate Tribunal and its jurisdiction, powers, and authority. Chapter VII, Finance, Accounts and Audit, sets out the grants by the Central Government, fund, accounts and audit. Chapter VIII, Power of Central Government, sets out the power of the Central Government to issue directions and take over control and management of facilities and business premises of any entity and retail outlets in public interest. Chapter IX, Offences and Punishment, sets out the offences and punishment. Chapter X, Miscellaneous, sets out the maintenance of data bank and information, obligations of entities, furnishing of returns, etc., to the Central Government, Chairperson, members, etc., to be public servants, protection of action taken in good faith, civil courts not to have jurisdiction, cognizance of certain offences, delegation, power to remove difficulties, power of the Central Government to make rules, power of the Board to make regulations, rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament, and transitional arrangements.

The Act contains various schedules, annexures, appendices, and forms. The Act also contains various footnotes.