Summary:
The Indira Gandhi National Tribal University Act, 2007 establishes and incorporates a teaching and affiliating university at Amarkantak in the State of Madhya Pradesh to facilitate and promote avenues of higher education and research facilities for the tribal population in India. The Act defines the objects, sections, and powers of the university. The university is empowered to provide instruction in various branches of learning, grant degrees and diplomas, organize extra-mural studies, and institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, and medals. The university may also establish regional centers and campuses in tribal areas, collaborate with national and international universities or organizations, and take measures to promote the intellectual, academic, and cultural development of the Scheduled Tribes within the Union of India. The jurisdiction of the university extends to the whole of India, and it is open to all classes, castes, and creeds. However, the university shall have adequate representation of the Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections of society. Every student of the university, other than those pursuing a course of study through distance education, shall reside in a hall or hostel or under such conditions as may be prescribed. The university shall also establish and maintain schools as model schools for the schools of the region. The Visitor of the university is the President of India, who may cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he may direct and address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, advising upon the action to be taken thereon. The university shall have a Chancellor, a Vice-Chancellor, a Pro-Vice-Chancellor, a Registrar, a Finance Officer, a Controller of Examinations, a Librarian, and other officers as may be declared by the Statutes. The authorities of the university include the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the College Development Council, the Boards of Studies, the Finance Committee, and other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes. The Act also provides for the appointment, powers, and duties of the officers and authorities of the university. The university shall have a common seal and shall sue and be sued by the said name. The university shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal. The Act came into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.