Summary:
The SIKKIM UNIVERSITY ACT, 2006 was enacted on 10th January, 2007. The Act establishes and incorporates a teaching and affiliating University in the State of Sikkim, with the objective of disseminating and advancing knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in various branches of learning, promoting innovations in teaching-learning process, inter-disciplinary studies and research, educating and training manpower for the development of the State of Sikkim, and improving the social and economic conditions and welfare of the people of that State.

The University has the power to grant degrees, diplomas, or certificates, organize and undertake extramural studies, training, and extension services, institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or academic positions, recognize educational institutions for various purposes, and establish, with the prior approval of the Central Government, specialized laboratories or other units for research and instruction.

The University's jurisdiction extends to the whole of the State of Sikkim. It is open to all classes, castes, and creed, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any person any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof.

The President of India is the Visitor of the University, and the Governor of the State of Sikkim is the Chief Rector. The University has various authorities, including the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the College Development Council, the Board of Studies, the Finance Committee, and other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes.

The Statutes, Ordinances, and Regulations made under the Act are subject to the provisions of the Act and shall be published in the Official Gazette. The Statutes may provide for the constitution, powers, and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide.

The Act also provides for the appointment of officers of the University, including the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Deans of Schools, the Registrar, the Finance Officer, the Controller of Examinations, the Librarian, and other officers. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.

The University shall have the power to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by the Visitor and may, after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.

The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.

The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.

All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become vacant, and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.

No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.

Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University, and any dispute arising out of the contract shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration.

Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration.

Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal or the management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be.

The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.

Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions. If, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.

The power to make Statutes, Ordinances, or Regulations shall include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, Ordinances, or Regulations or any of them, but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance, or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance, or Regulation may be applicable.

The Act contains transitional provisions for the appointment of the first Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, Registrar, and Finance Officer, and for the composition of the first Court, the first Executive Council, the first College Development Council, and the first Academic Council.

The Schedule to the Act contains the first Statutes of the University, which provide for the appointment and powers of the Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor, the appointment and powers of the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the appointment and powers of the Deans of Schools, the appointment and powers of the Registrar, the appointment and powers of the Finance Officer, the appointment and powers of the Controller of Examinations, the appointment and powers of the Librarian, the meetings of the Court, the powers and functions of the Executive Council, the powers and functions of the Academic Council, and the appointment and powers of the Deans of Schools and the Boards of Studies.