Summary:
The Tripura University Act, 2006 establishes and incorporates the Tripura University in the State of Tripura. The University is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall have the power to sue and be sued by the said name. The headquarters of the University shall be at Agartala. The objects of the University are to disseminate and advance knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may determine, and to make provisions for integrated courses in humanities, natural and physical sciences, social sciences, forestry and other allied disciplines in the educational programmes of the University. The University shall have the power to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause. The University shall also have the power to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or academic positions, and to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto. The University shall have the power to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or Institution of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine. The University shall have the power to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes. The University shall have the power to establish, with the prior approval of the Central Government, such Centres and specialised laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects. The University shall have the power to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary. The University shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes. The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of the State of Tripura. The University shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof. The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University. The Governor of the State of Tripura shall be the Chief Rector of the University. The Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Deans of Faculties, the Registrar, the Finance Officer, the Controller of Examinations, and the Librarian shall be the officers of the University. The Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the College Development Council, the Board of Studies, the Finance Committee and such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University shall be the authorities of the University. The Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations shall provide for the constitution, powers and functions of these authorities and other bodies of the University, the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide. The University shall have the power to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by the Visitor and the Visitor may direct the University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him. The University shall have the power to make Ordinances, consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for all or any of the following matters, namely: the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such; the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University; the medium of instruction and examination; the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same; the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University; the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators; the conditions of residence of the students of the University; the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence and teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them; the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Specialised Laboratories and other Committees; the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions and other agencies not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit including learned bodies or associations; the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for improving the academic life of the University; the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; the supervision of management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the privileges of the University; the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are to be or may be, provided for by the Ordinances. The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section (1): Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed shall be considered by the Executive Council. Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for re-consideration. A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless it has been assented to by the Visitor. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the Visitor may make new or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section (1), during the period of three years immediately after the commencement of this Act: Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament. The Visitor may direct the University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably. The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply to such fund, as if it were a Government provident fund. If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person or body who appoints, elects or co-opts the member whose place has become vacant and person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members. Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the employee concerned. Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the request of such employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor. The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal. Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2), shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of the section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996). Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 36 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub-section. Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal or the management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to time, require. Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the employee concerned. Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the request of such employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor. The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal. Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2), shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of the section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996). Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 36 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub-section. Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal or the management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.