Summary:

THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS ACT, 2007 (ACT NO. 56 OF 2007) was enacted on 29th December, 2007. The Act provides for more effective provisions for the maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens guaranteed and recognized under the Constitution. The Act applies to the whole of India and to citizens of India outside India.

The Act defines various terms such as children, maintenance, minor, parent, prescribed, property, relative, senior citizen, State Government, Tribunal, and welfare. The Act also has an overriding effect on any other enactment or instrument.

Chapter II of the Act deals with the maintenance of parents and senior citizens. A senior citizen or a parent who is unable to maintain himself from his own earning or out of the property owned by him can make an application under section 5 against one or more of his children not being a minor or against a childless senior citizen's relative. The obligation of the children or relative to maintain a senior citizen extends to the needs of such citizen so that he may lead a normal life. The obligation of the children to maintain his or her parent extends to the needs of such parent either father or mother or both, as the case may be, so that such parent may lead a normal life.

An application for maintenance can be made by a senior citizen or a parent or by any other person or organization authorized by him or by the Tribunal suomotu. The Tribunal may during the pendency of the proceeding order such children or relative to make a monthly allowance for the interim maintenance of such senior citizen including parent and to pay the same to such senior citizen including parent as the Tribunal may from time to time direct.

The Tribunal shall hold an inquiry for determining the amount of maintenance. The Tribunal shall issue a process for procuring the presence of children or relative against whom the application is filed, and shall have the power of a Judicial Magistrate of first class as provided under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The Tribunal shall take evidence in the presence of the children or relative against whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be made and shall be recorded in the manner prescribed for summons cases.

The Tribunal before hearing an application under section 5 may, refer the same to a Conciliation Officer, and such Conciliation Officer shall submit his findings within one month, and if an amicable settlement has been arrived at, the Tribunal shall pass an order to that effect.

Chapter II also deals with the constitution of Maintenance Tribunal, jurisdiction and procedure, alteration in allowance, enforcement of order of maintenance, option regarding maintenance in certain cases, deposit of maintenance amount, award of interest where any claim is allowed, constitution of Appellate Tribunal, appeals, right to legal representation, maintenance officer, establishment of old age homes, provisions for medical care of senior citizen, protection of life and property of senior citizen, measures for publicity, awareness, etc., for welfare of senior citizens, authorities who may be specified for implementing the provisions of this Act, transfer of property to be void in certain circumstances, offences and procedure for trial, officers to be public servants, jurisdiction of civil courts barred, protection of action taken in good faith, power to remove difficulties, power of Central Government to give directions, power of Central Government to review, power of State Government to make rules, and miscellaneous provisions.

The Act aims to provide for more effective provisions for the maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens, and to ensure that they are not neglected or abandoned by their children or relatives. The Act provides for the establishment of old age homes, provisions for medical care of senior citizens, and protection of life and property of senior citizens. The Act also provides for measures for publicity, awareness, etc., for the welfare of senior citizens. The Act also deals with offences and procedure for trial, power to remove difficulties, power of Central Government to give directions, power of Central Government to review, power of State Government to make rules, and miscellaneous provisions.