The Indian Maritime University Act, 2008 (Act No. 22 of 2008) was enacted on 11th November, 2008, to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating university at the national level for facilitating and promoting maritime studies, research, and excellence in marine science and technology, marine environment, and related fields. The University is headquartered in Chennai with its campuses in Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, and Vishakhapatnam.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act and the Statutes made thereunder, such as "academic staff," "academic council," "Board of Affiliation and Recognition," "Board of Studies," "campus," "Certificate of Competency," "Chancellor," "college," "Court," "department," "Director-General," "distance education system," "employee," "Executive Council," "Finance Committee," "governing body," "hall," "institution," "notification," "off-shore campus," "Planning Board," "Principal," "recognised institution," "recognised teachers," "school," "Statutes," "Ordinances," "Regulations," "University," "teachers of the University," and "University Grants Commission."

The objects of the University, as per Section 4 of the Act, include facilitating and promoting maritime studies, training, research, and extension work with a focus on emerging areas of studies like oceanography, maritime history, maritime laws, maritime security, search and rescue, transportation of dangerous cargo, environmental studies, and other related fields. The University also aims to achieve excellence in these and connected fields, promote advanced knowledge, provide institutional and research facilities, promote innovations in teaching-learning process, inter-disciplinary studies and research, and pay special attention to the promotion of educational and economic interests and welfare of the people of India.

The University has the power to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as it may determine, make provision for research and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge, make provision for recognised institutions to undertake special studies, establish and maintain campuses, colleges, institutions, departments, laboratories, libraries, museums, centres of research, training and specialised studies, establish and maintain hostels, health centres and other related facilities, grant diplomas, certificates, degrees, and other academic distinctions, confer honorary degrees or other distinctions, organise and undertake extra-mural studies, training and extension services, institute Directorships, Principalships, Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships and other teaching or academic positions, provide for the terms and conditions of service of Directors, Principals, teachers, and other members of the academic staff appointed by the University, teachers and other members of the academic staff appointed by any college or institution, and any other employee of recognised college or institution, whether appointed by the University or such college or institution, appoint persons working in any other University or organisation as teachers of the University for a specified period, and recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may determine.

The Act also provides for the establishment of various bodies such as the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Planning Board, the Finance Committee, the Board of Affiliation and Recognition, and the Board of Studies, to oversee the functioning of the University. The Chancellor is the head of the University, and the Vice-Chancellor is the principal executive officer of the University. The Act also provides for the appointment of other officers and employees of the University.

In summary, the Indian Maritime University Act, 2008, establishes and incorporates a teaching and affiliating university at the national level for facilitating and promoting maritime studies, research, and excellence in marine science and technology, marine environment, and related fields. The University has the power to provide for instruction, research, and extension work in various branches of learning, grant diplomas, certificates, degrees, and other academic distinctions, and establish various bodies to oversee its functioning. The Act also provides for the appointment of the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, and other officers and employees of the University.
Summary:

The document outlines the powers and functions of a University in India, as per the specified Act. The University has the authority to create various posts, appoint teaching and non-teaching staff, and collaborate with other universities or institutions in India or abroad. It can also approve appointments of persons for imparting instructions in any institution admitted to its privileges and withdraw such approval. The University has the responsibility to ensure that proper standards of instruction, teaching, and training are maintained by the recognized institutions, and adequate library, laboratory, hospital, workshop, and other academic facilities are provided for. It can also prescribe fees and other charges to be levied on the students of self-financing colleges and institutions and coordinate the work of different colleges and institutions working in the same and similar areas. The University has the power to set up central facilities like computer centers, training centers, instrumentation centers, libraries, simulators, and curriculum development centers for different subjects. It can also recognize, guide, supervise, and control Halls not maintained by the University and other accommodations for students and withdraw any such recognition. The University can make provisions for research and advisory services and determine standards of admission to the University, which may include examinations, evaluation, or any other method of testing. It can institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, assistantships, medals, and prizes. The University can also regulate the conduct of the students of the University and of colleges and institutions and control and regulate admission of students for various courses of study in Departments, recognized institutions, schools, and centers of studies. It can regulate and enforce discipline among the employees and students of the University and take such disciplinary measures as may be deemed necessary. The University can prescribe a code of conduct for managements of recognized colleges and institutions and make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees of the University and those of colleges and institutions. It can acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the University. The University can borrow money for the purposes of the University with the approval of the Central Government. It can assess needs of the students in terms of subjects, fields of specialization, levels of education and training of technical manpower, both on short and long term basis, and initiate necessary programs to meet these needs. The University can establish such campuses, special centers, specialized laboratories, or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objectives. The University can also arrange for the training to upgrade maritime standard of the employees of the industry and institutes and levy fees for such training as prescribed by the Statutes. The University shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race, or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose on any person any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof. The University shall have a University Fund which shall include any contribution or grant made by the Central Government or an instrumentality of the Central Government, any contribution or grant made by the State Governments, any contribution from the shipping companies, off-shore construction companies and diving companies, any bequests, donations, endowments, or other grants made by any private individual or institution, income received by the University from fees and charges, and amounts received from any other source. The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University, who may cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories, and equipment, and of any college, institution, or Campus maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges, and also of the examinations, instruction, and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, colleges, or institutions. The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories, and equipment, and of any college, institution, or Campus maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges, and also of the examinations, instruction, and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, colleges, or institutions. The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University, make orders or give directions in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with such orders or directions.
Summary:

The document outlines the powers and functions of various authorities and officers in an Indian university. The Visitor, who is usually the Governor of the state or a nominee, has the power to inspect universities, colleges, and institutions, and issue directions to them. The Visitor can also annul any proceedings of the university that are not in conformity with the Act, Statutes, or Ordinances, after giving an opportunity to the Registrar to show cause.

The Chancellor is the head of the university and is appointed by the Visitor. The Chancellor presides over the convocations of the university and confers degrees. The Vice-Chancellor is the principal executive and academic officer of the university and exercises general supervision and control over its affairs. The Vice-Chancellor can exercise any power conferred on any authority of the university if immediate action is necessary and report to such authority later.

The Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Deans of Schools, Directors, Registrars, and the Finance Officer are appointed in the manner prescribed by the Statutes. They exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

The university has several authorities, including the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Planning Board, the Board of Affiliation and Recognition, the Boards of Schools, and the Finance Committee. The Court, which consists of members prescribed by the Statutes, reviews the broad policies and programmes of the university, considers and passes resolutions on the annual report and accounts, advises the Visitor on matters referred to it, and performs such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

The Executive Council is the principal executive body of the university and exercises general supervision and control over its affairs. The Academic Council is the principal academic body of the university and has the control and supervision over the maintenance of standards of instruction, education, and examination within the university. The Board of Affiliation and Recognition is responsible for admitting colleges and institutions to the privileges of the university. The Planning Board is the principal planning body of the university and is responsible for monitoring its development. The Constitution, term of office of members, and powers and functions of these authorities are prescribed by the Statutes.
Summary:

The document outlines various provisions related to the governance and administration of an Indian university. It includes provisions related to the constitution, powers, and functions of various bodies and authorities of the university, such as the Boards of Schools, the Finance Committee, and other authorities. The document also specifies the process for making and amending statutes, which are the fundamental rules and regulations of the university. The Statutes can cover various matters including the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the University, the election and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide. It also provides for the making of Ordinances, which are subsidiary rules and regulations that can cover matters such as admission of students, courses of study, conduct of examinations, and appointment of employees. The document also specifies the process for preparing and submitting the annual report and accounts of the university to the Court, the Visitor, and the Central Government.
Summary:

The document outlines several sections of an Act related to the establishment and functioning of a university in India. Here are the key points:

* Section 34 outlines the conditions of service of employees of the university. Every employee must have a written contract of service, and a copy of the contract must be kept with the university and furnished to the employee.
* Section 35 establishes a Tribunal of Arbitration to resolve any disputes arising out of the contract between the university and any employee. The decision of the Tribunal is final and binding on the parties.
* Section 36 outlines the procedure for appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students. Any student whose name has been removed from the rolls of the university or debarred from appearing at examinations for more than one year may appeal to the Executive Council, and any dispute arising out of disciplinary action taken by the university against a student may be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration.
* Section 37 gives every employee or student of the university or of a college or institution maintained by the university the right to appeal within a prescribed time to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the university or of the Principal of any college or institution.
* Section 38 allows the university to constitute provident or pension funds or provide insurance schemes for the benefit of its employees, subject to conditions prescribed by the Statutes.
* Section 39 provides that any question as to whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the university shall be referred to the Visitor, whose decision shall be final.
* Section 40 provides that where any authority of the university is given power by this Act or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall consist of the members of the authority concerned and such other persons as the authority may think fit.
* Section 41 provides that all casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any authority or other body of the university shall be filled as soon as may be by the person or body who appointed, elected or co-opted the member whose place has become vacant, and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person of whose place he fills would have been a member.
* Section 42 provides that no act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the university shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
* Section 43 provides that no suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer or other employee of the university for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
* Section 44 provides that a copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, proceedings, resolution of any authority or Committee of the university, or other documents in possession of the university, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the university, if certified by the Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, proceedings, resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any other law for the time being in force.
* Section 45 provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
* Section 46 contains transitional provisions related to the appointment of the first Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, Registrar, Finance Officer, Court, Executive Council, and Planning Board, and the exercise of the powers of the Academic Council by the Planning Board until the Academic Council is constituted under the provisions of this Act and the Statutes.
* Section 47 provides that every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and laid before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, and if both Houses agree in making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be. The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations includes the power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.
* Section 48 provides that the completion of courses of studies in colleges or institutions affiliated to the university shall be governed by the regulations made under this Act.

In summary, the document outlines various provisions related to the establishment and functioning of a university in India, including the conditions of service of employees, the resolution of disputes, the appeal process for students, the powers of authorities and committees, and the transitional and publication provisions. The Act also provides for the establishment of a Tribunal of Arbitration to resolve disputes between the university and its employees, and for the appointment of a Registrar and a Finance Officer by the Visitor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor. The document also includes provisions related to the publication of Statutes, Ordinances, and Regulations in the Official Gazette and their laying before Parliament.
Summary:

The document summarizes the Indian Maritime University Act, 2008, which establishes the Indian Maritime University (IMU) as a central university to promote maritime studies and research in the country. The Act includes provisions related to the admission of students, transfer of assets and options of employees, role of the Central Government and Director-General of Shipping, statutes of the University, and powers and duties of the Vice-Chancellor.

Section 49 of the Act allows students who were studying for a degree, diploma, or certificate in any University before the admission of their college or institution to the privileges of the IMU to complete their course, and the IMU shall provide for their instructions and examination accordingly.

Section 50 of the Act states that the IMU shall be bound by the directions on questions of policy given by the Central Government in writing from time to time, and the decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.

The Schedule of the Act contains the statutes of the University, including the appointment, tenure, and emoluments of the Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor. The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor recommended by the Executive Council from amongst three persons of eminence in the field of academic, maritime, public administration, or public life of the country. The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons having experience in the field of human resource management, maritime, public administration, marine or port administration.

The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University and shall hold office for a term of five years or until he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier. The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor shall be as fixed by the Central Government from time to time. The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University. The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline in the University and may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he may deem fit.
Summary:

The document outlines the roles, responsibilities, and terms of office for various administrative positions at an Indian university. The positions discussed include the Vice-Chancellor, Pro-Vice-Chancellors, Registrars, and the Finance Officer. The Vice-Chancellor is the head of the university and is appointed by the Visitor (a high-ranking official, usually the President or Governor of a state) after consultation with the Executive Council. The Vice-Chancellor's term of office is five years, and they may be eligible for reappointment. The Vice-Chancellor has a variety of responsibilities, including presiding over meetings of the Executive Council and the Academic Council, and representing the university in various capacities. The Pro-Vice-Chancellors assist the Vice-Chancellor in their duties and are appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of a selection committee. They serve for a term of five years and may be eligible for reappointment, but they must retire by the age of sixty-five. The Registrars are appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of a selection committee and are responsible for managing the administrative affairs of the university. They serve for a term of five years and may be eligible for reappointment, but they must retire by the age of sixty-two. The Finance Officer is appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of a selection committee and is responsible for managing the financial affairs of the university. They serve for a term of five years and may be eligible for reappointment, but they must retire by the age of sixty-two. The document also outlines the duties and responsibilities of these positions, as well as the process for filling vacancies and dealing with disciplinary matters.
Summary:

The University Act outlines the composition and powers of various bodies within the university. The Executive Council is responsible for the management and administration of the university's revenue and property, and for conducting all administrative affairs not otherwise provided for. The Council has the power to create teaching and academic posts, appoint faculty and staff, and manage finances and investments. The Vice-Chancellor serves as the Chairperson of the Council, and the Registrar serves as the Secretary. Seven members constitute a quorum for a meeting. Members of the Council, other than ex-officio members, serve for a term of three years.

The Academic Council is responsible for maintaining the standards of instruction, examination, and research in the university. The Council recommends to the Executive Council the number and qualifications of teachers and academic staff, and the emoluments of such posts. The Council also advises the Executive Council on academic matters. The Vice-Chancellor serves as the Chairperson of the Council, and the Registrar serves as the Secretary. Twelve members constitute a quorum for a meeting.

The Court is the supreme body of the university, and consists of members appointed by the Visitor, the Chancellor, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, and other specified bodies. The Court meets annually to discuss the university's working during the previous year, and to review the receipts and expenditure, balance-sheet, and financial estimates for the next year. Twelve members constitute a quorum for a meeting.

The document also outlines the roles and responsibilities of the Dean, Heads of Departments, Proctors, Librarian, and other officers of the university. The Dean is the Head of the School and is responsible for the conduct and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School. The Heads of Departments are appointed from among the Professors in the Department on a rotation basis. The Proctors are appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor and are responsible for maintaining discipline and order in the university. The Librarian is appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations of the Selection Committee and is responsible for managing the university's library.
Summary:

The document outlines the composition, quorum, tenure, and powers of various bodies within an Indian university, specifically related to maritime studies. The Court is the supreme authority of the university and consists of ex-officio members such as the Vice-Chancellor, Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Deans, Heads of Teaching Departments, Registrar, Librarian, Proctor, and Finance Officer. In addition, the Court includes representatives of teachers, non-teaching staff, affiliated institutions, Parliament, and industry. The Academic Council is responsible for exercising general supervision over the academic policies of the university and has the power to frame regulations and rules regarding academic functioning, discipline, residences, admissions, fees, and concessions. The Planning Board is the principal planning body of the university and is responsible for reviewing educational programs offered by the university and creating an atmosphere and environment conducive to value-oriented education. The university shall have such Schools of Studies as may be specified by the Ordinances, and every School shall have a School Board with members nominated by the Executive Council. The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
Summary:

The document outlines the rules and regulations for the functioning of the University of Delhi. It includes provisions for the establishment and abolition of departments, the constitution of boards of studies, and the formation of a finance committee. The finance committee is responsible for examining the university's accounts, scrutinizing proposals for expenditure, and recommending limits for the total recurring and non-recurring expenditure for the year. The document also includes provisions for the appointment of teachers and other academic staff, including the formation of selection committees and the mode of appointment. The university may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post on such terms and conditions as it deems fit. The university may also appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other university or organization for undertaking a joint project. The document also includes provisions for the appointment of teachers and other academic staff for a fixed term.
Summary:

The document outlines various statutes and regulations related to an Indian university, specifically focusing on tenure, recognition of teachers, committees, terms and conditions of service, seniority, removal of employees, honorary degrees, withdrawal of degrees, and maintenance of discipline.

1. Tenure: The Executive Council may appoint a person for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.
2. Recognition of Teachers: The qualifications of recognized teachers are prescribed by the Ordinances. Applications for recognition are made in the manner laid down in the Ordinances, and no teacher shall be recognized except on the recommendation of a Selection Committee.
3. Committees: Any authority of the University may appoint Standing, Special or Search Committees and delegate any subject to them.
4. Terms and Conditions of Service and Code of Conduct: Teachers and other academic staff are governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as specified in the Statutes, Ordinances, and Regulations. Every teacher and member of academic staff shall be appointed on a written contract.
5. Seniority List: Seniority is determined according to the length of continuous service in a particular grade, and the Registrar maintains a complete and up-to-date seniority list.
6. Removal of Employees: The Executive Council or the appointing authority has the power to remove an employee on grounds of misconduct, and the employee has the right to show cause against the action proposed.
7. Honorary Degrees: The Executive Council may recommend the conferment of honorary degrees to the Visitor, and it may also withdraw any honorary degree conferred.
8. Withdrawal of Degrees, etc.: The Executive Council may withdraw any degree or academic distinction for good and sufficient cause.
9. Maintenance of Discipline: All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the University vest in the Vice-Chancellor, who may delegate these powers to a Proctor or other officers.
The document outlines various rules and regulations regarding the administration of a university in India. Here is a summary of the key points:

1. The Heads of teaching Departments in the University may make supplementary rules as necessary for maintaining discipline among students.
2. At the time of admission, every student must sign a declaration submitting to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice-Chancellor and other authorities of the University.
3. The Principal of a college or institution has the power to regulate discipline and disciplinary action for students not maintained by the University.
4. Colleges and institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University may be admitted to certain privileges of the University under certain conditions, including the presence of a Governing Body with at least two teachers from the University and three representatives of the teaching staff.
5. The admission of colleges and institutions to the privileges of the University is subject to the recommendation of the Academic Council based on the report of a Committee of Inspection.
6. The service conditions of the administrative and other non-academic staff of every college or institution referred to in clause (2) shall be such as may be laid down in the Ordinances.
7. Every college or institution admitted to the privilege of the University shall be inspected at least once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed by the Academic Council.
8. The Executive Council may withdraw any privileges granted to a college or an institution at any time it considers that the college or institution does not satisfy any of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the college or institution was admitted to such privileges.
9. The Ordinances may prescribe other conditions for the admission of colleges and institutions to the privileges of the University and for the withdrawal of those privileges.
10. The constitution of the Board of affiliation and recognition and the terms of office of its members shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
11. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
12. If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision shall be final.
13. A person who is not ordinarily resident in India shall be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the University.
14. The Alumni Association for the University shall have a subscription for membership prescribed by the Ordinances.
15. The Students' Council shall be constituted for every academic year and shall make suggestions to the appropriate authorities of the University regarding programmes of studies, students' welfare, and other matters of importance.
Summary:

The document outlines various rules and regulations regarding the governance of a university in India.

Section 76 details the process for the creation of Ordinances, which are laws made by the Executive Council of the university. These Ordinances must be proposed by the Academic Council and can only be amended or rejected by the Executive Council. If the Executive Council rejects or returns a draft Ordinance, the Academic Council may consider it again and, if it is reaffirmed by a two-thirds majority, it may be sent back to the Executive Council for reconsideration. The Visitor, or head of the university, has the power to disallow any Ordinance and their decision is final.

Section 77 outlines the procedure for making Regulations, which are rules made by the authorities of the university for various matters. These Regulations must be made consistent with the Act, the Statutes, and the Ordinances and must provide for the giving of notice to members of the authorities of the dates of meetings and the business to be considered at meetings. The Executive Council may direct the amendment or annulment of any Regulation.

Section 46 allows for the delegation of powers by any officer or authority of the university to any other officer or authority or person under their control, with the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated continues to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.

The Equivalence Committee, established by the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Government of India, has recommended equivalences between existing teaching posts in four Government Maritime Institutes and equivalent posts in the proposed university. These equivalences are outlined in a table in the document.

The fees charged by the university shall be reviewed after every three years.

Various forms and footnotes are also included in the document.