Summary:

The South Asian University Act, 2008, establishes the South Asian University (SAU) as a non-state, non-profit, self-governing international educational institution with a regional focus. The main campus of the University is located in India. The legal capacity of the University includes the power to confer degrees, diplomas, and certificates; the capacity to contract; to sue and be sued in its name; to acquire, hold, and dispose of properties; to establish campuses and centers in the region; and to make rules, regulations, and bye-laws for the operation of the University.

The objectives and functions of the University include creating a world-class institution of learning that will bring together the brightest and most dedicated students from all countries of South Asia; building a South Asian community of learning where every student will be able to develop her/his fullest intellectual potential and to create a South Asian community by strengthening regional consciousness; imparting education towards capacity building of the South Asian nations in the domain of science, technology, and other areas of higher learning vital for improving their quality of life; contributing to the promotion of regional peace and security by bringing together the future leaders of South Asia and enhancing their understanding of each other's perspectives; fostering in the students sound civic sense and training them to become useful citizens of democratic societies.

The University is a non-profit public-private partnership that will seek support from each of the national governments of member states and from other sources but will be autonomous and accountable to its board of trustees/governors. The University and its campuses and centers shall be exempted from paying and from collecting all direct and indirect forms of taxes and duties for the establishment and operations of the University. The University has the right to accept inter vivos as well as testamentary gifts, contributions, and donations in cash or in kind for the objectives of the University. All such gifts and donations from any legal or physical person are fully deductible without any limit against the income of such donor or contributor in the respective Founding States.

The University shall be governed by a Governing Board, composed of two members from each member state, and will be headed by a Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be elected from among the members of the Governing Board. Each member of the Governing Board shall serve office for a fixed term of three years and shall not hold office for more than two consecutive terms. The members shall be selected from amongst the distinguished persons from the region and shall be responsible for the overall policies and directions of the University. The powers and functions of the Chairperson of the Governing Board and the role of the Board shall be decided as per the rules and regulations of the University.

The University shall be headed by a President, appointed by the Governing Board. The appointment, tenure, powers, and functions shall be decided as per the rules and regulations of the University. The President shall also be the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and an ex officio member of the Governing Board. The President as the CEO of the University, will report to the Board and hold office at the pleasure of the Board. He will be responsible for implementing the vision and the foundation statement of the University, ensuring the purpose and objectives of the University, upholding uniformly high academic standards, and fulfilling the policy directives of the Board of the University.

The Member States shall provide appropriate visas to the students, faculty, and staff for travel in all the SAARC Member States and grant necessary resident permits for students, faculty, and administrative staff to work in the University and its different campuses, centers, and collaborative educational institutions. The Agreement shall facilitate the mutual recognition of degrees and certificates awarded by the University in all the SAARC Member States at par with the degrees and certificates issued by their respective national universities/institutions.