The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (Act No. 35 of 2009) is a law in India that provides for free and compulsory education to all children in the age group of six to fourteen years. The Act was enacted on 26th August, 2009, and came into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.

The Act has two chapters, namely, Chapter I - Preliminary and Chapter II - Right to Free and Compulsory Education. Chapter I deals with the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act, and defines various terms used in the Act. Chapter II provides for the right of children to free and compulsory education and lays down the duties of the appropriate Government, local authority, and parents in this regard.

The Act provides that every child in the age group of six to fourteen years shall have the right to free and compulsory education in a neighborhood school till the completion of his or her elementary education. The Act also provides that no child shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may prevent him or her from pursuing and completing the elementary education.

The Act also provides for special provisions for children not admitted to, or who have not completed, elementary education. It provides that where a child above six years of age has not been admitted in any school or though admitted, could not complete his or her elementary education, then, he or she shall be admitted in a class appropriate to his or her age.

The Act also provides for the right of transfer to other schools and lays down the procedure for seeking admission in such other schools. It provides that the Head-teacher or in-charge of the school where such child was last admitted shall immediately issue the transfer certificate, and delay in producing the transfer certificate shall not be a ground for either delaying or denying admission in such other school.

The Act also imposes duties on the appropriate Government, local authority, and parents in relation to the provision of free and compulsory education to children. It provides that the appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory elementary education to every child, ensure availability of a neighborhood school, ensure that the child belonging to weaker section and the child belonging to disadvantaged group are not discriminated against and prevented from pursuing and completing elementary education, provide infrastructure including school building, teaching staff, and learning equipment, provide special training facility, ensure good quality elementary education conforming to the standards and norms specified in the Schedule, ensure timely prescribing of curriculum and courses of study for elementary education, and provide training facility for teachers.

The Act also provides that every local authority shall provide free and compulsory elementary education to every child, ensure availability of a neighborhood school, ensure that the child belonging to weaker section and the child belonging to disadvantaged group are not discriminated against and prevented from pursuing and completing elementary education, maintain records of children up to the age of fourteen years residing within its jurisdiction, ensure and monitor admission, attendance, and completion of elementary education by every child residing within its jurisdiction, provide infrastructure including school building, teaching staff, and learning material, provide special training facility, ensure good quality elementary education conforming to the standards and norms specified in the Schedule, ensure timely prescribing of curriculum and courses of study for elementary education, provide training facility for teachers, ensure admission of children of migrant families, monitor functioning of schools within its jurisdiction, and decide the academic calendar.

The Act also provides that it shall be the duty of every parent or guardian to admit or cause to be admitted his or her child or ward, as the case may be, to an elementary education in the neighborhood school.

The Act also provides for the establishment of schools by the appropriate Government and local authority, and lays down the sharing of financial and other responsibilities between the Central Government and the State Governments. It also provides for the development of a framework of national curriculum and the development and enforcement of standards for training of teachers by the Central Government.

The Act also provides for the prohibition of capitation fee and screening procedure for admission, and lays down the proof of age for admission and no denial of admission. It also provides for the prohibition of holding back and expulsion of children.

The Act also provides for the prohibition of physical punishment and mental harassment to children, and lays down the duties of schools and teachers in this regard. It also provides for the prohibition of establishment of schools without obtaining certificate of recognition, and lays down the norms and standards for schools.

The Act also provides for the constitution of School Management Committees and their functions, and lays down the procedure for the preparation of School Development Plan. It also provides for the qualifications for appointment and terms and conditions of service of teachers, and lays down their duties and redressal of grievances.

The Act also provides for the Pupil-Teacher Ratio and filling up of vacancies of teachers, and prohibits the deployment of teachers for non-educational purposes and private tuition by teachers. It also provides for the curriculum and evaluation procedure, examination and completion certificate, and protection of the right of children.

The Act also provides for the monitoring of child's right to education, redressal of grievances, constitution of National Advisory Council and State Advisory Council, and power to issue directions. It also provides for previous sanction for prosecution, protection of action taken in good faith, power of appropriate Government to make rules, and power of Central Government to remove difficulties.

The Schedule to the Act lays down the norms and standards for a school, including the numbers of teachers, building, minimum number of working days and instructional hours, teaching learning equipment, library, play material, games and sports equipment, and arrangements for securing the school building by boundary wall or fencing.

The Act is a significant step towards ensuring the right of children to free and compulsory education, and lays down the duties and responsibilities of the appropriate Government, local authority, and parents in this regard. It also provides for the prohibition of capitation fee and screening procedure for admission, physical punishment and mental harassment to children, and establishment of schools without obtaining certificate of recognition. The Act also provides for the curriculum and evaluation procedure, examination and completion certificate, and protection of the right of children. The Act also provides for the monitoring of child's right to education, redressal of grievances, constitution of National Advisory Council and State Advisory Council, and power to issue directions. The Schedule to the Act lays down the norms and standards for a school, including the numbers of teachers, building, minimum number of working days and instructional hours, teaching learning equipment, library, play material, games and sports equipment, and arrangements for securing the school building by boundary wall or fencing.