Summary:
THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2010 is an Act to implement the decisions arrived at the Second East Asia Summit held on the 15th January, 2007, at Philippines and subsequently at the Fourth East Asia Summit held on the 25th October, 2009, at Thailand for the establishment of the Nalanda University in the State of Bihar as an international institution for pursuit of intellectual, philosophical, historical and spiritual studies and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

The Act defines the Nalanda University as an institution of national importance. It establishes the Nalanda University in the State of Bihar and declares it to be an institution of national importance. The University is a non-profit public-private partnership, which shall seek support from each of the Member States and from other sources but shall be autonomous and accountable to the Governing Board.

The Act has 44 sections and 4 schedules. The sections cover various aspects related to the establishment, incorporation, jurisdiction, Governing Board, powers and functions, objectives, officers, authorities, Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations, annual report, annual accounts, conditions of service of employees, procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students, right to appeal, provident and pension funds, disputes as to the constitution of authorities and bodies, filling of casual vacancies, proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies, protection of action taken in good faith, power to remove difficulties, Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before Parliament, transitional provisions, and repeal of University of Nalanda Act.

The Act provides for the establishment of a Governing Board, which shall be responsible for all the policies and directions of the University and management of its affairs. The Governing Board shall consist of the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, five members from amongst the Member States which provide maximum financial assistance during a period of three years to be nominated by the Member States, one member, not below the rank of Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, to be nominated by the Central Government, two members, representing the State Government of Bihar, to be nominated by the State Government, one member not below the rank of Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Human Resource Development, to be nominated by the Central Government, and three members from amongst the persons being renowned academician or educationist, to be nominated by the Central Government.

The Act also provides for the appointment of the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Registrars, the Finance Officer, the Controller of Examinations, and the Librarian. The powers and duties of these officers are to be prescribed by the Statutes.

The Act empowers the University to establish or maintain centres at such other places in India as it may deem fit and to establish study centres outside India with the approval of the Governing Board. The University is also empowered to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as it may, from time to time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge.

The Act provides that the University shall be open to all persons irrespective of gender, caste, creed, disability, ethnicity or socio-economic background.

The Act provides for the appointment of a Visitor, who shall be the President of India. The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of the University and to submit a report thereon. The Visitor may also cause an inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipments, and of any institution or centre maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges, and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the University.

The Act provides for the establishment of various authorities of the University, including the Governing Board, the Academic Council, the Boards of Schools of Studies, the Finance Committee, and such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University.

The Act empowers the University to make Statutes, Ordinances, and Regulations, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes. The Statutes, Ordinances, and Regulations shall be consistent with this Act, the Statutes, and the Ordinances.

The Act provides for the submission of an annual report of the University to the Visitor and to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament.

The Act provides for the protection of action taken in good faith by any officer or employee of the University.

The Act provides for the removal of difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of this Act.

The Act provides that every Statute, Ordinance, or Regulation made under this Act shall be published in the Gazette of India and the website of the University and shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.

The Act provides for transitional provisions, including the appointment of the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer, the first Board of School of Studies, and the first Academic Council.

The Act repeals the University of Nalanda Act, 2007 (Bihar Act 18 of 2007). However, all appointments, orders, degrees, diplomas, certificates, privileges, proceedings, and actions taken under the repealed Act shall be deemed to have been made, issued, conferred, awarded, granted, or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue in force unless and until they are superseded by any order made under this Act or the Statutes.

The Act has four schedules, which provide for the transfer of certain properties, rights, and liabilities to the University, the transfer of employees to the University, the exemption of the University from the payment of stamp duty, and the repeal of certain enactments.

In conclusion, THE NALANDA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2010 is an Act to establish and incorporate the Nalanda University in the State of Bihar as an international institution for pursuit of intellectual, philosophical, historical and spiritual studies and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act provides for the establishment of a Governing Board, the appointment of various officers, the establishment of authorities, the making of Statutes, Ordinances, and Regulations, the submission of an annual report, the protection of action taken in good faith, the removal of difficulties, and transitional provisions. The Act also repeals the University of Nalanda Act, 2007 (Bihar Act 18 of 2007).