Summary:

THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010

This Act establishes a no-fault liability regime for nuclear damage, with the operator being liable for compensation to victims. The Act applies to nuclear incidents occurring in or over the maritime areas beyond the territorial waters of India, in the exclusive economic zone of India, on board or by a ship or aircraft registered in India, or on or by an artificial island, installation, or structure under the jurisdiction of India. The Act applies only to nuclear installations owned or controlled by the Central Government.

The Act defines various terms, including "nuclear damage," "nuclear fuel," "nuclear reactor," "operator," and "preventive measures." The operator is liable for nuclear damage caused by a nuclear incident occurring in or involving nuclear material coming from the nuclear installation. The liability of the operator is strict and based on the principle of no-fault liability.

The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board is required to notify a nuclear incident within 15 days of its occurrence. The operator is liable for nuclear damage caused by a nuclear incident directly due to a grave natural disaster or an act of armed conflict, hostility, civil war, insurrection, or terrorism. The operator is not liable for nuclear damage caused to the nuclear installation itself, to property on the same site used in connection with the installation, or to the means of transport upon which the nuclear material involved was carried at the time of the nuclear incident.

The maximum amount of liability for each nuclear incident is the rupee equivalent of three hundred million Special Drawing Rights or such higher amount as the Central Government may specify by notification. The liability of an operator for each nuclear incident is rupees one thousand five hundred crores in respect of nuclear reactors having thermal power equal to or above ten MW, rupees three hundred crores in respect of spent fuel reprocessing plants, and rupees one hundred crores in respect of the research reactors having thermal power below ten MW, fuel cycle facilities other than spent fuel reprocessing plants, and transportation of nuclear materials. The Central Government may review the amount of operator's liability from time to time and specify a higher amount.

The Central Government may establish a fund called the Nuclear Liability Fund to meet part of its liability under clause (a) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 7. The operator is required to take out insurance policy or such other financial security or combination of both, covering his liability under sub-section (2) of section 6.

For the purposes of adjudicating upon claims for compensation, the Central Government shall appoint one or more Claims Commissioners for such area as may be specified in that notification. A person is not qualified for appointment as a Claims Commissioner unless he is, or has been, a District Judge or in the service of the Central Government and has held the post not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any other equivalent post in the Central Government. The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner shall be such as may be prescribed.

An application for compensation may be made by a person who has sustained injury, the owner of the property to which damage has been caused, the legal representatives of the deceased, or any agent duly authorized by such person or owner or legal representatives. Every application for compensation before the Claims Commissioner shall be made in such form, containing such particulars and accompanied by such documents, as may be prescribed. The Claims Commissioner shall, after giving notice of such application to the operator and affording an opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of the application within a period of three months from the date of such receipt and make an award accordingly. The Claims Commissioner shall not take into consideration any benefit, reimbursement, or amount received by the applicant in pursuance of contract of insurance taken by him or for members of his family or otherwise.

The operator has a right of recourse where such right is expressly provided for in a contract in writing, the nuclear incident has resulted as a consequence of an act of supplier or his employee, or the nuclear incident has resulted from the act of commission or omission of an individual done with the intent to cause nuclear damage.

The right to claim compensation for nuclear damage shall extinguish if such claim is not made within a period of ten years in the case of damage to property or twenty years in the case of personal injury to any person from the date of occurrence of the incident notified under sub-section (1) of section 3.

Where the Central Government, having regard to the injury or damage caused by a nuclear incident, is of the opinion that it is expedient in public interest that such claims for such damage be adjudicated by the Commission instead of a Claims Commissioner, it may, by notification, establish a Commission for the purpose of this Act. The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and such other Members, not exceeding six, as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.

The Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of three experts from amongst the persons having at least thirty years of experience in nuclear science and a retired Supreme Court Judge. The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed.

A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the Commission unless he has attained the age of fifty-five years and is or has been or qualified to be a Judge of a High Court. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member unless he has attained the age of fifty-five years and has held or is holding or qualified to hold, the post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any other equivalent post in the Central Government and possesses special knowledge in law relating to nuclear liability arising out of nuclear incident or has been a Claims Commissioner for five years.

The Chairperson or a Member may, by a notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office. The Central Government shall remove from office the Chairperson or a Member who has been adjudged an insolvent, has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude, has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member, has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member, or has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest.

A person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as a Chairperson or a Member, was in service of the Government, shall be deemed to have retired from service on the date on which he enters upon office as such.

The Chairperson shall have the power of superintendence in the general administration of the Commission and exercise such powers as may be prescribed. The Commission shall have original jurisdiction to adjudicate upon every application for compensation filed before it under sub-section (1) of section 31 or transferred to it under section 33. The Commission shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure including the places and the times at which it shall have its sittings.

Every proceeding before the Claims Commissioner or the Commission under this Act shall be deemed to be judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193, 219, and 228 of, and for the purposes of section 196 of, the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). No civil court (except the Supreme Court and a High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of any matter which the Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, is empowered to adjudicate under this Act and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.

When an award is made under sub-section (1) of section 16 or under sub-section (6) of section 32, the insurer or any person, as the case may be, who under the contract of insurance or financial security under section 8 is required to pay any amount in terms of such award and to the extent of his liability under such contract, shall deposit that amount within such time and in such manner as the Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, may direct. The operator shall, subject to the maximum liability specified under sub-section (2) of section 6, deposit the remaining amount by which such award exceeds the amount deposited under clause (a). Where any person fails to deposit the amount of award within the period specified in the award, such amount shall be recoverable from such person as arrears of land revenue.

The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as may be prescribed, an annual report giving full account of its activities during that financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government which shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Where the Central Government is satisfied that the purpose for which the Commission established under section 19 has served its purpose, or where the number of cases pending before such Commission is so less that it would not justify the cost of its continued function, or where it considers necessary or expedient so to do, the Central Government may, by notification, dissolve the Commission.