Summary:

The Coinage Act, 2011 is an Act to consolidate the laws relating to coinage and the Mints, the protection of coinage, and to provide for the prohibition of melting or destruction of coins and prohibit the making or the possession thereof for issue. The Act has 28 sections divided into six chapters.

Chapter I, Preliminary, defines the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act and provides definitions for various terms used in the Act.

Chapter II, Establishment of Mints, empowers the Government to establish and abolish Mints, and authorizes the minting of coins by any organization or Government of any foreign country, within or beyond the limits of India.

Chapter III, Coinage, provides for the denominations, dimensions, designs, and composition of coins, the standard weight and remedy, and the legal tender status of coins.

Chapter IV, Diminished, Defaced and Counterfeit Coins, authorizes certain persons to cut, diminish, or deface coins, and provides for the cutting of counterfeit coins.

Chapter V, Offences and Penalties, prohibits the making or melting or destruction of coins, and provides penalties for contravention of the provisions. It also prohibits the bringing of metal pieces for use as coin into India, and provides penalties for offences by companies.

Chapter VI, Miscellaneous, provides for the forfeiture of any coin or metal in relation to which any offence under this Act has been committed, and the non-application of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 to offences under this Act. It also provides that offences under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable, but not compoundable, and amends the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.

The Act also provides for the trial of offences summarily, the protection of action taken in good faith, the power to remove difficulties, the power to make rules, and the laying of rules before Parliament. The Act also provides for the saving of making other coins at Mints, the repeal and savings, the continuance of existing coins, and the non-obstante provision.

The Schedule to the Act provides for the addition, alteration, or omission of certain words and expressions in enactments.

The Annexure to the Act provides for the forms of application for a license to make or import coins, the form of license to make or import coins, the form of declaration to be made by the applicant, and the form of certificate of authentication of coins.

The Appendix to the Act provides for the specimens of the new rupee coin and the new one rupee note.

The Act came into force on 1st September, 2011.