Summary:

The Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 is an Act that provides for and regulates assignment of receivables. It defines key terms such as assignment, assignee, assignor, bank, business enterprise, debtor, factor, factoring business, financial contract, netting agreement, notification, prescribed, property, receivables, Reserve Bank, State Bank of India, Subsidiary Bank, and words and expressions used and not defined in this Act.

The Act requires factors to obtain a certificate of registration from the Reserve Bank to commence or carry on the factoring business. It sets out the requirements for registration and the application process. It also specifies the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Companies Act, 1956, the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005, or the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 that apply to a factor.

The Act also regulates the assignment of receivables. It sets out the rights and obligations of parties to a contract for assignment of receivables. It specifies the notice and discharge requirements for debtors and assignors. It also provides for the payment of interest in case of delayed payments by debtors.

The Act requires factors to file certain particulars of every transaction of assignment of receivables in favour of a factor with the Central Registry to be set-up under section 20 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. It also provides for public inspection of the Central Register.

The Act imposes penalties for non-compliance with the provisions of the Act. It also provides for the prosecution of offences and the offences that may be committed by factors.

The Act contains miscellaneous provisions such as the provisions of this Act to override other laws, the application of other laws not barred, limitation, confidentiality of information, power to exempt, provisions of this Act not to apply or affect in certain cases, power of Central Government to make rules, laying of rules, power to remove difficulties, and amendments to certain enactments.