Summary:
The Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University Act, 2013 establishes and incorporates a national aviation university in India to facilitate and promote aviation studies, research, and education. The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, with the power to acquire, hold, and dispose of property and to contract. The University shall be a teaching, research, and affiliating aviation university, with the power to establish and maintain campuses, departments, laboratories, libraries, museums, centers of research, training, and special studies, and to provide for distance education and off-shore campuses. The University shall have the power to grant degrees, diplomas, and certificates, and to recognize institutions and appoint teachers. The University shall be open to all classes, castes, and creeds, and shall not discriminate on the basis of religion. The University shall have a University Fund, which shall include contributions or grants from the Central Government, State Governments, aviation companies and industry, bequests, donations, endowments, and income from fees and charges. The Visitor of the University shall be the President of India, who may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of the University and to submit a report. The Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary based on the report, and the University shall be bound to comply with such directions. The University shall have a Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, Deans of Schools, Registrar, Finance Officer, Controller of Examinations, and other officers as may be declared by the Statutes. The authorities of the University shall include the Court, Executive Council, Academic Council, Board of Affiliation and Recognition, Boards of Schools, Finance Committee, and such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes. The Statutes, Ordinances, and Regulations of the University shall be consistent with this Act, and the first Statutes shall be framed by the Steering Committee of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The annual accounts of the University shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by such persons as he may authorize in this behalf. Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration. The University shall constitute for the benefit of its employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit. If any question arises as to whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.