Summary:

The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (Act No. 6 of 2014) was enacted on 1st March, 2014, to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh and for matters connected therewith. The Act is divided into three parts.

Part I of the Act deals with preliminary provisions, including the short title, definitions, and interpretation. The term "appointed day" refers to the day appointed by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, for the reorganisation of the State of Andhra Pradesh. The Act also defines various terms used throughout the Act, such as "article," "assembly constituency," "council constituency," "parliamentary constituency," "Election Commission," "existing State of Andhra Pradesh," "law," "notified order," "population ratio," "sitting member," "successor State," "transferred territory," "treasury," and "any reference to a district, mandal, tehsil, taluk or other territorial division of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh."

Part II of the Act deals with the reorganisation of the State of Andhra Pradesh. Section 3 of the Act provides for the formation of the State of Telangana, comprising the territories specified in the section, which were transferred from the existing State of Andhra Pradesh. Section 4 of the Act provides that the remaining territories of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall form the State of Andhra Pradesh. Section 5 of the Act provides that Hyderabad shall be the common capital of the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh for a period not exceeding ten years. The Central Government shall constitute an expert committee to study various alternatives regarding the new capital for the successor State of Andhra Pradesh and make appropriate recommendations within six months from the date of enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. Section 7 of the Act provides that the Governor of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall be the Governor for both the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana for such period as may be determined by the President. The Governor shall have special responsibility for the security of life, liberty, and property of all those who reside in the common capital area, including law and order, internal security, and security of vital installations, and management and allocation of Government buildings in the common capital area. The Governor shall be assisted by two advisors to be appointed by the Central Government. The Central Government shall assist the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana to raise additional police forces. The Central Government shall maintain and administer the Greyhound Training Centre in Hyderabad for a period of three years, after which it shall become the training centre of the State of Telangana. The Central Government shall assist the successor State of Andhra Pradesh to set up a similar state-of-the-art training centre at a place notified by the State Government. The Central Government shall provide financial assistance to the successor States in setting up new operational hubs for Greyhounds at locations notified by the successor States. The Greyhound and OCTOPUS forces of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall be distributed between the successor States after seeking options from the personnel, and each of these forces shall function under the respective Director General of Police of the successor States.

Part III of the Act deals with representation in the legislatures. Section 12 of the Act amends the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution to provide for the allocation of sitting members in the Council of States representing the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Section 13 of the Act provides for the allocation of sitting members in the Legislative Assemblies of the successor States.

In summary, the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 provides for the reorganisation of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh into the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, with Hyderabad as the common capital for a period of ten years. The Act also deals with various matters connected with the reorganisation, including the allocation of sitting members in the legislatures, the distribution of assets and liabilities, the establishment of new institutions, and the administration of the common capital area.
Summary:

The document outlines changes to the Indian laws related to the representation in the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies for the successor states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

The Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) is amended to allocate 25 seats to Andhra Pradesh and 17 seats to Telangana in the House of the People. The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008, is also amended to reflect the new allocation of seats.

The sitting members of the House of the People representing constituencies in the successor states will be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so allotted, and their term of office will remain unaltered.

The number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana is increased to 175 and 119, respectively. The existing members of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh will be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of the successor State of Andhra Pradesh or Telangana, depending on the constituency to which they belong.

The Legislative Councils of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana will consist of 58 and 40 members, respectively. The existing members of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh will be allotted to the Councils as specified in the Fourth Schedule.

The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Andhra Pradesh) Order, 2006 is amended to reflect the new allocation of seats, and the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Telangana) Order, 2014, will apply to the successor State of Telangana.

The Chairman, Deputy Chairman, and rules of procedure for the Legislative Council of the successor State of Telangana will be the same as those for the Legislative Council of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh, until rules are made under clause (1) of article 208.

The Election Commission is responsible for determining the delimitation of constituencies in the Legislative Assemblies of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, taking into account the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
Summary:

The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008, outlines the process for dividing states into single-member constituencies for elections. The Election Commission is responsible for determining the matters referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1), taking into account factors such as geographical compactness, existing boundaries of administrative units, facilities of communication, and the proportion of the population that is part of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes. The Election Commission may associate with itself five persons as associate members to assist in the performance of its functions. The commission must publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies and invite objections and suggestions. After considering all objections and suggestions, the commission will determine the delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette, which will have the full force of law. Every such order relating to assembly constituencies shall be laid before the concerned Legislative Assembly. The High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad shall be the common High Court for the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh till a separate High Court for the State of Andhra Pradesh is constituted. The expenditure in respect of salaries and allowances of the Judges of the common High Court shall be allocated amongst the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana on the basis of population ratio. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall have, in respect of any part of the territories included in the State of Andhra Pradesh, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the law in force immediately before the date referred to in sub-section (1) of section 30, are exercisable in respect of that part of the said territories by the High Court at Hyderabad.
Summary:

This document pertains to the Indian laws relating to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, specifically addressing the transition from the High Court at Hyderabad to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. The laws in force immediately before the specified date with respect to the custody of the seal, the form of writs and other processes, the powers of Judges, and procedures for appeals to the Supreme Court shall continue to apply with necessary modifications.

Section 40 outlines the jurisdiction of the High Court at Hyderabad and the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. The High Court at Hyderabad shall have no jurisdiction in respect of the State of Andhra Pradesh, except for certain proceedings that are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court to be heard and decided by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. The High Court at Hyderabad shall retain jurisdiction over appeals, applications for leave to the Supreme Court, applications for review, and other proceedings seeking relief in respect of orders passed before the specified date.

Section 41 grants any person who is an advocate entitled to practise or any other person entitled to practise in the High Court at Hyderabad and was authorized to appear in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh the right to appear in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in relation to those proceedings.

Section 42 defines the term "proceedings" and "High Court" for the purposes of Section 40.

Section 43 states that nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh of any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made on or after the specified date with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority having power to make such provision.

Part V of the document deals with the Authorisation of Expenditure and Distribution of Revenues. Section 44 allows the Governor of existing State of Andhra Pradesh to authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Telangana as he deems necessary for any period not more than six months beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Telangana.

Section 45 requires the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating to the accounts of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in respect of any period prior to the appointed day to be submitted to the Governor of each of the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of that State.

Section 46 deals with the Distribution of Revenue. The award made by the Thirteenth Finance Commission to the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall be apportioned between the successor States by the Central Government on the basis of population ratio and other parameters.

Part VI of the document deals with the Apportionment of Assets and Liabilities. The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment of the assets and liabilities of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh immediately before the appointed day. The successor States shall be entitled to receive benefits arising out of the decisions taken by the existing State of Andhra Pradesh and the successor States shall be liable to bear the financial liabilities arising out of the decisions taken by the existing State of Andhra Pradesh. The apportionment of assets and liabilities shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of the assets and liabilities amongst the successor States. Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled through mutual agreement, failing which by order by the Central Government on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Summary:
This document outlines the distribution of assets and liabilities between the successor states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana after the bifurcation of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh.

Section 3 of the document outlines the distribution of properties, with provisions made for properties situated outside the existing State of Andhra Pradesh to be apportioned based on population ratio. Goods are to be distributed according to the situation of the goods, but the Central Government has the power to issue directions for a just and equitable distribution if necessary. Any disputes relating to the distribution of goods or class of goods are to be settled through mutual agreement, and if that fails, the Central Government may issue directions for distribution.

Section 4 outlines the distribution of stores, with stores held for specific purposes passing to the successor state in whose territory the institution, workshop, undertaking, or work is located. Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having jurisdiction over the whole of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh are to be divided between the successor states based on population ratio.

Section 49 outlines the distribution of treasury and bank balances, with the total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh and the credit balances of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh with the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India, or any other bank immediately before the appointed day being divided between the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana based on population ratio.

Section 50 outlines the right to recover arrears of taxes, with the right to recover arrears of the tax or duty on property, including arrears of land revenue, belonging to the successor state in which the property is situated. The right to recover arrears of any other tax or duty belongs to the successor state in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day.

Section 51 outlines the right to recover loans and advances, with the right of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh to recover any loans or advances made before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist, or other person in an area within that state belonging to the successor state in which that area is included on that day.

Section 52 outlines the distribution of investments and credits in certain funds, with securities held in respect of investments made from Cash Balances Investment Account or from any Fund in the Public Account of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh as specified in the Seventh Schedule being apportioned on the basis of population ratio.

Section 53 outlines the assets and liabilities of state undertakings, with assets and liabilities relating to any commercial or industrial undertaking of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh passing to the state in which the area is included on the appointed day.

Section 54 outlines the public debt, with all liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh outstanding immediately before the appointed day being apportioned on the basis of population ratio. The individual items of liabilities to be allocated to the successor states and the amount of contribution required to be made by one successor state to another shall be such as may be ordered by the Central Government on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

In summary, this document outlines the distribution of assets and liabilities between the successor states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana after the bifurcation of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh. The distribution is based on population ratio, with provisions made for specific cases such as properties situated outside the existing State of Andhra Pradesh, stores held for specific purposes, and public debt. The Central Government has the power to issue directions for a just and equitable distribution of goods, and any disputes are to be settled through mutual agreement.
Summary:

The document summarizes the distribution of certain financial obligations, assets, and liabilities between the successor states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana after the bifurcation of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh.

The floating debt of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh will be determined based on the purpose of the loan and the population ratio. The liability to refund any tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess will be the liability of the successor state in whose territories the property is situated. Any other tax or duty collected in excess will be apportioned between the successor states based on the population ratio.

The liability of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh in respect of any civil deposit or local fund deposit shall be the liability of the successor state in whose area the deposit has been made. The liability of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh in respect of any charitable or other endowment shall be the liability of the successor state in whose area the institution entitled to the benefit of the endowment is located or of the successor state to which the objects of the endowment, under the terms thereof, are confined. Any civil deposits or loan funds or charitable or other endowment fund maintained by the existing state of Andhra Pradesh before the appointed day having jurisdiction over the entire state shall be apportioned between the successor states on the basis of population ratio.

The liability of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh in respect of the Provident Fund account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall be the liability of the successor state to which that Government servant is permanently allotted. The liability of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh in respect of pensions shall pass to, or be apportioned between, the successor states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana in accordance with the provisions contained in the Eighth Schedule to this Act.

Where, before the appointed day, the existing state of Andhra Pradesh has made any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the state, that contract shall be deemed to have been made in exercise of the executive power of the successor state in whose area the purpose of the contract is exclusively located. In any other case, all rights and liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any such contract shall be apportioned between the successor states on the basis of population ratio or in any other manner as may be agreed to by the successor states.

Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing state of Andhra Pradesh is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than breach of contract, that liability shall be apportioned between the successor states on the basis of population ratio or in any other manner as may be agreed to by the successor states. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing state of Andhra Pradesh is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co-operative society or other person, that liability shall be a liability of the successor state in whose area the area of operations of such society or person is confined.

If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance with that provision. The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing state of Andhra Pradesh not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the state of Andhra Pradesh in the first instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana or, in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.

Where the successor states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned between them in a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the manner agreed upon. Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, either of the successor states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government is of opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed day by either of the states, that it is just and equitable that such property or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the other successor state, or that a contribution towards that liability should be made by the other successor state, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner between the two states, or the other state shall make to the state subject to the liability such contribution in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the two state governments, by order, determine.

All sums payable by the state of Andhra Pradesh or by the state of Telangana, as the case may be, to the other state, or by the Central Government to the successor states, by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the state by which such sums are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India.

The companies and corporations specified in the Ninth Schedule constituted for the existing state of Andhra Pradesh shall continue to function in those areas in respect of which they were functioning immediately before the appointed day, subject to the provisions of this section. The assets, rights and liabilities of the companies and corporations referred to in sub-section (1) shall be apportioned between the successor states in the manner provided in section 53. The arrangement in regard to the generation or supply of electric power and supply of water shall continue.
Summary:

The document outlines various provisions related to Indian laws, specifically in relation to the reorganization of the state of Andhra Pradesh.

Section 69 pertains to the supply of power or water to areas that may be affected by the reorganization. The Central Government may give directions to the State Government or other authority concerned for the maintenance of previous arrangements, as far as practicable.

Section 70 pertains to the Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation. The Corporation shall continue to function in the areas it was functioning in before the appointed day, subject to certain directions from the Central Government. These directions may include exceptions and modifications to the State Financial Corporations Act of 1951.

Section 71 allows the Central Government to issue directions regarding the division of interests and shares of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in companies, and the reconstitution of the Board of Directors to give adequate representation to the successor States.

Section 72 pertains to the continuance of certain existing road transport permits. Permits granted by the State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall continue to be valid and effective in the transferred territory.

Section 73 outlines special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases. The reorganization of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall not entitle any workman to compensation under certain sections of the Industrial Disputes Act of 1947.

Section 74 pertains to a special provision as to income-tax. The losses or profits or gains sustained by a body corporate shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate.

Section 75 pertains to the continuance of facilities in certain State institutions. The Government of the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana shall continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State, for a certain period and upon certain terms and conditions.

These provisions aim to ensure a smooth transition in the reorganization of the state of Andhra Pradesh, with regard to various legal and administrative matters.
Summary:

The document summarizes provisions related to services in the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. Specifically, it focuses on the creation of separate cadres for the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service, and Indian Forest Service in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The document also outlines the provisional strength, composition, and allocation of officers to these cadres. Additionally, it specifies the allocation of other employees to either of the two states, based on their preferences and the needs of the states, and provides guidelines for the same. The document also includes provisions for the continuance of officers in the same post, the establishment of advisory committees to assist the Central Government, the power of the Central Government to give directions, and provisions related to the State Public Service Commission. The document also includes provisions related to the distribution of personnel in state public sector undertakings, corporations, and other autonomous bodies between the two successor states. The document is written in clear and straightforward English, explaining legal concepts and terms for easy understanding. It does not use any abbreviations or shorthand in the summary.
Summary:

This document outlines several Indian laws and provisions related to the management and development of water resources, specifically focusing on the Godavari and Krishna rivers. The laws establish the Apex Council for the supervision of the Godavari River Management Board and Krishna River Management Board, which will consist of the Minister of Water Resources, Government of India, the Chief Minister of the State of Andhra Pradesh, and the Chief Minister of the State of Telangana. The functions of the Apex Council include supervising the functioning of the River Management Boards, planning and approving proposals for construction of new projects, resolving disputes amicably, and referring any disputes not covered under the Krishna Water Disputes Tribunal to a Tribunal to be constituted under the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956.

The document also establishes the Godavari River Management Board and Krishna River Management Board as autonomous bodies under the administrative control of the Central Government. Each Board will consist of a Chairperson, two members nominated by each of the successor States, and one expert nominated by the Central Government. The Boards will be responsible for the administration, regulation, maintenance, and operation of projects notified by the Central Government.

The document also outlines the functions of the Boards, which include regulating the supply of water and power to the successor States, constructing specified works connected with the development of water resources projects, making an appraisal of any proposal for construction of new projects, and performing such other functions as the Central Government may entrust to it.

The document also includes provisions for the employment of staff by the Boards, the jurisdiction of the Boards, the power of the Boards to make regulations, the allocation of water resources, and the declaration of the Polavaram Irrigation Project as a national project.
Summary:

The document outlines various provisions related to Indian laws, specifically focusing on the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

Under Part X of the document, titled "Infrastructure and Special Economic Measures," Section 91 states that the Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana will replace the existing State of Andhra Pradesh on the Tungabhadra Board, which will continue to monitor the release of water to various canals and schemes.

Under Part XI of the document, titled "Access to Higher Education," Section 95 ensures equal opportunities for quality higher education to all students in the successor States by continuing existing admission quotas in institutions of higher, technical, and medical education for a period of ten years.

Under Part XII of the document, titled "Legal and Miscellaneous Provisions," Section 96 amends article 168 of the Constitution by substituting the words "Tamil Nadu" with "Tamil Nadu, Telangana."

Section 97 amends article 371D of the Constitution by providing for equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging to different parts of the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana in the matter of public employment and education.

Section 98 inserts the words "and constituting the Legislative Council of the State of Telangana under the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014" after the words "under the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010 (16 of 2010)" in section 15A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

Section 99 amends section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, by substituting the words "Andhra Pradesh" with "Andhra Pradesh and Telangana."

Section 100 states that the provisions of Part II of the Act shall not affect the territories to which the Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973, and any other law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or applies.

Section 101 allows the appropriate Government to make adaptations and modifications of any law made before the appointed day, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient.

Section 102 allows any court, tribunal, or authority to construe the law in such a manner as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before it.

Section 103 enables the Government of the State of Telangana to specify the authority, officer, or person who shall be competent to exercise functions exercisable under any law in force on that day.

Section 104 states that where the existing State of Andhra Pradesh is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights, or liabilities subject to apportionment between the States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana under this Act, the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be substituted for the existing State of Andhra Pradesh or added as a party to those proceedings.

Section 105 transfers every proceeding pending immediately before the appointed day before a court, tribunal, authority, or officer in any area which on that day falls within the State of Andhra Pradesh to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority, or officer of that State if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the territory which as from that day are the territories of the State of Telangana.

Section 106 allows any person who is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate court in the existing State of Andhra Pradesh to continue to be entitled to practise in those courts for a period of one year from the appointed day.
Summary:

The document outlines provisions from the Indian Constitution and related laws. The first section, Section 107, states that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law. This means that the provisions of this Act will take precedence over any conflicting provisions in other laws.

The second section, Section 108, grants the President the power to remove difficulties in implementing the provisions of this Act. The President may do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty, but no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the appointed day. Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

The First Schedule of the document outlines the allocation of seats for the states of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh in the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of India's bicameral Parliament. It details the allocation of seats for sitting members whose terms will expire on specific dates, and how they will be allocated to the states of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh.

The Second Schedule of the document outlines amendments to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008. It includes changes to the number of seats in the Parliament and Assembly for the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, as well as the extent of Assembly Constituencies for various districts in these states.

In summary, this document outlines provisions from the Indian Constitution and related laws, including the allocation of seats for the states of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh in the Rajya Sabha, and amendments to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008. It also grants the President the power to remove difficulties in implementing the provisions of this Act.
Summary:

The given document lists the districts, municipal corporations, and mandals (a type of administrative division) in the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The mandals are grouped under various districts and municipal corporations. Here are some key points:

1. West Godavari District: This district in Andhra Pradesh includes mandals such as Mandapeta, Rajanagaram, Kovvur, Nidadavole, Achanta, Palacole, Narasapuram, Bhimavaram, Undi, Tanuku, Tadepalligudem, Unguturu, and Denduluru.
2. Krishna District: This district in Andhra Pradesh includes mandals such as Chintalapudi, Tiruvuru, Nuzvid, Gannavaram, Gudivada, Kaikalur, Pedana, Machilipatnam, Avanigadda, Pamarru, Penamaluru, and Mylavaram.
3. Guntur District: This district in Andhra Pradesh includes mandals such as Pedakurapadu, Tadikonda, Mangalagiri, Ponnuru, Vemuru, Repalle, Tenali, Bapatla, Prathipadu, Guntur West, Guntur East, Chilakaluripet, Narasaraopet, Sattenapalle, Vinukonda, and Gurajala.
4. Prakasam District: This district in Andhra Pradesh includes mandals such as Yerragondapalem, Darsi, Parchur, Addanki, Chirala, Santhanuthalapadu, Ongole, Kandukur, Kondapi, Markapuram, and Giddalur.
5. Nellore District: This district in Andhra Pradesh includes mandals such as Kavali, Atmakur, Kovur, Nellore City, Nellore Rural, Sarvepalli, Gudur, Sullurpeta, and Venkatagiri.
6. Kadapa District: This district in Andhra Pradesh includes mandals such as Badvel, Rajampet, Kadapa, Kodur, Rayachoti, Pulivendula, Kamalapuram, Jammalamadugu, Proddatur, and Mydukur.
7. Kurnool District: This district in Andhra Pradesh includes mandals such as Allagadda, Srisailam, Nandikotkur, Alur, Banaganapalle, Dhone, Kodumur, Koilkuntla, and Yemmiganur.

It is important to note that the document does not provide a comprehensive list of all districts, municipal corporations, and mandals in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, but it does give an overview of several of them.
In this document, the focus is on the legislative districts and mandals of the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The document lists the mandals that make up each legislative district in both states. A mandal is a subdivision of a district, similar to a county or borough in other countries.

The document begins with a list of mandals in the Kurnool district of Andhra Pradesh. It includes the names of specific villages and other territorial divisions that are part of each mandal. For example, the Kurnool Mandal includes the villages of Kanthalapadu, Sunkesula, Remata, Ulchala, Basavapuram, Edurur, G. Singavaram, Nidzur, Munagalapadu, Mamidalapadu, Panchalingala, E.Thandrapadu, Gondiparla, Dinnedevarapadu, B.Thandrapadu, Pasupula, Rudravaram, Noothanapalle, Devamada, Pudur, Gargeyapuram, and Diguvapadu.

The document then lists the mandals in several other districts of Andhra Pradesh, including Anantapur, Chittoor, and Kadapa. It also includes a list of mandals in the district of Nandyal, which is part of the newly-formed state of Telangana.

In addition to the lists of mandals, the document also includes information about parliamentary constituencies in both states. A parliamentary constituency is a geographical area that elects a member of parliament to represent it in the national legislature. The document lists the mandals that make up each parliamentary constituency, as well as the name of the constituency and its corresponding parliamentary district.

Overall, this document provides a detailed overview of the legislative districts and mandals in the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. It is a useful resource for understanding the administrative structure of these states and the geographical boundaries of their legislative districts.
Summary:

The given document lists the Assembly Constituencies of the districts in the state of Telangana, India. There are a total of 119 Assembly Constituencies spread across 31 districts. Each district is divided into a number of Assembly Constituencies, and the names of the constituencies are mentioned along with the district name. The districts listed are Adilabad, Mahbubnagar, Medak, Nalgonda, Ranga Reddy, Hyderabad, and Warangal, among others. The list includes both general and reserved constituencies for Scheduled Castes (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST). The document also mentions the Parliamentary Constituencies, each of which is made up of a group of Assembly Constituencies. The names of the Parliamentary Constituencies are Adilabad, Peddapalle, Karimnagar, Nizamabad, Zahirabad, and Bhongir, among others.
Summary:

This document pertains to the Delimitation of Council Constituencies in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The Third Schedule contains the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Andhra Pradesh) Order, 2006, which has been amended by the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Telangana) Order, 2014. The amended order specifies the constituencies for the Legislative Council elections in Telangana, including local authorities' constituencies, graduates' constituencies, and teachers' constituencies. The Fourth Schedule lists the members of the Legislative Council of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, including members elected from local authorities, graduates, teachers, nominated members, and members elected by the Legislative Assembly. The Fifth Schedule contains the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, which has been amended to include the Scheduled Castes in Telangana, including Adi Andhra, Adi Dravida, Anamuk, Aray Mala, Arundhatiya, Arwa Mala, Bariki, Bavuri, Beda (Budga) Jangam, Bindla, Byagara, Byagari, Chachati, Chalavadi, Chamar, Mochi, Muchi, Chamar-Ravidas, Chamar-Rohidas, Chambhar, Chandala, Dakkal, Dokkalwar, Dandasi, Dhor, Dom, Dombara, Paidi, Pano, Ellamalawar, Yellammalawandlu, Ghasi, Haddi, Relli, Chanchandi, Godari, Gosangi, Holeya, Holeya Dasari, Jaggali, Jambuvulu, Kolupulvandlu, Pambada, Pambanda, Pambala, Madasi Kuruva, Madari Kuruva, Madiga, Madiga Dasu, Mashteen, Mahar, Mala, Mala Ayawaru, Mala Dasari, Mala Dasu, Mala Hannai, Malajangam, Mala Masti, Mala Sale, Nethani, Mala Sanyasi, Mang, Mang Garodi, Manne, Mashti, Matangi, Mehtar, Mitha Ayyalvar, Mundala, Paky, Moti, Thoti, Pamidi, Panchama, Pariah, Relli, Samagara, Samban, and Sapru.
Summary:

The Sixth Schedule of the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 has been amended to include the Scheduled Tribes of the newly formed state of Telangana. The new Part XXV of the Schedule lists 32 Scheduled Tribes of Telangana, including Andh, Sadhu Andh, Bagata, Bhil, Chenchu, Gadabas, Gond, Naikpod, Rajgond, Koitur, Goudu, Hill Reddis, Jatapus, Kammara, Kattunayakan, Kolam, Konda Dhoras, Kubi, Konda Kapus, Kondareddis, Kondhs, Kotia, Koya, Doli Koya, Gutta Koya, Kammara Koya, Musara Koya, Oddi Koya, Pattidi Koya, Rajah, Rasha Koya, Lingadhari Koya (ordinary), Kottu Koya, Bhine Koya, Rajkoya, Kulia, Manna Dhora, Mukha Dhora, Nayaks, Pardhan, Porja, Parangiperja, Reddi Dhoras, Rona, Rena, Savaras, Kapu Savaras, Maliya Savaras, Khutto Savaras, Sugalis, Lambadis, Banjara, Thoti (in Adilabad, Hyderabad, Karimnagar, Khammam, Mahbubnagar, Medak, Nalgonda, Nizamabad and Warangal districts), Yenadis, Chella Yenadi, Kappala Yenadi, Manchi Yenadi, Reddi Yenadi, Nakkala, Kurvikaran.

The Seventh Schedule of the Constitution contains a list of funds, including provident funds, pension funds, insurance funds, sinking funds, guarantee redemption funds, reserve funds, development and welfare funds, and other funds. The funds are further divided into sub-categories, such as Contributory Provident Fund Work-charged, All India Service Provident Fund, Deposits of Zilla Praja Parishads out of Provident Fund contribution, and General Provident Fund (Regular).

The Eighth Schedule of the Constitution deals with the apportionment of liability in respect of pensions in the successor States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. The liability in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day by the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall be paid by the successor States, subject to adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3. The liability in respect of pensions of officers serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before the appointed day, but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the State of Andhra Pradesh. The liability of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh in respect of pension rolls granted before the appointed day and drawn in any area outside the territories of the existing State shall be the liability of the State of Andhra Pradesh subject to adjustments to be made in accordance with paragraph 3. The liability in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh and retiring on or after that day, shall be that of the successor State granting him the pension and other retirement benefits.
Summary:

The Ninth Schedule to the Indian Constitution contains a list of government companies and corporations. This list is relevant to sections 68 and 71 of the Constitution, which deal with the payment of pensions to certain government employees. Specifically, if an employee is serving in connection with the affairs of more than one successor state other than the one granting the pension, the other states must reimburse the granting state for a portion of the pension attributable to the employee's service after the appointed day. This reimbursement is based on the ratio of the employee's qualifying service after the appointed day under the reimbursing state to the total qualifying service after the appointed day reckoned for the purposes of pension.

The Ninth Schedule lists 73 government companies and corporations in the state of Andhra Pradesh, India. These entities are involved in a variety of sectors, including seeds development, agro industrial development, warehousing, civil supplies, power generation and transmission, mining, and infrastructure development. Some examples of these entities include the Andhra Pradesh State Seeds Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Agro Industrial Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Warehousing Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Genco, the Andhra Pradesh Transco, the Singareni Collieries Company, the NREDCAP, the Andhra Pradesh Forest Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Film and Television Theatre Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Medical Services Infrastructure Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Police Housing Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Housing Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Housing Board, the Andhra Pradesh Technologies Services Ltd., the Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Finance Corporation, the Leather Industries Development Corporation of Andhra Pradesh, the Andhra Pradesh Handicraft Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Trade Promotion Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Irrigation Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Minorities Finance Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Beverages Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Foods, the Andhra Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Rajiv Swagruha Corporation, the Eastern Power Distribution Corporation, the Southern Power Distribution Corporation, the Central Power Distribution Corporation, the Northern Power Distribution Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Heavy Machinery and Engineering Ltd., the Vizag Apparel Park for Export, the Andhra Pradesh State Christian (Minorities) Finance Corporation, the Hyderabad Metro Rail Ltd., the Infrastructure Development Corporation of Andhra Pradesh, the Overseas Manpower Company of Andhra Pradesh, the Andhra Pradesh Power Finance Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Roads Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Tribal Power Company, the Andhra Pradesh Tribal Mining Company, the Andhra Pradesh Cooperative Oil seeds Growers Federation, the Andhra Pradesh Marketing Federation, the Deccan Infrastructure and Land Holdings Ltd., the Andhra Pradesh Aviation Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Gas Infrastructure Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Gas Distribution Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Khadi and Village Industries Board, the Andhra Pradesh State Handloom Weavers Co-operative Society, the Andhra Pradesh Textile Development Corporation, the Nizam Sugars Ltd., the Andhra Pradesh Food Processing Society, the Krishnapatnam International Leather Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Federation of Co-operative Sugar Factories, the Textile Park, the Andhra Pradesh Women's Co-operative Finance Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Vikalangula Co-operative Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh State Property Tax Board, the Andhra Pradesh Toddy Tappers Co-operative Society, the Society for Employment, Promotion and Training in Twin Cities, the Sports Authority of Andhra Pradesh, the Andhra Pradesh Society for Training and Employment Promotion, the State Institute of Hotel Management and Catering Technology in Tirupathi and Medak, the Andhra Pradesh Meat Development Corporation, the Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development Cooperative, the AP Sheep and Goat Development Agency, and the Andhra Pradesh State Fishermen Cooperative.
Summary:
The document summarizes Indian laws and institutions, specifically those related to the Andhra Pradesh state. It includes a list of training institutions and centers, such as the Andhra Pradesh State Co-operative Union, Andhra Pradesh Study Circle for Backward Classes, and Environment Protection Training and Research Institute. The document also mentions various departments and corporations, such as the Andhra Pradesh Girijan Co-operative Telugu Samkshema Corporation Bhavan, Andhra Pradesh Education and Welfare, and Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes VC and MD Co-operative Finance Corporation. The Tenth Schedule details the continuance of facilities in certain state institutions, including the Andhra Pradesh State Co-operative Union, Andhra Pradesh Forest Academy, and Andhra Pradesh Police Academy. The Eleventh Schedule outlines principles governing the functioning of the River Management Boards, including the operation protocol notified by the Ministry of Water Resources and the precedence of water for irrigation and drinking water purposes.
Summary:

The document outlines the provisions for water sharing, coal, oil and gas, power, education, and infrastructure between the successor states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

For water sharing, the document specifies that the allocations made by the River Water Tribunals with regard to various projects on Godavari and Krishna Rivers or for the regions of the existing State of Andhra Pradesh shall remain the same. Allocations made on excess flows by any Tribunal in future shall be binding on both the State of Telangana and the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. The Boards shall advise the two State Governments on the management of disaster or drought or flood in the rivers of Krishna and Godavari, and shall have the full authority to get their orders implemented by the two successor State Governments promptly and effectively. No new projects based on water resources arrived at based on appropriate dependability criteria on Godavari or Krishna rivers can be taken up by the State of Telangana or the State of Andhra Pradesh without obtaining sanction from the Apex Council on River water resources.

Regarding coal, the document states that 51% of the total equity of Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL) shall be with the Government of Telangana and 49% with the Government of India. Existing coal linkages of SCCL shall continue without any change, and new linkages shall be allotted to the successor States as per the New Coal Distribution Policy by Government of India.

For oil and gas, the document states that allocation of natural gas will continue to be done as per the policies and guidelines issued by the Government of India from time to time, and the royalties payable on domestic onshore production of oil and gas shall accrue to the State in which such production takes place.

For power, the document states that units of APGENCO shall be divided based on geographical location of power plants, and existing Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with respective DISCOMS shall continue for both on-going projects and projects under construction. The existing Andhra Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (APERC) shall function as a joint regulatory body for a period not exceeding six months within which time separate SERCs will be formed in the successor States. The existing State Load Despatch Centre (SLDC) shall function for both successor States for a period not exceeding two years within which time separate SLDC shall be set up for each successor State. Transmission lines of APTRANSCO of 132 KV and higher voltage cutting across the successor States shall be deemed as Inter-State Transmission System (ISTS) lines, and the maintenance of ISTS lines shall also be done by successor States in their respective jurisdictions.

Regarding education, the document states that the Government of India shall take steps to establish institutions of national importance in the 12th and 13th Plan periods in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. This would include one IIT, one NIT, one IIM, one IISER, one Central University, one Petroleum University, one Agricultural University and one IIIT. The Government of India shall establish one AIIMS-type Super-Specialty Hospitalcum-Teaching Institution in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. The Government of India shall establish a Tribal University each in the State of Andhra Pradesh and in the State of Telangana. A Horticulture University shall be established in the successor State of Telangana. The Government of India shall establish the National Institute of Disaster Management in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh.

Regarding infrastructure, the document states that the Government of India shall develop a new major port at Duggirajupatnam in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh to be completed in phases with Phase I by end-2018. SAIL shall examine, within six months from the appointed day, the feasibility of establishing an integrated steel plant in Khammam district of the successor State of Telangana. SAIL shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine the feasibility of establishing an integrated Steel Plant in YSR District of the successor State of Andhra Pradesh. IOC or HPCL shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine the feasibility of establishing a greenfield crude oil refinery and petrochemical complex in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh and take an expeditious decision thereon. The Government of India shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine the feasibility of establishing a Vizag-Chennai industrial corridor along the lines of Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor and take within such period an expeditious decision thereon. The Government of India shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine the feasibility of expanding the existing Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada and Tirupati airports to international standards and take an expeditious decision thereon. NTPC shall establish a 4000 MW power facility in the successor State of Telangana after establishing necessary coal linkages. Indian Railways shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine establishing a new railway zone in the successor State of Andhra Pradesh and take an expeditious decision thereon. NHAI shall take necessary steps to improve road connectivity in the backward regions of the successor State of Telangana. The Indian Railways shall, within six months from the appointed day, examine the feasibility of establishing a Rail Coach Factory in the successor State of Telangana and improve rail connectivity in the State and take an expeditious decision thereon. The Central Government shall take measures to establish rapid rail and road connectivity from the new capital of the successor State of Andhra Pradesh to Hyderabad and other important cities of Telangana. The Government of India shall examine the feasibility of Metro Rail facility in Vishakhapatnam and Vijayawada-Guntur-Tenali Metropolitan Urban Development Authority within a period of one year from the appointed day and take an expeditious decision thereon.