Summary:

THE SCHOOL OF PLANNING AND ARCHITECTURE ACT, 2014 (ACT NO. 37 OF 2014) establishes and declares Schools of Planning and Architecture as Institutions of national importance in order to promote education and research in architectural studies including planning of human settlements.

The Act has 37 sections divided into six chapters. Chapter I, Preliminary, consists of three sections. Section 1 deals with the short title and commencement of the Act, and Section 2 declares certain Schools as Institutions of national importance. Section 3 provides definitions for various terms used in the Act.

Chapter II, The School, has 11 sections. Section 4 establishes and incorporates Schools, and Section 5 outlines the objects of the School. Section 6 deals with the effects of incorporation of Schools, and Section 7 lays down the powers and functions of Schools. Section 8 states that Schools shall be open to all races, creeds, and classes, and Section 9 deals with teaching at Schools. Section 10 states that each School shall be a not-for-profit legal entity, and Section 11 deals with the Visitor of the School.

Chapter III, The Authorities of Schools, has 16 sections. Section 12 lists the authorities of Schools, and Section 13 deals with the Board of Governors. Section 14 outlines the term of office of vacancies among, and allowances payable to, Members of the Board, and Section 15 deals with the powers and functions of the Board. Section 16 deals with the Senate, and Section 17 outlines its functions. Section 18 deals with the Chairperson of the Board, and Section 19 deals with the Director. Section 20 deals with the Registrar, and Section 21 deals with other authorities and officers. Section 22 deals with the review of performance of the School.

Chapter IV, Accounts and Audit, has three sections. Section 23 deals with grants by the Central Government, and Section 24 deals with the Fund of the School. Section 25 deals with accounts and audit, and Section 26 deals with pension and provident fund.

Chapter V, The Council, has seven sections. Section 33 establishes the Council for Schools, and Section 34 deals with the term of office of vacancies among, and allowances payable to, Members of the Council. Section 35 outlines the functions of the Council, and Section 36 deals with the Chairperson of the Council. Section 37 deals with the power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter, and Section 38 deals with acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.

Chapter VI, Miscellaneous, has six sections. Section 39 deals with returns and information to be provided to the Central Government, and Section 40 deals with the power to remove difficulties. Section 41 deals with the School to be a public authority under the Right to Information Act, 2005, and Section 42 deals with transitional provisions. The Schedule to the Act lists the existing Schools incorporated under this Act.