Summary:

The Commercial Courts Act, 2015, is an Act to provide for the constitution of Commercial Courts, Commercial Appellate Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division in the High Courts for adjudicating commercial disputes of specified value and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act defines commercial dispute as a dispute arising out of ordinary transactions of merchants, bankers, financiers and traders, export or import of merchandise or services, issues relating to admiralty and maritime law, transactions relating to aircraft, aircraft engines, aircraft equipment and helicopters, including sales, leasing and financing of the same, carriage of goods, construction and infrastructure contracts, including tenders, agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively in trade or commerce, franchising agreements, distribution and licensing agreements, management and consultancy agreements, joint venture agreements, shareholders agreements, subscription and investment agreements pertaining to the services industry including outsourcing services and financial services, mercantile agency and mercantile usage, partnership agreements, technology development agreements, intellectual property rights relating to registered and unregistered trademarks, copyright, patent, design, domain names, geographical indications and semiconductor integrated circuits, agreements for sale of goods or provision of services, exploitation of oil and gas reserves or other natural resources including electromagnetic spectrum, insurance and re-insurance, contracts of agency relating to any of the above, and such other commercial disputes as may be notified by the Central Government.

The Act specifies the jurisdiction of Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions of High Courts, and Commercial Appellate Divisions of High Courts. It also provides for the transfer of pending suits and applications relating to commercial disputes of a specified value to the Commercial Courts or Commercial Divisions of High Courts. The Act amends the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in its application to commercial disputes. It also provides for the collection and disclosure of data by Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate Divisions, the power of High Court to issue directions, the provision of infrastructure facilities, training and continuous education, and the power of the Central Government to make rules. The Act has an overriding effect and repeals and saves the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Ordinance, 2015. The Act also contains a Schedule that amends the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

The Act aims to provide a specialized forum for adjudicating commercial disputes and to ensure speedy and efficient disposal of such disputes. It also seeks to promote ease of doing business in India by reducing the time and cost of litigation in commercial matters.