Summary:

THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851 (ACT NO. 8 OF 1851) was enacted on the 4th of July, 1851, to enable the government to levy tolls on public roads and bridges. The Act extends to the territories administered by the Governor of the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal, the Lieutenant-Governor of North-Western Provinces of Bengal, and the Governor of the Presidency of Fort St. George in Council.

The Act empowers the State Government to cause such rates of toll, as it thinks fit, to be levied upon any road or bridge made or repaired at the expense of the Central or any State Government. The State Government may place the collection of such tolls under the management of persons as may appear to it proper. The officers appointed to collect the tolls are liable to the same responsibilities as would belong to them if employed in the collection of the land revenue.

The Act provides for the recovery of toll, in case of non-payment, by seizing any of the carriages or animals on which it is chargeable or any part of their burden of sufficient value to defray the toll. If any toll remains undischarged for twenty-four hours, with the cost arising from such seizure, the case shall be brought before the officer appointed to superintend the collection of the said toll, who may sell the property seized for discharge of the toll and all expenses occasioned by such non-payment, seizure, and sale.

The Act exempts Police-officers on duty, or any person or property in their custody, from paying tolls. However, no other exemption from payment of the toll levied under this Act shall be allowed. The Act empowers all Police-officers to assist the toll-collectors when required in the execution of this Act.

The Act provides for penalties for offenses under the Act. Every person, other than the persons appointed to collect the tolls under this Act, who shall levy or demand any toll on any public road or bridge or for passing through any bazar situated thereon, and also every person who shall unlawfully and extortionately demand, or take any other or higher toll than the lawful toll or under color of this Act seize or sell any property knowing such seizure or sale to be unlawful, shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding six calendar months, or to fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, any part of which fine may be awarded by the Magistrate to the person aggrieved.

The Act requires the exhibition of a table of the tolls authorized to be taken at any toll-gate or station in a conspicuous place near such gate or station, legibly written or printed in English words and figures and also in those of the vernacular language of the district. The Act provides for compensation to the person aggrieved and saves his right to sue.

The tolls levied under this Act are deemed public revenue. The Schedule to the Act has been repealed by the Devolution Act, 1920 (38 of 1920), s. 2 and the First Schedule.