Summary:

The Usury Laws Repeal Act, 1855, also known as Act No. 28 of 1855, was enacted on the 19th of September, 1855. The purpose of this Act is to repeal the laws related to usury that were in force at the time.

Section 1 of the Act states that the enactments mentioned in the Act have been repealed by the Repealing Act of 1870.

Section 2 states that in any suit where interest is recoverable, the amount shall be adjudged or decreed by the Court at the rate agreed upon by the parties. If no rate has been agreed upon, the Court shall deem a reasonable rate.

Section 3 states that whenever a Court directs that a judgment or decree shall bear interest or awards interest upon a judgment or decree, it may order the interest to be calculated at the rate allowed in the judgment or decree upon the principal sum adjudged or at such other rate as the Court shall think fit.

Section 4 states that a mortgage or other contract for the loan of money, by which it is agreed that the use or usufruct of any property shall be allowed in lieu of interest, shall be binding upon the parties.

Section 5 states that whenever, under the Regulations of the Bengal Code, a deposit may be made of the principal sum and interest due upon any mortgage or conditional sale of land thereafter to be entered into, the amount of interest to be deposited shall be at the rate stipulated in the contract, or, if no rate has been stipulated and interest be payable under the terms of the contract, at the rate of twelve percentum per annum.

Section 6 states that in any case in which an adjustment of accounts may become necessary between the lender and the borrower of money upon any mortgage, conditional sale of landed property, or other contract whatsoever, which may be entered into after the passing of this Act, interest shall be calculated at the rate stipulated therein or, if no rate of interest shall have been stipulated and interest be payable under the terms of the contract, at such rate as the Court shall deem reasonable.

The Act has been extended to several Scheduled Districts and Provinces, including West Jalpaiguri, the Western Dvars, the Western Hills of Darjiling, the Darjiling Tarai and the Damson Sub-division of The Darjiling District, the District of Hazaribagh, the District of Lohardaga, the District of Manbhum, the Scheduled portion of the Mirzapur District, Jaunsar Bawar, the District of Lahaul, the Scheduled Districts of the C. P., the Scheduled District in Gan-jam and Vizagapatam, the Districts of Kamrup, Naugong, Darrang, Sibsagar, Lak-h i m p u r , G o a l p a r a ( e x c l u d i n g t h e   E a s t e r n   D v a r s )   a n d   C a c h a r( e x c l u d i n g   t h e   N o r t h   C a c h a rHills), Kumaon and Garhwal, and the Tarai of the Province of Agra.

The Act has been declared to be in force in the whole of India, except former Part B States and the Scheduled Districts, by the Laws Local Extent Act, 1874. It has been declared, by notification under s. 3(a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874, to be in force in several Scheduled Districts.

The Bengal Regulation 1 of 1798, which is now in force only in the SonthalParganas and with the exception of the Parts which relate to interest, is also in force in the Punjab.