Summary:

THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861, is an Act for licensing and regulating stage-carriages in India. The Act defines a stage-carriage as any carriage drawn by one or more horses used for the purpose of conveying passengers for hire. No carriage can be used as a stage-carriage unless licensed by a Magistrate or the Commissioner of Police of a Presidency-town. The Magistrate or Commissioner of Police may refuse to license a stage-carriage if they deem it unserviceable, unsafe, or unfit for public accommodation or use.

A license must contain the number, name and residence of the proprietor, the place of the head office, the largest number of passengers and weight of luggage to be carried, the number of horses by which the carriage is to be drawn, and the name of the place at which the carriage is licensed. The license is valid for one year from the date of issue and costs five rupees or a lesser amount fixed by the State Government.

The proprietor of a licensed stage-carriage must cause the number of the license and all other particulars of the license to be painted in English on a conspicuous part of the carriage. Failing to do so may result in a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees. Similarly, letting an unlicensed stage-carriage for hire may result in a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees for a first conviction and up to five hundred rupees for subsequent convictions.

The Act also imposes penalties for allowing a stage-carriage to be drawn by a less number of horses or carrying a larger number of passengers or a greater weight of luggage than provided by the license, knowingly or unknowingly. Cruel treatment of animals employed in drawing or harnessing stage-carriages is also punishable with a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees.

The Act empowers any Magistrate or Commissioner of Police to cancel the license of a stage-carriage if it appears to be unserviceable, unsafe, or otherwise unfit for public accommodation or use. Failure to comply with the provisions of Section 5 regarding painting the particulars of the license on the carriage may result in the seizure of the carriage and horse by a police officer. The carriage and horse will be taken before a Magistrate who will hear and determine the complaint of the police officer. If a fine is imposed and paid, the carriage and horse will be immediately released. If the fine is not paid, the carriage and horse may be detained for twenty days as security for the payment of the fine, costs, and charges incurred on account of the detention and sale. The surplus, if any, will be paid to the proprietor of the carriage and horse. If the proceeds of the sale do not fully pay the fine, costs, and charges, the balance may be recovered as hereinafter provided.

The Act imposes penalties for misconduct on the part of drivers, such as driving under the influence of intoxicants, negligence, or furious driving, which endanger the safety of any passenger or other person or injure or endanger the property of the proprietor of the stage-carriage or of any other person. The proprietor of a stage-carriage is liable to every such penalty as if he had been the driver of the carriage or owner of the horse at the time when the offence was committed, unless he can prove that the offence was committed without his privity or knowledge and that he has used his endeavor to find out the driver or owner and has done all that was in his power to recover the amount of the penalty from him.

The Act provides for the issue of summons, adjudication of penalties, recovery of penalties, imprisonment of offenders, and jurisdiction. The State Government may make rules to carry out the purposes and objects of this Act in the territories under its administration. The Act applies to all animals used for drawing carriages. The Act extends to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States, but it shall not apply to carriages ordinarily plying for hire within the limits of any municipality or cantonment or other place in which any law for the regulation of carriages is for the time being in force. The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any carriage or class of carriages from all or any of the provisions of this Act.