Summary:

THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863 is an Act that enables the Government to divest itself of the management of Religious Endowments. The Act aims to relieve the Boards of Revenue, and the local Agents, in the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal, and the Presidency of Fort Saint George, from the duties imposed on them by Regulation XIX, 1810 (Ben. Reg. 19 of 1810), and Regulation VII, 1817 (Mad. Reg. 7 of 1817), specifically related to the superintendence of lands granted for the support of Mosques, Hindu Temples, Colleges, and other purposes.

The Act comprises several sections that define the scope and application of the Act. Section 1 repeals parts of Bengal Regulation 19 of 1810 and Madras Regulation 7 of 1817. Section 2 provides an interpretation clause, defining terms such as "Civil Court" and "Court" to mean the principal Court of original civil jurisdiction in the District in which the mosque, temple, or religious establishment is situate.

Section 3 requires the Government to make special provision respecting mosques, temples, or other religious establishments, where the nomination of the trustee, manager, or superintendent is vested in, or may be exercised by, the Government or any public officer, or where the nomination is subject to the confirmation of the Government or any public officer.

Section 4 transfers to such trustee, manager, or superintendent all the landed or other property which, at the time of the passing of this Act, is under the superintendence or in the possession of the Board of Revenue or any local agent, belonging to such mosque, temple, or other religious establishment, except such property as is hereinafter provided.

Section 5 provides for the appointment of a manager of such mosque, temple, or other religious establishment, in case of a dispute respecting the right of succession to the office of trustee, manager, or superintendent. The manager so appointed by the Civil Court shall have and shall exercise all the powers which, under this or any other Act, the former trustee, manager, or superintendent, in whose place such manager is appointed by the Court, had or could exercise in relation to such mosque, temple, or religious establishment, or the property belonging thereto.

Section 6 provides that the rights, powers, and responsibilities of every trustee, manager, or superintendent, to whom the land and other property of any mosque, temple, or other religious establishment is transferred, shall be the same as if this Act had not been passed, except in respect of the liability to be sued under this Act, and except in respect of the authority of the Board of Revenue and local agents, given by the Regulations hereby repealed, over such mosque, temple, or religious establishment, and over such trustee, manager, or superintendent, which authority is hereby determined and repealed.

Section 7 requires the State Government to appoint one or more committees in every division or district to take the place, and to exercise the powers, of the Board of Revenue and the local agents under the Regulations hereby repealed.

Section 8 specifies the qualifications of a member of the committee, requiring that the members of the said committee shall be appointed from among persons professing the religion for the purposes of which the mosque, temple, or other religious establishment was founded or is now maintained.

Section 9 provides that every member of a committee appointed as above shall hold his office for life, unless removed for misconduct or unfitness.

Section 10 provides for the filling of vacancies among the members of a committee appointed as above, requiring that whenever any vacancy shall occur among the members of a committee appointed as above, a new member shall be elected to fill the vacancy by the persons interested as above provided.

Section 11 prohibits a member of a committee appointed under this Act from being capable of being, or from acting as, a trustee, manager, or superintendent of the mosque, temple, or other religious establishment for the management of which such committee shall have been appointed.

Section 12 requires the Board of Revenue, or the local agents acting under the authority of the said Board, to transfer to such committee all landed or other property which, at the time of appointment, is under the superintendence, or in the possession of the said Board or local agents, and belonging to the said religious establishment, except as is hereinafter provided for.

Section 13 imposes a duty on every trustee, manager, and superintendent of a mosque, temple, or religious establishment to keep regular accounts of his receipts and disbursements in respect of the endowments and expenses of such mosque, temple, or other religious establishment.

Section 14 enables any person or persons interested in any mosque, temple, or religious establishment, or in the performance of the worship or of the service thereof, or the trusts relating thereto, to sue before the Civil Court the trustee, manager, or superintendent of such mosque, temple, or religious establishment or the member of any committee appointed under this Act, for any misfeasance, breach of trust, or neglect of duty, committed by such trustee, manager, superintendent, or member of such committee, in respect of this trusts vested in, or confided to, them respectively.

Section 15 defines the nature of interest entitling a person to sue under Section 14, providing that the interest required in order to entitle a person to sue under the last preceding section need not be a pecuniary, or a direct or immediate, interest or such an interest as would entitle the person suing to take any part in the management or superintendence of the trusts.

Section 16 enables the Court to order any matter in difference in any suit to be referred for decision to one or more arbitrators.

Section 17 enables the parties to apply to the Court, or the Court to make the order of reference, under the Arbitration Act, 1940.

Section 18 requires a preliminary application to be made to the Court for leave to institute a suit.

Section 19 enables the Court to order the trustee, manager, or superintendent, or any member of a committee, as the case may be, to file in Court the accounts of the trust, or such part thereof as to the Court may seem necessary.

Section 20 provides that no suit or proceeding before any Civil Court under the preceding sections shall in any way affect or interfere with any proceeding in a Criminal Court for criminal breach of trust.

Section 21 provides for cases in which endowments are partly for religious and partly for secular purposes.

Section 22 prohibits the Government from undertaking or resuming the superintendence of any land or other property granted for the support of, or otherwise belonging to, any mosque, temple, or other religious establishment, or from taking any part in the management or appropriation of any endowment made for the maintenance of any such mosque, temple, or other establishment, or from nominating or appointing any trustee, manager, or superintendent thereof, or from being in any way concerned therewith.

Section 23 provides that nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Regulations mentioned in this Act, except in so far as they relate to mosques, Hindu temples, and other religious establishments, or prevent the Government from taking such steps as it may deem necessary, under the provisions of the said Regulations, to prevent injury to and preserve buildings remarkable for their antiquity, or for their historical or architectural value, or required for the convenience of the public.

In summary, THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863 is an Act that enables the Government to divest itself of the management of Religious Endowments, specifically related to the superintendence of lands granted for the support of Mosques, Hindu Temples, Colleges, and other purposes. The Act comprises several sections that define the scope and application of the Act, including provisions related to the interpretation of terms, special provision respecting mosques, temples, or other religious establishments, transfer of property, appointment of committees, filling of vacancies, and duties of trustees, managers, and superintendents. The Act also includes provisions related to the filing of accounts, reference to arbitrators, proceedings for criminal breach of trust, and cases in which endowments are partly for religious and partly for secular purposes.