Summary:
The Bombay Civil Courts’ Act, 1869, is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the District and Subordinate Civil Courts in the Presidency of Bombay. The Act extends to the territories under the Government of the Governor of Bombay in Council in which the Code of Civil Procedure is now in force. The Act is divided into nine parts. Part I is the preliminary part, which includes the short title and extent of the Act. Part II deals with Districts and Sadr Stations, where the Governor of Bombay in Council may alter the limits of existing Zilas (Districts) and create new Districts for the purposes of this Act. Part III deals with District Courts, where there shall be in each District a District Court presided over by a Judge to be called the District Judge. The District Judge shall be appointed by the Governor of Bombay in Council and shall be liable to be suspended or removed from his appointment only by the Governor of Bombay in Council. The District Court shall be the principal Court of original civil jurisdiction in the District, within the meaning of the Code of Civil Procedure. Part IV deals with Joint Judges, where the Governor of Bombay in Council may, with the previous sanction of the Governor General of India in Council, appoint in any District a Joint Judge who shall be invested with co-extensive powers and a concurrent jurisdiction with the District Judge. Part V deals with Assistant Judges, where the Governor of Bombay in Council, under the general control of the Governor General of India in Council, may appoint one or more Assistants to the District Judge. Part VI deals with Subordinate Judges, where the Governor of Bombay in Council, under the general control of the Governor General of India in Council, may appoint one or more Assistants to the District Judge. Part VII deals with Temporary vacancies, where in the event of the death of the District Judge or of his being prevented from performing his duties by illness or other casualty, or of his absence from his District on leave, the first in rank of the Assistant Judges in the District, or in the absence from the District of an Assistant Judge the first in rank of the Subordinate Judges, shall assume charge of the District Court without interruption to his ordinary jurisdiction. Part VIII deals with Ministerial Officers, where all ministerial officers of the Civil Courts in each District shall be appointed, and may be fined, suspended or dismissed by the District Judge, subject to such rules as the High Court may from time to time prescribe. Part IX deals with Miscellaneous, where the proceedings of each Civil Court shall be kept and recorded according to such rules as the High Court may from time to time prescribe. The High Court shall also lay down rules under which copies of papers may be granted. The Act also provides for the fees to be taken for any process issued by any Court the constitution of which is declared by this Act, or by any officer of such Court. The District and Subordinate Courts shall sit from day to day, except on Sundays, New Year's Day, Good Friday, Christmas Day, and Her Majesty’s Birth Day, and such other days as may be sanctioned for each or every District by the High Court. The High Court may also permit the Civil Courts under its control to adjourn for a period or periods not exceeding in the whole six weeks in each year.