Summary:

THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860, is an Act to provide for the registration of literary, scientific, and charitable societies. The Act defines societies as those formed by a memorandum of association and registration, with a minimum of seven members associated for any literary, scientific, or charitable purpose, or for any purpose described in section 20 of the Act.

The memorandum of association must contain the name of the society, the objects of the society, and the names, addresses, and occupations of the governors, council, directors, committee, or other governing body. A copy of the rules and regulations of the society, certified to be a correct copy by not less than three of the members of the governing body, must also be filed with the memorandum of association.

Upon such memorandum and certified copy being filed, the Registrar shall certify under his hand that the society is registered under this Act. The registration fee is fifty rupees, or such smaller fee as the State Government may, from time to time, direct.

Every society registered under this Act may sue or be sued in the name of the president, chairman, or principal secretary, or trustees, as shall be determined by the rules and regulations of the society. No suit or proceeding in any Civil Court shall abate or discontinue by reason of the person, by or against whom such suit or proceedings shall have been brought or continued, dying or ceasing to fill the character in the name whereof he shall have sued or been sued.

The property, movable and immovable, belonging to a society registered under this Act, if not vested in trustees, shall be deemed to be vested, for the time being, in the governing body of such society.

If a judgment shall be recovered against the person or officer named on behalf of the society, such judgment shall not be put in force against the property, movable or immovable, or against the body of such person or officer, but against the property of the society.

The Act enables societies to alter, extend or abridge their purposes, and to amalgamate with any other society, subject to the provisions of the Act. The governing body may submit the proposition to the members of the society in a written or printed report, and may convene a special meeting for the consideration thereof according to the regulations of the society. No such proposition shall be carried into effect unless such report shall have been delivered or sent by post to every member of the society ten days previous to the special meeting convened by the governing body for the consideration thereof, nor unless such proposition shall have been agreed to by the votes of three-fifths of the members delivered in person or by proxy, and confirmed by the votes of three-fifths of the members present at a second special meeting convened by the governing body at an interval of one month after the former meeting.

Anymember of the society who shall steal, purloin or embezzle any money or other property, or wilfully and maliciously destroy or injure any property of such society, or shall forge any deed, bond, security for money, receipt, or other instrument, whereby the funds of the society may be exposed to loss, shall be subject to the same prosecution, and, if convicted, shall be liable to be punished in like manner, as any person not a member would be subject and liable to in respect of the like offence.

The Act provides for the dissolution of societies and the adjustment of their affairs. Upon a dissolution, no member to receive profit. If upon the dissolution of any society registered under this Act there shall remain after the satisfaction of all its debts and liabilities any property whatsoever, the same shall not be paid to or distributed among the members of the said society or any of them, but shall be given to some other society, to be determined by the votes of not less than three-fifths of the members present personally or by proxy at the time of the dissolution, or, in default thereof, by such Court as aforesaid.

For the purposes of this Act, a member of a society shall be a person who, having been admitted therein according to the rules and regulations thereof, shall have paid a subscription, or shall have signed the roll or list of members thereof, and shall not have resigned in accordance with such rules and regulations.

The governing body of the society shall be the governors, council, directors, committee, trustees or other body to whom by the rules and regulations of the society the management of its affairs is entrusted.

Any company or society established for a literary, scientific, or charitable purpose, and registered under Act 43 of 1850, or any such society established and constituted previously to the passing of this Act but not registered under the said 3Act 43 of 1850, may at any time hereafter be registered as a society under this Act.

Any person may inspect all documents filed with the Registrar under this Act on payment of a fee of one rupee for each inspection. Any person may require a copy or extract of any document or any part of any document, to be certified by the Registrar, on payment of two annas for every hundred words of such copy or extract.

The following societies may be registered under this Act:—Charitable societies, the military orphan funds or societies established at the several presidencies of India, societies established for the promotion of science, literature, or the fine arts, for instruction, the diffusion of useful knowledge, the diffusion of political education, the foundation or maintenance of libraries or reading-rooms for general use among the members or open to the public, or public museums and galleries of paintings and other works of art, collections of natural history, mechanical and philosophical inventions, instruments, or designs.

The Act applies to charitable societies, the military orphan funds or societies established at the several presidencies of India, societies established for the promotion of science, literature, or the fine arts, for instruction, the diffusion of useful knowledge, the diffusion of political education, the foundation or maintenance of libraries or reading-rooms for general use among the members or open to the public, or public museums and galleries of paintings and other works of art, collections of natural history, mechanical and philosophical inventions, instruments, or designs.

In the case of a company or society registered under Act 43 of 1850, the directors shall be deemed to be such governing body. In the case of a society not so registered, if no such body shall have been constituted on the establishment of the society, it shall be competent for the members thereof, upon due notice, to create for itself a governing body to act for the society thenceforth.

In order to any such society as is mentioned in the last preceding section obtaining registry under this Act, it shall be sufficient that the governing body file with the Registrar of Joint-stock Companies a memorandum showing the name of the society, the objects of the society, and the names, addresses and occupations of the governing body, together with a copy of the rules and regulations of the society certified as provided in section 2, and a copy of the report of the proceedings of the general meeting at which the registration was resolved on.

Any person may inspect all documents filed with the Registrar under this Act on payment of a fee of one rupee for each inspection. Any person may require a copy or extract of any document or any part of any document, to be certified by the Registrar, on payment of two annas for every hundred words of such copy or extract; and such certified copy shall be prima facie evidence of the matters therein contained in all legal proceedings whatever.

The Act provides penalties for non-compliance with certain provisions, and specifies the procedure for trying offences punishable under the Act. No Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the First Class shall try an offence punishable under this Act. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act except upon complaint made by the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies or any other person, authorized in writing by him, in this behalf.

The Act has been amended in various states, and has been extended to several Union territories with modifications. It has been repealed in its application to certain districts and regions.