Summary:

THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876 (ACT NO. 10 OF 1876) is a law that limits the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts throughout the Bombay Presidency in matters relating to the Land-revenue, and for other purposes. The Act was enacted on [28th March, 1876.] with the purpose of ensuring that the jurisdiction of all the Civil Courts in the said Presidency is limited and consistent.

The Act has several sections, including:

Section 1: The short title of the Act is "The Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876", and it shall come into force on the passing thereof, except for certain provisions related to claims to set aside, on the ground of irregularity, mistake or any other ground except fraud, sales for arrears of land-revenue, which shall come into force on such day as the Governor General in Council directs in that behalf by notification in the Gazette of India. The Act extends to all the State of Maharashtra, but it does not affect certain suits related to the assessment of revenue on land situate in the City of Bombay, or the collection of such revenue, or any of the provisions of certain acts or regulations.

Section 2: This section repeals certain enactments.

Section 3: This section provides an interpretation-clause, defining terms used in the Act. "Land" includes the sites of villages, towns and cities, trees, growing crops and grass, fruit upon, and juice in, trees, rights-of-way, ferries, fisheries, and all other benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth, or permanently fastened to things attached to the earth. "Land-revenue" means all sums and payments, in money or in kind, received or claimable by or on behalf of the Government from any person on account of any land held by the Government under the provisions of any law for the time being in force. "Revenue officer" means any officer employed in or about the business of the land-revenue, or of the surveys, assessment, accounts or records connected therewith.

Section 4: This section bars certain suits. The Civil Courts shall not exercise jurisdiction as to any of the following matters: claims against the Government relating to any property appertaining to the office of any hereditary officer appointed or recognized under certain laws, or of any other village-officer or servant, or claims to perform the duties of any such officer or servant, or in respect of any injury caused by exclusion from such office or service, or suits to set aside or avoid any order under certain laws passed by the Government or any officer duly authorized in that behalf, or claims against Government relating to lands held under treaty, or to lands granted or held as saranjam, or on other political tenure, or to lands declared by Government or any officer duly authorized in that behalf to be held for service; objections to the amount or incidence of any assessment of land-revenue authorized by the Government, or to the mode of assessment, or to the principle on which such assessment is fixed, or to the validity or effect of the notification of survey or settlement, or of any notification determining the period of settlement; claims connected with or arising out of any proceedings for the realization of land-revenue or the rendering of assistance by the Government or any officer duly authorized in that behalf to superior holders or occupants for the recovery of their dues from inferior holders or tenants; claims to set aside on account of irregularity, mistake, or any other ground except fraud, sales for arrears of land-revenue; claims against Government to be entered in the revenue survey or settlement records or village papers as liable for the land-revenue, or as superior holder, inferior holder, occupant or tenant, or claims to have any entry made in any record of a revenue survey or settlement, or claims to have any such entry either omitted or amended; the distribution of land or allotment of laud-revenue on partition of any estate under certain laws, or claims against Government to hold land wholly or partially free from payment of land-revenue, or to receive payments charged on or payable out of the land-revenue, or to set aside any cess or rate authorized by the Government under certain laws, or respecting the occupation of waste or vacant land belonging to the Government. However, if any person claim to hold land wholly or partially exempt from payment of land-revenue under certain specified circumstances, such claim shall be cognizable in the Civil Courts.

Section 5: This section saves certain suits. Nothing in section four shall be held to prevent the Civil Courts from entertaining the following suits: suits against the Government to contest the amount claimed, or paid under protest, or recovered, as land-revenue on the ground that such amount is in excess of the amount authorized in that behalf by the Government, or that such amount had previous to such claim, payment, or recovery been satisfied, in whole or in part, or that the plaintiff, or the person whom he represents, is not the person liable for such amount; suits between private parties for the purpose of establishing any private right, although it may be affected by any entry in any record of a revenue survey or settlement or in any village papers; suits between superior holders or occupants and inferior holders or tenants regarding the dues claimed or recovered from the latter; and suits, other than suits against the Government, for possession of any land being a whole survey number or a recognized share of a survey number.

Section 6: This section provides that revenue officers shall not be liable to be sued for damages in any Civil Court for any act bona fide done, or ordered to be done, by them as such in pursuance of the provisions of any law for the time being in force.

Section 7: This section provides that nothing in any law for the time being in force which authorizes the punishment departmentally of any Revenue officer for any offence or breach of duty, or which sanctions his prosecution criminally for such offence or breach, shall be held to bar any remedy which may be had in the Civil Court against such officer.

Section 8: This section, which provided for officers to answer in suits against them for acts done by order of superior authority, has been repealed.

Section 9: This section, which provided for appeals from proceedings of Revenue officers, has been repealed.

Section 10: This section, which provided for the power to Local Government to call for record, has been repealed.

Section 11: This section provides that no Civil Court shall entertain any suit against the Government on account of any act or omission of any Revenue- officer unless the plaintiff first proves that, previously to bringing his suit, he has presented all such appeals allowed by the law for the time being in force, as within the period of limitation allowed for bringing such suit, it was possible to present.

Section 12: This section provides that if in the trial or investigation of any suit, claim or objection, which, but for the passing of this Act, might have been tried or investigated by a Civil Court, there arises any question on which the State Government desires to have the decision of the High Court, the State Government may cause a statement of the question to be prepared, and may refer such question for the decision of the High Court.

Section 13: This section provides that if in any suit instituted, or in any appeal presented, in a Civil Court, the Judge doubts whether he is precluded by this Act from taking cognizance of the suit or appeal, he may refer the matter to the High Court.

Section 14: This section provides that every reference under section twelve or section thirteen shall be heard by a Bench consisting of such number of Judges not less than three, as the Chief Justice from time to time directs.

Section 15: This section, which provided for the amendment of section 32 of the Bombay Civil Courts Act, has been repealed.

Section 16: This section provides privileges of the Government in suits in which it is concerned. Whenever any suit is brought in any District Court against the Government or against any Revenue officer, and the Government undertakes the defence thereof, it shall be lawful for the Government to require that such suit shall be tried by the District Judge himself, and shall not be transferred for trial to an Assistant Judge, and that the trial of any such suit shall have precedence over the trial of any other suit or other civil proceeding then pending in such Court.

Section 17: This section, which provided for the operation of certain Regulations in certain districts, has been repealed.

The Second Schedule lists the Districts of Ahmedabad, Kaira (exclusive of the PanchMahals), Broach, Surat (exclusive of the lapsed State of Mandvi), Tanna, Colaba (exclusive of the lapsed State of Colaba), Ratnagiri, and Kanara.

Overall, THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876 (ACT NO. 10 OF 1876) is a law that limits the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts throughout the Bombay Presidency in matters relating to the Land-revenue, and for other purposes. It defines terms, bars certain suits, saves certain suits, and provides privileges to the Government in suits in which it is concerned. The Act also includes provisions for referring questions to the High Court and for appeals from proceedings of Revenue officers. The Second Schedule lists the Districts of Ahmedabad, Kaira (exclusive of the PanchMahals), Broach, Surat (exclusive of the lapsed State of Mandvi), Tanna, Colaba (exclusive of the lapsed State of Colaba), Ratnagiri, and Kanara.