Summary:

THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871, is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Pensions and Grants by Government of money or land-revenue. The Act has been amended several times, and it now extends to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States.

The Act has four chapters, and each chapter has different sections. Chapter I is the preliminary chapter, which has three sections. Section 1 provides the short title and extent of the Act. Section 2 has been repealed. Section 3 provides the interpretation of the Act.

Chapter II deals with the rights to pensions and has four sections. Section 4 bars suits relating to pensions, and Section 5 provides that any person having a claim relating to any such pension or grant may prefer such claim to the Collector of the District or Deputy Commissioner or other officer authorized in this behalf by the appropriate Government. Section 6 empowers a Civil Court to take cognizance of any such claim upon receiving a certificate from such Collector, Deputy Commissioner or other officer authorized in that behalf, but it shall not make any order or decree in any suit whatever by which the liability of Government to pay any such pension or grant as aforesaid is affected directly or indirectly. Section 7 provides that nothing in sections 4 and 6 applies to pensions granted by Government in the territories respectively subject to the Lieutenant-Governors of Bengal and the North-Western Provinces, either wholly or in part as an indemnity for loss sustained by the resumption by a Native Government of lands held under sanads purporting to confer a right in perpetuity.

Chapter III deals with the mode of payment and has three sections. Section 8 provides that all pensions or grants by Government of money or land-revenue shall be paid by the Collector or the Deputy Commissioner or other authorized officer, subject to such rules as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the Chief Controlling Revenue-authority. Section 9 provides that nothing in sections 4 and 8 shall affect the right of a grantee of land-revenue, whose claim to such grant is admitted by Government, to recover such revenue from the persons liable to pay the same under any law for the time being in force for the recovery of the rent of land. Section 10 provides that the appropriate Government may, with the consent of the holder, order the whole or any part of his pension or grant of money or land-revenue to be commuted for a lump sum on such terms as may seem fit.

Chapter IV deals with miscellaneous provisions and has five sections. Section 11 provides that no pension granted or continued by Government on political considerations, or on account of past services or present infirmities or as a compassionate allowance, and no money due or to become due on account of any such pension or allowance, shall be liable to seizure, attachment or sequestration by process of any Court at the instance of a creditor, for any demand against the pensioner, or in satisfaction of a decree or order of any such Court. Section 12 provides that all assignments, agreements, orders, sales, and securities of every kind made by the person entitled to any pension, pay or allowance mentioned in section 11, in respect of any money not payable at or before the making thereof, on account of any such pension, pay or allowance, or for giving or assigning any future interest therein, are null and void. Section 12A provides for nomination by pensioner to receive moneys outstanding on account of pension. Section 13 provides that whoever proves to the satisfaction of the appropriate Government that any pension is fraudulently or unduly received by the person enjoying the benefit thereof shall be entitled to a reward equivalent to the amount of such pension for the period of six months. Section 14 provides that the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority may, with the consent of the appropriate Government, from time to time make rules consistent with this Act respecting all or any of the following matters:—the place and times at which, and the person to whom, any pension shall be paid; inquiries into the identity of claimants; records to be kept on the subject of pensions; transmission of such records; correction of such records; delivery of certificates to pensioners; registers of such certificates; reference to the Civil Court, under section 6, of persons claiming a right of succession to, or participation in, pensions or grants of money or land-revenue payable by Government; and generally for the guidance of officers under this Act. All such rules shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force of law. Section 15 provides that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —(a) the manner and form in which any nomination may be made under section 12A and the manner and form in which such nomination may be cancelled or varied by another nomination; and (b) the manner in which provision may be made, for the purposes of the second proviso to section 12A, in any such nomination for conferring on some person other than the nominee the right to receive moneys payable to the nominee if such nominee predeceases the pensioner. Section 16 provides that every rule made by the Central Government under this Act and every rule made under section 14 by a Chief Controlling Revenue Authority with the consent of the Central Government, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. The Schedule has been repealed.