The Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (Act No. 15 of 1872) is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the solemnization of marriages of Christians in India. This Act applies to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the States of Travancore-Cochin, Manipur, and the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States.

The Act defines 'Christians' as persons professing the Christian religion and 'Indian Christians' as Christians who are or are deemed to be Indian citizens. The Act also defines 'Minor' as a person who has not completed the age of twenty-one years and who is not a widower or a widow.

The Act provides for the solemnization of marriages between Christians in accordance with the provisions of the Act. Any marriage between persons, one or both of whom is or are a Christian or Christians, shall be solemnized in accordance with the provisions of the Act, and any such marriage solemnized otherwise than in accordance with such provisions shall be void.

Marriages may be solemnized in India by any person who has received episcopal ordination, provided that the marriage be solemnized according to the rules, rites, ceremonies, and customs of the Church of which he is a Minister. Marriages may also be solemnized by any Clergyman of the Church of Scotland, provided that such marriage be solemnized according to the rules, rites, ceremonies, and customs of the Church of Scotland.

Marriages may also be solemnized by any Minister of Religion licensed under this Act to solemnize marriages, by or in the presence of a Marriage Registrar appointed under this Act, or by any person licensed under this Act to grant certificates of marriage between Indian Christians.

The Act also provides for the grant and revocation of licenses to solemnize marriages and the appointment of Marriage Registrars. The State Government may grant licenses to Ministers of Religion to solemnize marriages within such territories and may revoke such licenses. The State Government may also appoint one or more Christians, either by name or as holding any office for the time being, to be the Marriage Registrar or Marriage Registrars for any district subject to its administration.

The Act also provides for the time and place at which marriages may be solemnized. Every marriage under this Act shall be solemnized between the hours of six in the morning and seven in the evening. No Clergyman of the Church of England shall solemnize a marriage in any place other than a church where worship is generally held according to the forms of the Church of England, unless there is no such church within five miles distance by the shortest road from such place or unless he has received a special license authorizing him to do so.

The Act also provides for the registration of marriages solemnized by Ministers of Religion licensed under this Act. Every Clergyman of the Church of England shall keep a register of marriages and shall register therein every marriage which he solemnizes under this Act. Every Clergyman of the Church of England shall send four times in every year returns, authenticated by his signature, of the entries in the register of marriages solemnized at any place where he has any spiritual charge, to the Registrar of the Archdeaconry to which he is subject, or within the limits of which such place is situate.

The Act also provides for the registration of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of the Church of Rome and the Church of Scotland. Every marriage solemnized by a Clergyman of the Church of Rome shall be registered by the person and according to the form directed in that behalf by the Roman Catholic Bishop of the Diocese or Vicariate in which such marriage is solemnized. Every Clergyman of the Church of Scotland shall keep a register of marriages and shall register therein every marriage which he solemnizes under this Act.

The Act also provides for the registration of marriages solemnized by persons who have received episcopal ordination, but who are not Clergymen of the Church of England, or of the Church of Rome, or by any Minister of Religion licensed under this Act to solemnize marriages. Every such marriage shall immediately after the solemnization thereof be registered in duplicate by the person solemnizing the same.

The Act also provides for the issue of certificates of notice given and declarations made. Any Minister of Religion consenting or intending to solemnize any such marriage as aforesaid, shall, on being required so to do by or on behalf of the person by whom the notice was given, and upon one of the persons intending marriage making the declaration herein after required, issue under his hand a certificate of such notice having been given and of such declaration having been made.

The Act also provides for the solemnization of marriage after the issue of the certificate. After the issue of the certificate by the Minister, marriage may be solemnized between the persons therein described according to such form or ceremony as the Minister thinks fit to adopt.

The Act also provides for the registration of marriages solemnized under Part V. After the solemnization of any marriage under this Part, the Marriage Registrar present at such solemnization shall forthwith register the marriage in duplicate; that is to say, in a marriage-register-book, according to the form of the Fourth Schedule hereto annexed, and also in a certificate attached to the marriage-register-book as a counterfoil.

The Act also provides for the registration of marriages between Indian Christians. The registration of marriages between Indian Christians under this Part shall be made in conformity with the rules laid down in section 37 (so far as they are applicable), and not otherwise.

The Act also provides for penalties for false oath, declaration, notice, or certificate for procuring marriage, forbidding, by false personation, the issue of a certificate by a Marriage Registrar, solemnizing marriage without due authority, solemnizing marriage out of proper time or without witnesses, solemnizing marriage with a minor within fourteen days after notice or without authority of Court or without sending copy of notice, issuing a certificate authorizedly forbidden, and solemnizing marriage authorizedly forbidden.

The Act also provides for the limitation of prosecutions under the Act and miscellaneous provisions. Every prosecution for every offence punishable under this Act shall be commenced within two years after the offence is committed. The Act also provides for the correction of errors, searches and copies of entries, certified copies of entry in marriage register, etc., to be evidence, certificates of certain marriages to be sent to Central Government, state government to prescribe fees, power to make rules, power to prescribe fees and rules for Indian States, power to declare who shall be District Judge, powers and functions exercisable as regards Indian States, saving of Consular marriages, non-validation of marriages within prohibited degrees, and repeal of enactments.

The Act also contains Schedules for forms and fees.