The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is a document that outlines the laws regarding evidence in India. It consists of two parts: Part I, which deals with the relevancy of facts, and Part II, which deals with the proof of facts.

Part I of the document begins with a preliminary chapter that outlines the short title, extent, commencement, and interpretation of the Act. The Act applies to all judicial proceedings in or before any court, including courts-martial, but does not apply to affidavits presented to any court or officer or to proceedings before an arbitrator. The Act defines relevant facts as those that are connected with other facts in issue in any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Act. Facts in issue are defined as any fact from which, either by itself or in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature, or extent of any right, liability, or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily follows.

The document also defines the terms "court," "fact," "relevant," "facts in issue," "document," and "evidence." A court includes all judges and magistrates, and all persons legally authorized to take evidence. A fact is defined as anything, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being perceived by the senses, or any mental condition of which any person is conscious. Relevant facts are those that are connected with other facts in issue in any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Act. Facts in issue are those that are necessary to be determined in order to decide the rights of the parties in a suit or proceeding. A document is defined as any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures, or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used or which may be used for the purpose of recording that matter. Evidence means and includes all statements which the court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry, and such statements are called oral evidence, and all documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of the court, and such documents are called documentary evidence.

The document also outlines the different types of presumptions that can be made by the court. These include may presume, shall presume, and conclusive proof. Whenever it is provided by this Act that the court may presume a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved, or may call for proof of it. Whenever it is directed by this Act that the court shall presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved. When one fact is declared by this Act to be conclusive proof of another, the court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of disproving it.

Part II of the document deals with the proof of facts. It outlines the different types of evidence that can be used to prove a fact, including oral and documentary evidence. It also outlines the rules for the examination and cross-examination of witnesses, and the burden of proof in a suit or proceeding.

In summary, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is a document that outlines the laws regarding evidence in India. It consists of two parts: Part I, which deals with the relevancy of facts, and Part II, which deals with the proof of facts. The Act defines relevant facts, facts in issue, court, fact, document, and evidence. It also outlines the different types of presumptions that can be made by the court and the rules for the examination and cross-examination of witnesses, and the burden of proof in a suit or proceeding.
The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 lays down the rules for the admission and proof of evidence in courts of law in India. This summary will focus on specific sections of the Act that deal with relevant facts, including motive, preparation, and previous or subsequent conduct, as well as things said or done by conspirators in reference to a common design.

Section 6 of the Act states that any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact. Additionally, the conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding, in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, is relevant if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.

Explanation 2 to Section 8 clarifies that when the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to him or in his presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant. Illustrations provided in the section further clarify the application of this rule to various scenarios, such as a person being tried for murder, a suit for the payment of money, or a question of whether a certain document is the will of a person.

Section 9 of the Act states that facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which establish the identity of any thing or person whose identity is relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that purpose.

Section 10 of the Act deals with the relevance of things said or done by conspirators in reference to a common design. Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done or written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention, after the time when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a party to it.

Section 11 of the Act states that facts not otherwise relevant are relevant if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact, or if by themselves or in connection with other facts, they make the existence or non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.

In summary, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 lays down rules for the admission and proof of evidence in courts of law in India. Specific sections of the Act deal with relevant facts, including motive, preparation, and previous or subsequent conduct, as well as things said or done by conspirators in reference to a common design. These rules help ensure that relevant evidence is admitted and considered in legal proceedings, while also limiting the admission of irrelevant or prejudicial evidence.
Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act of 1872, Section 11 states that any fact that shows that the crime could have been committed by no one else, and that it was not committed by either B, C, or D, is relevant. Section 12 states that in suits for damages, any fact that will enable the Court to determine the amount of damages that ought to be awarded is relevant. Section 13 states that where the question is as to the existence of any right or custom, the following facts are relevant: any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created, claimed, modified, recognized, asserted, or denied, or which was inconsistent with its existence; and particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognized, or exercised, or in which its exercise was disputed, asserted, or departed from. Section 14 states that facts showing the existence of any state of mind, such as intention, knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will, or good-will towards any particular person, or showing the existence of any state of body or bodily feeling, are relevant, when the existence of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue or relevant. Section 15 states that when there is a question whether an act was accidental or intentional, or done with a particular knowledge or intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant. Section 16 states that when there is a question whether a particular act was done, the existence of any course of business, according to which it naturally would have been done, is a relevant fact.
Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 outlines the rules for the admission of evidence in legal proceedings in India. The Act defines an admission as a statement made by a party or their agent that suggests any inference as to a fact in issue or a relevant fact. Admissions can be made orally, in writing, or electronically. Admissions made by parties to a proceeding, or their agents, are admissible as evidence. Admissions made by parties in a representative capacity, such as a suitor, are admissible if made while they held that character. Admissions made by parties interested in the subject matter or persons from whom they have derived their interest are admissible if made during the continuance of their interest. Statements made by persons whose position or liability must be proved in the suit are admissions if made while they occupy that position or are subject to that liability. Statements made by persons to whom a party has expressly referred for information are also admissions. Admissions can be proved by or on behalf of the person making them in certain circumstances, such as if the statement is of a nature that would be relevant if the person were dead, or if it is relevant otherwise than as an admission. Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not relevant unless the party proposing to prove them shows that they are entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of the document or if the genuineness of the document is in question. In civil cases, no admission is relevant if it is made on the condition that evidence of it is not to be given or if the parties agreed that evidence of it should not be given. Confessions caused by inducement, threat, or promise are irrelevant in criminal proceedings. Confessions made to a police officer cannot be proved as against a person accused of an offense. Confessions made while a person is in the custody of a police officer, unless made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate, are not admissible as evidence against them. However, if a fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received from a person accused of an offense, so much of such information as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered may be proved. A confession made after the removal of the impression caused by any such inducement, threat, or promise is relevant. A confession is not rendered inadmissible merely because it was made under a promise of secrecy or in consequence of a deception practiced on the accused.
The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 outlines the rules for the admissibility of evidence in courts of law in India. In this summary, we will focus on Sections 27-33 of the Act, which deal with statements made by persons who cannot be called as witnesses.

Section 27: Confessions made to a police officer not to be proved

Under Section 27, confessions made to a police officer are not admissible as evidence against the person making the confession. This provision is meant to protect individuals from being coerced into confessing to a crime by the police.

Section 28: Confessions made by accused in presence of police officer

Similarly, confessions made by an accused person in the presence of a police officer, but not in the immediate presence of a magistrate, are also not admissible as evidence. This provision is intended to ensure that confessions are made voluntarily and without any pressure from the police.

Section 29: Confessions to be proved by persons who heard them made

However, if a confession is made in the immediate presence of a magistrate, it can be used as evidence against the person making the confession. Such confessions must be proved by the persons who heard them made.

Section 30: Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and others jointly under trial for same offence

Under Section 30, if more than one person is being tried jointly for the same offence, and a confession made by one of them affects both themselves and the other accused, the court may take the confession into consideration as evidence against the other accused as well.

Section 31: Admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop

Under Section 31, admissions made by a person are not conclusive proof of the facts admitted, but they may be used to prevent the person from denying those facts in a later proceeding. This provision is intended to prevent people from making inconsistent statements in different proceedings.

Section 32: Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant

Under Section 32, statements made by a person who is dead or cannot be found, or who is incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an unreasonable amount of delay or expense, are admissible as evidence if they relate to the cause of death, are made in the ordinary course of business, are against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the person making them, give an opinion as to a public right or custom, or relate to the existence of a relationship by blood, marriage, or adoption.

Section 33: Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceeding, the truth of facts therein stated

Under Section 33, evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding or before any person authorized by law to take it is relevant for the purpose of proving the truth of the facts stated in the evidence in a subsequent judicial proceeding or in a later stage of the same judicial proceeding, if the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without an unreasonable amount of delay or expense.

In summary, Sections 27-33 of the Indian Evidence Act of 1872 deal with statements made by persons who cannot be called as witnesses. These provisions are intended to ensure that confessions and admissions are made voluntarily and without any pressure from the police, and that statements made by deceased or unavailable witnesses are admissible as evidence under certain circumstances.
The opinions of experts upon the question whether the handwriting of the document is that of A, are relevant.', '7': '(d) The question is, whether a certain seal affixed to a document is the seal of B.', '8': 'The opinions of experts upon the question whether the seal is the seal of B, are relevant.', '9': '(e) The question is, whether an act is the act of a particular corporation.', '10': 'The opinions of experts upon the question whether the seal affixed to the document is the seal used by that corporation, are relevant.'}}, 'Section 46.': {'heading': 'Facts bearing upon opinions of experts.', 'paragraphs': {'0': 'Facts bearing upon the question whether an expert is competent to express an opinion, and facts calculated to affect the weight of his opinion, are relevant, whether they are or are not themselves proved by other evidence.'}}, 'Section 47.': {'heading': 'Opinions of third persons not relevant, when', 'paragraphs': {'0': 'Opinions of third persons, when uncommunicated to the person for whose use the opinion is given, are not relevant, unless the Court has 4[or the person to whom the opinion is given has] special means of knowledge as to the accuracy of such opinions.'}}}}

Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 outlines the relevance of various types of evidence in legal proceedings. This summary will focus on sections of the Act that relate to Indian laws, including Acts, Articles, or other legal terms.

Section 34 discusses the relevance of entries in books of account, including those maintained electronically, in the course of business. These entries are relevant whenever they refer to a matter into which the court has to inquire, but they alone are not sufficient evidence to charge any person with liability.

Section 35 states that an entry in any public or official book, register, or record, or an electronic record, made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, is a relevant fact.

Section 36 states that statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in published maps or charts generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under the authority of the Central Government or any State Government, are themselves relevant facts.

Section 37 states that when the court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public nature, any statement of it made in a recital contained in any Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom or in any Central Act, Provincial Act, or State Act, or in a Government notification or notification by the Crown Representative appearing in the Official Gazette, is a relevant fact.

Section 38 states that when the court has to form an opinion as to a law of any country, any statement of such law contained in a book purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the Government of such country and to contain any such law, is relevant.

Section 39 states that when any statement of which evidence is given forms part of a longer statement, or of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is contained in a document which forms part of a book, or is contained in part of electronic record or of a connected series of letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more of the statement, conversation, document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers as the court considers necessary in that particular case to the full understanding of the nature and effect of the statement, and of the circumstances under which it was made.

Section 40 states that the existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law prevents any court from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant fact when the question is whether such court ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold such trial.

Section 41 states that a final judgment, order or decree of a competent court, in the exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers upon or takes away from any person any legal character, or which declares any person to be entitled to any such character, or to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any specified person but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal character, or the title of any such person to any such thing, is relevant. Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof that any legal character which it confers accrued at the time when such judgment, order or decree came into operation, and that anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled was the property of that person at the time from which such judgment, order or decree declares that it had been or should be his property.

Section 42 states that judgments, orders or decrees other than those mentioned in section 41 are relevant if they relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry, but such judgments, orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which they state.

Section 43 states that judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in sections 40, 41, and 42, are irrelevant, unless the existence of such judgment, order or decree is a fact in issue, or is relevant under some other provision of this Act.

Section 44 states that any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order, or decree which is relevant under section 40, 41, or 42, and which has been proved by the adverse party, was delivered by a court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by fraud or collusion.

Section 45 states that when the court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law or of science, or art, or as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions, the opinions upon that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science, or art, or in questions as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions, are relevant facts.

Section 46 states that facts bearing upon the question whether an expert is competent to express an opinion, and facts calculated to affect the weight of his opinion, are relevant, whether they are or are not themselves proved by other evidence.

Section 47 states that opinions of third persons, when uncommunicated to the person for whose use the opinion is given, are not relevant, unless the court has or the person to whom the opinion is given has special means of knowledge as to the accuracy of such opinions.
Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 outlines various rules and regulations regarding the admissibility and relevance of evidence in legal proceedings. This document summarizes Sections 45 to 57 of the Act, focusing on the relevance of opinions, character, and facts of which the court must take judicial notice.

Section 45: Opinions of experts are relevant when the court has to form an opinion on a matter relating to any information transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or digital form. The opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence is also relevant in such cases.

Section 46: Facts that support or are inconsistent with the opinions of experts are relevant when such opinions are relevant.

Section 47: The opinion of any person acquainted with the handwriting of the person by whom a document is supposed to be written or signed is relevant when the court has to form an opinion as to the person by whom the document was written or signed.

Section 47A: The opinion of the Certifying Authority that has issued the electronic signature certificate is relevant when the court has to form an opinion as to the electronic signature of any person.

Section 48: The opinions of persons who are likely to know of the existence of a general custom or right are relevant when the court has to form an opinion as to the existence of such custom or right.

Section 49: The opinions of persons having special means of knowledge are relevant when the court has to form an opinion as to the usages and tenets of any body of men or family, the constitution and government of any religious or charitable foundation, or the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by particular classes of people.

Section 50: The opinion expressed by conduct, as to the existence of a relationship, of any person who has special means of knowledge on the subject is relevant when the court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of one person to another.

Section 51: The grounds on which an opinion is based are also relevant whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant.

Section 52: In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person concerned is such as to render probable or improbable any conduct imputed to him is irrelevant, except insofar as such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.

Section 53: In criminal proceedings, the fact that the person accused is of a good character is relevant.

Section 53A: In a prosecution for certain offenses under the Indian Penal Code, evidence of the character of the victim or of such person's previous sexual experience with any person is not relevant on the issue of consent or the quality of consent.

Section 54: In criminal proceedings, the fact that the accused person has a bad character is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he has a good character, in which case it becomes relevant.

Section 55: In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person is such as to affect the amount of damages which he ought to receive is relevant.

Section 56: No fact of which the court will take judicial notice need be proved.

Section 57: The court shall take judicial notice of certain facts, including all laws in force in India, all public and local Acts passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, the course of proceedings of Parliament and of the legislatures established under any laws for the time being in force in a Province or in the States, the accession to office, names, titles, functions, and signatures of the persons holding various offices, and the seals of various courts and authorities.
This document provides information on the rules of evidence in India. It explains the types of evidence that can be used in legal proceedings, including oral evidence, primary evidence, and secondary evidence. The document also outlines the specific rules for proving the contents of documents, such as the requirement for primary evidence in most cases. Additionally, the document includes special provisions for evidence relating to electronic records.

Primary evidence refers to the document itself, while secondary evidence includes copies made from the original by mechanical processes, copies made from or compared with the original, counterparts of documents, and oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen it. Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition, or contents of a document in certain cases, such as when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved, or when the original has been destroyed or lost.

In the case of electronic records, the contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the provisions of section 65B. Any information contained in an electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media produced by a computer shall be deemed to be also a document, if the conditions mentioned in section 65B are satisfied in relation to the information and computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or production of the original.

It's also important to note that, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 was amended in 2000 by Information Technology Act, 2000 to include provisions relating to electronic records and electronic signatures. The amendment aimed to provide legal recognition to electronic records and to ensure that the legal framework for evidence was able to accommodate advances in technology.
Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act, 1872, outlines the rules for the admission and proof of evidence in legal proceedings in India. This summary focuses on certain sections of the Act related to electronic records and digital signatures.

Section 65B: This section deals with the admissibility of electronic records. An electronic record can be admitted as evidence if it is shown that it was regularly generated, stored, or processed by a computer in the ordinary course of activities. The computer must have been operating properly during the material part of the period, and the information contained in the electronic record must be derived from information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of activities.

Section 66: This section outlines the rules for giving notice to produce documents. Secondary evidence of the contents of a document cannot be given unless the party proposing to give such evidence has previously given notice to produce the document to the party in possession or power of the document. However, notice is not required if the document is itself a notice, when the adverse party must know that he will be required to produce it, or when it appears that the adverse party has obtained possession of the original by fraud or force.

Section 67: This section deals with the proof of the signature and handwriting of a person alleged to have signed or written a document. The signature or handwriting of a person alleged to have signed or written a document must be proved to be in his handwriting.

Section 67A: This section deals with the proof of electronic signatures. Except in the case of a secure electronic signature, if the electronic signature of any subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record, the fact that such electronic signature is the electronic signature of the subscriber must be proved.

Section 68: This section deals with the proof of execution of a document required by law to be attested. If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution.

Section 69: This section deals with proof where no attesting witness can be found. If no such attesting witness can be found, or if the document purports to have been executed in the United Kingdom, it must be proved that the attestation of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person executing the document is in the handwriting of that person.

Section 70: This section deals with admission of execution by a party to an attested document. The admission of a party to an attested document of its execution by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against him, though it be a document required by law to be attested.

Section 71: This section deals with proof when an attesting witness denies the execution. If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the document, its execution may be proved by other evidence.

Section 72: This section deals with proof of a document not required by law to be attested. An attested document not required by law to be attested may be proved as if it was unattested.

Section 73: This section deals with comparison of signature, writing, or seal with others admitted or proved. In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing, or seal is that of the person by whom it purports to have been written or made, any signature, writing, or seal admitted or proved to the satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by that person may be compared with the one which is to be proved.

Section 73A: This section deals with proof as to verification of digital signature. In order to ascertain whether a digital signature is that of the person by whom it purports to have been affixed, the Court may direct the person or the Controller or the Certifying Authority to produce the Digital Signature Certificate or any other person to apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate and verify the digital signature purported to have been affixed by that person.

Public Documents: The following documents are public documents: (1) Documents forming the acts or records of the acts of the sovereign authority, official bodies and tribunals, and public officers, legislative, judicial, and executive, of any part of India or of any foreign country; (2) Public records kept in any State of private documents.
Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 outlines the rules for the admission and proof of evidence in courts in India. This summary focuses on the sections related to Indian laws, including Acts, Articles, or other legal terms.

Section 62 of the Act defines public documents as those that fall under three categories: (i) documents relating to the sovereign authority of the government, (ii) documents of official bodies and tribunals, and (iii) documents of public officers, legislative, judicial, and executive, of any part of India or of the Commonwealth, or of a foreign country. Section 63 defines public records as documents kept in any State of private documents.

Section 75 states that all other documents are private.

Section 76 outlines the rules for certified copies of public documents. Every public officer having custody of a public document must provide a copy of it to any person who demands it, along with a certificate written at the foot of the copy that it is a true copy of the document. These certified copies may be produced in proof of the contents of the public documents or parts of the public documents of which they purport to be copies.

The following public documents may be proved as follows:

* Acts, orders, or notifications of the Central Government, or of the Crown Representative, or of any State Government or any department of any State Government, by the records of the departments, certified by the head of those departments, or by any document purporting to be printed by order of any such Government or, as the case may be, of the Crown Representative.
* The proceedings of the Legislatures, by the journals of those bodies, or by published Acts or abstracts, or by copies purporting to be printed by order of the Government concerned.
* Proclamations, orders, or regulations issued by Her Majesty or by the Privy Council, or by any department of Her Majesty's Government, by copies or extracts contained in the London Gazette, or purporting to be printed by the Queen's Printer.
* The Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign country, by journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country as such, or by a copy certified under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a recognition thereof in some Central Act.
* The proceedings of a municipal body in a State, by a copy of such proceedings, certified by the legal keeper thereof, or by a printed book purporting to be published by the authority of such body.
* Public documents of any other class in a foreign country, by the original, or by a copy certified by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the seal of a Notary Public, or of an Indian Consul or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly certified by the officer having the legal custody of the original, and upon proof of the character of the document according to the law of the foreign country.

Section 79 states that the Court shall presume to be genuine every document purporting to be a certificate, certified copy, or other document, which is by Law declared to be admissible as evidence of any particular fact, and which purports to be duly certified by any officer of the Central Government or of a State Government, or by any officer in the State of Jammu and Kashmir who is duly authorized thereto by the Central Government. Section 80 states that whenever any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a record or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence, given by a witness in a judicial proceeding or before any officer authorized by law to take such evidence or to be a statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance with law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid, the Court shall presume that the document is genuine, that any statements as to the circumstances under which it was taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it, are true, and that such evidence, statement, or confession was duly taken. Section 81 states that the Court shall presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be the London Gazette or any Official Gazette, or the Government Gazette of any colony, dependency, or possession of the British Crown, or to be a newspaper or journal, or to be a copy of a private Act of Parliament printed by the Queen's Printer, and of every document purporting to be a document directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such document is kept substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.

Section 81A states that the Court shall presume the genuineness of every electronic record purporting to be the Official Gazette, or purporting to be an electronic record directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such electronic record is kept substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.

Section 82 states that when any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a document which, by the law in force for the time being in England or Ireland, would be admissible in proof of any particular in any Court of Justice in England or Ireland, without proof of the seal or stamp or signature authenticating it, or of the judicial or official character claimed by the person by whom it purports to be signed, the Court shall presume that such seal, stamp, or signature is genuine, and that the person signing it held, at the time when he signed it, the judicial or official character which he claims, and the document shall be admissible for the same purpose for which it would be admissible in England or Ireland.

Section 83 states that the Court shall presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority of the Central Government or any State Government were so made, and are accurate, but maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause must be proved to be accurate.

Section 84 states that the Court shall presume the genuineness of every book purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the Government of any country, and to contain any of the laws of that country, and of every book purporting to contain reports of decisions of the Courts of such country.

Section 85 states that the Court shall presume that every document purporting to be a power-of-attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of the Central Government, was so executed and authenticated.

Section 85A states that the Court shall presume that every electronic record purporting to be an agreement containing the electronic signature of the parties was so concluded by affixing the electronic signature of the parties.

Section 85B states that in any proceedings involving a secure electronic record, the Court shall presume unless contrary is proved, that the secure electronic record has not been altered since the specific point of time to which the secure status relates, and in any proceedings involving secure digital signature, the Court shall presume unless the contrary is proved that the secure electronic signature is affixed by the subscriber with the intention of signing or approving the electronic record.

Section 85C states that electronic signature means the authentication of an electronic record by a subscriber by means of the electronic signature affixed by him and offering to the electronic form for the purpose of being authenticated by the subscriber.
Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 lays down provisions related to the admissibility and relevance of evidence in legal proceedings in India. In this summary, we will focus on certain sections of the Act that deal with the presumption of certain facts and the exclusion of oral evidence by documentary evidence.

Section 65B deals with the admissibility of electronic records. It states that any information contained in an electronic record that is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic form by a computer system or other similar device, shall be deemed to be a document. The Court may presume that the electronic signature which purports to be the signature of any particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorized by him in this behalf.

Section 65C deals with the admissibility of electronic records as evidence. It states that any electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic form by a computer system or other similar device, shall be deemed to be a document. The Court may presume that the computer output containing the electronic record was produced by the computer system referred to in the certificate.

Section 66 provides for the presumption as to electronic signatures. The Court shall presume that every electronic signature which purports to be the signature of any particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorized by him in this behalf.

Section 86 deals with the presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records. The Court may presume that any document purporting to be a certified copy of any judicial record of any country not forming part of India or of Her Majesty’s Dominions is genuine and accurate, if the document purports to be certified in any manner which is certified by any representative of the Central Government in or for such country to be the manner commonly in use in that country for the certification of copies of judicial records.

Section 87 deals with the presumption as to books, maps and charts. The Court may presume that any book to which it may refer for information on matters of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart, the statements of which are relevant facts, and which is produced for its inspection, was written and published by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have been written or published.

Section 88 deals with the presumption as to telegraphic messages. The Court may presume that a message, forwarded from a telegraph office to the person to whom such message purports to be addressed, corresponds with a message delivered for transmission at the office from which the message purports to be sent; but the Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was delivered for transmission.

Section 88A deals with the presumption as to electronic messages. The Court may presume that an electronic message, forwarded by the originator through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message purports to be addressed corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for transmission; but the Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was sent.

Section 89 deals with the presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced. The Court shall presume that every document, called for and not produced after notice to produce, was attested, stamped and executed in the manner required by law.

Section 90 deals with the presumption as to documents thirty years old. Where any document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may presume that the signature and every other part of such document, which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person’s handwriting, and, in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by whom it purports to be executed and attested.

Section 90A deals with the presumption as to electronic records five years old. Where any electronic record, purporting or proved to be five years old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may presume that the electronic signature which purports to be the electronic signature of any particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorized by him in this behalf.

Section 91 deals with the exclusion of oral evidence by documentary evidence. When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property, have been reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof of the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter, except the document itself, or secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary evidence is admissible under the provisions hereinbefore contained.

Section 92 deals with the exclusion of evidence of oral agreement. When the terms of any such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have been proved according to the last section, no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted, as between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest, for the purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, its terms. However, any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, such as fraud, intimidation, illegality, want of due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party, want or failure of consideration, or mistake in fact or law.

In conclusion, the Indian Evidence Act of 1872 lays down provisions related to the admissibility and relevance of evidence in legal proceedings in India. The Act provides for the presumption of certain facts and the exclusion of oral evidence by documentary evidence. The Act recognizes the importance of electronic records and provides for their admissibility as evidence. The Act also provides for the presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records and the presumption as to books, maps and charts. The Act also provides for the presumption as to telegraphic messages and the presumption as to electronic messages. The Act also provides for the presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced and the presumption as to documents thirty years old. The Act also provides for the presumption as to electronic records five years old. The Act also provides for the exclusion of oral evidence by documentary evidence and the exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.
The above document is a part of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The section discusses the burden of proof in legal proceedings. According to Section 101, the person who desires a court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability dependent on the existence of facts must prove that those facts exist. The burden of proof lies on the person who asserts the existence of the facts.

Section 102 explains on whom the burden of proof lies. The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side. For instance, in a suit for land possession, if no evidence were given on either side, the person in possession would be entitled to retain the possession. Therefore, the burden of proof lies on the person who is not in possession.

Section 103 discusses the burden of proof as to any particular fact. The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person. For instance, in a prosecution for theft, if the prosecution wishes the court to believe that the accused admitted the theft to someone, the prosecution must prove the admission.

Section 104 provides that the burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on the person who substantially asserts the affirmative of that fact. In other words, if a person makes an affirmative allegation, the burden of proof lies on that person. For example, if a person alleges that another person has committed a crime, the burden of proof lies on the person making the allegation.

Section 105 provides that when a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person. The section further provides that the burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on the person who substantially asserts the affirmative of that fact. The burden of proof may shift during the course of the trial depending on the evidence adduced by the parties.

Section 106 provides that when the burden of proof lies on any person, and he adduces evidence sufficient to raise a presumption that the fact in issue exists, the burden of proof shifts to the opponent to adduce evidence sufficient to rebut that presumption. For instance, if a person is charged with an offense and he adduces evidence to show that he was elsewhere at the time of the offense, the burden of proof shifts to the prosecution to rebut that presumption.

Section 107 provides that when the burden of proof lies on any person, and he adduces evidence which is consistent with the existence of the fact in issue, and inconsistent with the existence of the negation of that fact, the burden of proof shifts to the opponent to adduce evidence sufficient to disprove the existence of that fact.

Section 108 provides that when a person is accused of any offense, the burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any exception created by law, or within any exemption from, or qualification to, the operation of the law creating the offense, is upon him, and the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances.

Section 109 provides that when a person is accused of any offense, and the existence of any circumstance is a necessary fact for the Court to appreciate the evidence, the burden of proving the existence of that fact is upon the prosecution, and the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstance.

Section 110 provides that when a person is accused of any offense, and the question is whether he has committed that offense or not, the burden of proving that he has not committed that offense is upon him, unless the law provides expressly or otherwise that the proof of such fact shall lie on any particular person.

Section 111 provides that when a person is accused of any offense, and it is doubtful whether he has committed that offense or not, the Court shall presume that he has not committed that offense.

Section 112 provides that when the accused is charged with an offense of which he would be innocent, but for the existence of an exception or qualification, the burden of proving the existence of that exception or qualification is upon the accused, and the Court shall presume that the exception or qualification does not exist.

Section 113 provides that when a person is accused of any offense, and the Court has reason to believe that he has been previously convicted of an offense by a competent court, the burden of proving that he has not been so previously convicted is upon him.

Section 114 provides that the Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct, and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.

Section 115 provides that the Court shall not allow any presumption to be made upon any presumption of law or fact, if the Court is of opinion that the presumption would be unreasonable.

Section 116 provides that when the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law, or of science or art, the Court may either take notice of that point without proof, or may require evidence upon that point, as it thinks fit.

Section 117 provides that when the Court has to form an opinion as to any matter of public history or general knowledge, the Court may take judicial notice of that matter without proof.

Section 118 provides that when the Court has to form an opinion as to the truth of any statement of fact made in any document, the Court may either take notice of that fact without proof, or may require evidence to be given of that fact, as it thinks fit.

Section 119 provides that when the Court has to form an opinion as to any matter of public right or public policy, the Court may take judicial notice of that matter without proof.

Section 120 provides that when the Court has to form an opinion as to the contents of any document, other than a document produced in evidence in the case, the Court may either take notice of the contents of such document without proof, or may require evidence to be given of the contents of such document, as it thinks fit.

Section 121 provides that when the Court has to form an opinion as to the meaning of any written or printed word or symbol, the Court may either take notice of that meaning without proof, or may require evidence to be given of that meaning, as it thinks fit.

Section 122 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the following facts, namely:

(a) the day of the week on which any day of the year falls;

(b) the month in which any day of the year falls;

(c) the date of any public Act, Ordinance, Regulation, Notification, or other official document;

(d) the contents of any published document declared by this Act to be admissible in evidence;

(e) the signatures of any well-known person, or of any person in public or private service, or of any person in the regular course of business, or of any person in any professional capacity;

(f) the contents of any document forming part of the records of any Court, or of any public office or registry, or of any public or local fund, or of any Court, public office, registry or fund in any foreign country;

(g) the fact that any document is registered, or that any person is registered as the owner, executor, administrator or assignee of any property, or as the proprietor of any patent or trademark, or as the holder of any license, or as a member of any chamber of commerce or of any trade association;

(h) the identity and genuineness of handwriting, signatures, seals and finger impressions;

(i) the general course of nature;

(j) the course of business;

(k) the situation and extent of any country, state, city, town, village or other place;

(l) the boundaries and areas of any electoral constituency;

(m) the names of the members of the Cabinet and of the Council of Ministers of the Union and of the members of the Council of Ministers of any State;

(n) the names of the Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Governors, Lieutenant-Governors, Chief Justices, Judges and other officers of the Union and of the several States;

(o) the names of the members of the two Houses of Parliament and of the members of the two Houses of the Legislature of any State, and the names of the persons holding office as such members;

(p) the names of the members of the Armed Forces of the Union and of the police forces of the Union and of the several States;

(q) the names of the members of the Civil Services of the Union and of the several States;

(r) the names of the members of the Judicial Services of the Union and of the several States;

(s) the names of the persons holding any public office;

(t) the names of the members of any foreign legislature, and of the members of any foreign Cabinet or of any foreign Council of Ministers;

(u) the names of the members of the Executive and of the Legislature of any foreign country;

(v) the names of the members of any international body;

(w) the names of the members of any local authority;

(x) the names of the members of any university, college or school;

(y) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any university, college or school;

(z) the names of the members of any club, society or association;

(za) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any club, society or association;

(zb) the names of the members of any religious or charitable institution;

(zc) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any religious or charitable institution;

(zd) the names of the members of any trade or professional association;

(ze) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any trade or professional association;

(zf) the names of the members of any other association of persons;

(zg) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any other association of persons;

(zh) the names of the members of any committee or other body appointed by any Court, Government or public authority;

(zi) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any committee or other body appointed by any Court, Government or public authority;

(zj) the names of the members of any commission of inquiry appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952;

(zk) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any commission of inquiry appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952;

(zl) the names of the members of any statutory authority or body;

(zm) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any statutory authority or body;

(zn) the names of the members of any other body appointed or constituted by or under any law for the time being in force;

(zo) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any other body appointed or constituted by or under any law for the time being in force;

(zp) the names of the members of any board or other body established by any company or other body corporate;

(zq) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any board or other body established by any company or other body corporate;

(zr) the names of the members of any board or other body established by any local authority;

(zs) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any board or other body established by any local authority;

(zt) the names of the members of any board or other body established by any public authority;

(zu) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any board or other body established by any public authority;

(zv) the names of the members of any board or other body established by any international body;

(zw) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any board or other body established by any international body;

(zx) the names of the members of any board or other body established by any other person;

(zy) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any board or other body established by any other person;

(zz) the names of the members of any board or other body established by any Government or public authority under any law for the time being in force;

(z1) the names of the persons holding any appointment in any board or other body established by any Government or public authority under any law for the time being in force.

Section 123 provides that the Court shall not take judicial notice of any fact which it could not otherwise have ascertained, without proof, unless it has been brought to its knowledge by means of documents produced for the purpose of the trial or by the evidence given in the case.

Section 124 provides that the Court shall not take judicial notice of any fact which it could not otherwise have ascertained, without proof, merely because it is a matter of general knowledge.

Section 125 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that customary law prevails in India in matters not provided for by this Act.

Section 126 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to marriage, caste and religious usages and institutions.

Section 127 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to succession, special property of females, betrothal, marriage, divorce, dower, adoption, minority, guardianship, minority and age of majority, and other incidents of marriage.

Section 128 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the administration and distribution of property of persons deceased intestate.

Section 129 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of religion, caste and status.

Section 130 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of contracts, agency, bailment, pledge, mortgage, gift, partitions, and other transactions.

Section 131 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of crimes, torts, and quasi-contracts.

Section 132 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of public worship, religious ceremonies, and festivals.

Section 133 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of charitable and religious endowments.

Section 134 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of education, public health, and sanitation.

Section 135 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the administration of justice.

Section 136 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the revenue and other public charges.

Section 137 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the police and the military.

Section 138 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the navigation and the sea-coast.

Section 139 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of trade and commerce.

Section 140 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the manufacture and sale of goods.

Section 141 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the carriage of goods and passengers.

Section 142 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the construction and maintenance of works and buildings.

Section 143 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the supply and distribution of water.

Section 144 provides that the Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that, in India, the law of each community prevails in cases relating to the rights and obligations of persons in respect of the supply and distribution of electricity.

Section 145 provides that
Summary:

This document summarizes various sections of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, which outline the burden of proof in different scenarios. According to Section 101, the burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on the person who wishes to give such evidence.

Under Section 105, when a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code or within any special exception or proviso contained in any other part of the same Code or in any law defining the offence is upon him.

Section 106 states that when any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him. For instance, when a person does an act with some intention other than that which the character and circumstances of the act suggest, the burden of proving that intention is upon him.

Section 107 provides that when the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he was alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms it. Similarly, Section 108 states that when the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it.

Section 109 states that when the question is whether persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or principal and agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden of proving that they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those relationships respectively, is on the person who affirms it.

Section 110 provides that when the question is whether any person is owner of anything of which he is shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the person who affirms that he is not the owner.

Section 111 states that where there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties, one of whom stands to the other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the party who is in a position of active confidence.

Section 111A states that where a person is accused of having committed any offence specified in sub-section (2) in any area declared to be a disturbed area under any enactment, for the time being in force, making provision for the suppression of disorder and restoration and maintenance of public order, or in any area in which there has been, over a period of more than one month, extensive disturbance of the public peace, and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a time when firearms or explosives were used at or from that place to attack or resist the members of any armed forces or the forces charged with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of their duties, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is shown, that such person had committed such offence.

Section 112 states that the fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate son of that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other at any time when he could have been begotten.

Section 113 states that a notification in the Gazette of India that any portion of British territory has been ceded to any Native State, Prince or Ruler, shall be conclusive proof that a valid cession of such territory took place at the date mentioned in such notification.

Section 113A states that when the question is whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the court may presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her husband.

Section 113B states that when the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.

Section 114 states that the Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
Summarize the content of the given document:

The document consists of excerpts from the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, specifically dealing with certain legal maxims and illustrations. It begins by stating that the court shall consider whether these maxims apply to the case before it. The following are the illustrations provided:

* In illustration (a), a shopkeeper has a marked rupee soon after it was stolen, and cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually receiving rupees in the course of his business.
* In illustration (b), a person of the highest character, A, is tried for causing a man's death by an act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B, a person of equally good character, who also took part in the arrangement, describes precisely what was done, and admits and explains the common carelessness of A and himself.
* In illustration (c), a crime is committed by several persons. A, B, and C, three of the criminals, are captured on the spot and kept apart from each other. Each gives an account of the crime implicating D, and the accounts corroborate each other in such a manner as to render previous concert highly improbable.
* In illustration (d), A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business. B, the acceptor, was a young and ignorant person, completely under A's influence.
* In illustration (e), it is proved that a river ran in a certain course five years ago, but it is known that there have been floods since that time which might change its course.
* In illustration (f), a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was performed under exceptional circumstances.
* In illustration (g), a man refuses to produce a document which would bear on a contract of small importance on which he is sued, but which might also injure the feelings and reputation of his family.
* In illustration (h), a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled by law to answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters unconnected with the matter in relation to which it is asked.
* In illustration (i), a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the circumstances of the case are such that he may have stolen it.

The document also includes Section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, which deals with the presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecutions for rape. It states that in a prosecution for rape under various clauses of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the woman states in her evidence before the court that she did not consent, the court shall presume that she did not consent.

Additionally, there are amendments made by the Chhattisgarh government to the Indian Evidence Act. A new section 114B has been inserted which deals with the presumption as to offences committed under various sections of the Indian Penal Code related to sexual harassment, outraging modesty, disrobing, stalking, intruding privacy, and sexual harassment by any means. When the question is whether a person has committed such an offence and if the victim deposes before the court that she has been subjected to such harassment, the court may, unless contrary is proved, presume that such offence has been committed by that person.
The document is a section of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, which outlines various provisions related to the examination of witnesses in legal proceedings. The section consists of several sub-sections and provisions that address various aspects of witness examination.

Section 123 of the Act deals with the privilege of communication between public officers. It states that no public officer can be compelled to disclose communications made to him in official confidence if he considers that the public interest would suffer by the disclosure.

Section 125 of the Act deals with the privilege of information as to the commission of offences. It states that no Magistrate or police officer can be compelled to disclose the source of their information regarding the commission of any offence. Similarly, no revenue officer can be compelled to disclose the source of their information regarding the commission of any offence against the public revenue.

Section 126 of the Act deals with professional communications. It states that no barrister, attorney, pleader, or vakil can be compelled to disclose any communication made to him in the course and for the purpose of his employment as such barrister, pleader, attorney, or vakil. They cannot disclose any advice given by them to their client in the course and for the purpose of such employment. However, this protection does not apply to any communication made in furtherance of any illegal purpose or any fact observed by them showing that any crime or fraud has been committed since the commencement of their employment.

Section 127 of the Act extends the provisions of Section 126 to interpreters, clerks, or servants of barristers, pleaders, attorneys, and vakils.

Section 128 of the Act states that privilege is not waived by volunteering evidence. If any party to a suit gives evidence therein at his own instance or otherwise, he shall not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure as is mentioned in section 126.

Section 129 of the Act deals with confidential communications with legal advisers. No one shall be compelled to disclose to the Court any confidential communication which has taken place between him and his legal professional adviser, unless he offers himself as a witness.

Section 130 of the Act deals with the production of title-deeds of a witness not a party. No witness who is not a party to a suit shall be compelled to produce his title-deeds to any property.

Section 131 of the Act deals with the production of documents or electronic records which another person, having possession, could refuse to produce. No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession or electronic records under his control, which any other person would be entitled to refuse to produce if they were in his possession or control, unless such last-mentioned person consents to their production.

Section 132 of the Act deals with the witness not excused from answering on the ground that the answer will criminate. A witness shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in any suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon the ground that the answer to such question will criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to criminate, such witness.

Section 133 of the Act deals with the accomplice. An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person, and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.

Section 134 of the Act deals with the number of witnesses. No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact.

Section 135 to 138 of the Act deal with the order of production and examination of witnesses, the judge to decide as to the admissibility of evidence, the examination-in-chief, and the order of examinations.
Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act, 1872, governs the rules of evidence in India. This document summarizes various sections of the Act related to the examination and cross-examination of witnesses, leading questions, evidence as to matters in writing, and questions related to the character of the witness.

Under Section 137, a witness can be cross-examined on any matter relevant to the case, even if it was not mentioned during the examination-in-chief. The re-examination should be directed to explaining matters referred to in cross-examination. Leading questions, which suggest the answer the person asking it wishes or expects to receive, are not allowed in examination-in-chief or re-examination without the permission of the court. However, they may be asked in cross-examination.

Section 144 allows a witness to give oral evidence of statements made by other persons about the contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts. Section 145 permits a witness to be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in writing or reduced into writing, relevant to matters in question, without the writing being shown to him.

Section 146 outlines the questions that can be asked during cross-examination, including those that test the veracity of the witness, discover who they are and what is their position in life, or to shake their credit by injuring their character. However, in a prosecution for certain offences under the Indian Penal Code, it is not permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination of the victim as to their general immoral character or previous sexual experience.

The court has the discretion to decide whether a witness should be compelled to answer a question that relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding, except insofar as it affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character. The court shall have regard to certain considerations, such as the importance of the imputation made against the witness's character and the importance of his evidence. No such question ought to be asked unless the person asking it has reasonable grounds for thinking that the imputation is well-founded. If the court is of the opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable grounds, it may report the circumstances of the case to the High Court or other authority to which the barrister, pleader, vakil, or attorney is subject in the exercise of his profession.

Section 151 permits the court to forbid any questions or inquiries which it regards as indecent or scandalous, unless they relate to facts in issue or to matters necessary to be known in order to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed. The court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be intended to insult or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the court needlessly offensive in form. Evidence that tends to contradict answers to questions testing veracity is generally not admissible, but if a witness answers falsely, he may be charged with giving false evidence.
Summary:

The Indian Evidence Act, 1872, governs the admission and proof of evidence in legal proceedings in India. This document summarizes various sections of the Act related to the questioning of witnesses, impeaching the credit of witnesses, corroborating evidence, and the production and use of documents.

Section 145 permits a witness to be contradicted on a fact which affects their credit. This means that if a witness makes a statement that is inconsistent with a fact that affects their credibility, they can be questioned about it. For example, if a witness denies being at a certain location on a particular day, they can be contradicted with evidence that they were, in fact, at that location on that day.

Section 154 allows the person who calls a witness to put questions to them that could be asked in cross-examination by the adverse party. This is to ensure that the witness's testimony is fully explored and that any inconsistencies or biases are brought to light.

Section 155 outlines the ways in which the credit of a witness can be impeached. This can be done by evidence of persons who testify that they believe the witness to be unworthy of credit, proof that the witness has been bribed or has accepted a bribe, or proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of their evidence.

Section 156 allows a witness to be questioned about any other circumstances that they observed at or near the time or place at which a relevant fact occurred, if the Court is of the opinion that such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the relevant fact.

Section 157 permits the testimony of a witness to be corroborated by any former statement made by such witness relating to the same fact, at or about the time when the fact took place, or before any authority legally competent to investigate the fact.

Section 158 allows for matters to be proved in connection with a statement relevant under sections 32 or 33, which relate to statements made by persons who are dead or cannot be found, in order to contradict or corroborate the statement, or to impeach or confirm the credit of the person by whom it was made.

Section 159 allows a witness to refresh their memory by referring to any writing made by themselves at the time of the transaction concerning which they are questioned, or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time fresh in their memory. The witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other person, and read by the witness within the time aforesaid, if when he read it he knew it to be correct.

Section 160 permits a witness to testify to facts mentioned in any such document as is mentioned in section 159, although they have no specific recollection of the facts themselves, if they are sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.

Section 161 requires that any writing referred to under sections 159 and 160 must be produced and shown to the adverse party if they require it. The adverse party may, if they please, cross-examine the witness thereupon.

Section 162 requires that a witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in their possession or power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production or to its admissibility. The validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the Court.

Section 163 requires that when a party calls for a document which they have given the other party notice to produce, and such document is produced and inspected by the party calling for its production, they are bound to give it as evidence if the party producing it requires them to do so.

Section 164 prohibits a party from using a document as evidence without the consent of the other party or the order of the Court if they have refused to produce it after being given notice to do so.

Section 165 permits the Judge to ask any question they please, in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of the parties about any fact relevant or irrelevant, and may order the production of any document or thing. However, the judgment must be based upon facts declared by this Act to be relevant, and duly proved.

Section 166 prohibits the jury or assessors from putting any questions to the witnesses without the leave of the Court.
Summary:
The Indian Evidence Act of 1872 is a law that governs the admission and rejection of evidence in courts in India. The Act defines what constitutes evidence and specifies the rules for its examination and admission in court. The Act applies to all courts in India, except those established by the Rajasthan Courts Act, 1954, and the Punjab Courts Act, 1918.

The Act defines evidence as any matter of fact that is relevant to the case at hand and is admissible in court. This includes oral and written statements, documents, and physical objects. The Act also specifies the rules for the examination and cross-examination of witnesses, the admissibility of confessions and admissions, and the use of presumptions and inferences.

The Act includes provisions for the examination of documents, including the requirement for original documents to be produced in court, the use of certified copies, and the admissibility of copies of public documents. The Act also includes provisions for the examination of electronic records, including the use of digital signatures and digital signature certificates.

The Act includes provisions for the examination of character evidence, including the use of previous convictions and the reputation of the accused. The Act also includes provisions for the examination of expert evidence, including the qualifications and opinions of experts.

The Act includes provisions for the rejection of evidence, including the rejection of evidence that is irrelevant, hearsay, or privileged. The Act also includes provisions for the rejection of evidence that is obtained through illegal means or is prejudicial to the accused.

The Act includes provisions for the review of decisions regarding the admission and rejection of evidence, including the right to appeal decisions to a higher court. The Act also includes provisions for the retrial of cases in which evidence is improperly admitted or rejected.

Overall, the Indian Evidence Act of 1872 provides a comprehensive framework for the admission and rejection of evidence in courts in India. The Act ensures that evidence is examined and admitted in a fair and impartial manner, and that decisions regarding the admission and rejection of evidence are subject to review and appeal.
Summary:

This document consists of amendments made to various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), the Indian Succession Act, and the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) over the years.

The first section of the document discusses amendments made to the IPC. The amendments include the addition and omission of certain words and phrases, as well as the substitution of existing text with new provisions. For example, the words "Her Majesty or of" were omitted by the A.O. 1950, and the phrase "resident in" was substituted with "such Part B State or Country" by Act 3 of 1891, section 8. Similarly, the phrase "in and for that Part B State or country" was substituted with "in that State or Country" by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and the Schedule.

The document also includes amendments made to the Indian Succession Act. These amendments include the substitution of existing text with new provisions, as well as the insertion of new sections. For example, section 18 of the Act was substituted with new provisions by Act 18 of 1872, section 9. Similarly, section 119 was substituted with new provisions by Act 13 of 2013, section 27.

Finally, the document includes amendments made to the CrPC. These amendments include the addition and omission of certain words and phrases, as well as the substitution of existing text with new provisions. For example, section 145 was amended by Act 13 of 2013, section 28, to include a new proviso. Similarly, section 154 was numbered as sub-section (1) and a new sub-section (2) was added by Act 2 of 2006, section 9.

Overall, this document provides a summary of various amendments made to Indian laws, including the IPC, the Indian Succession Act, and the CrPC. These amendments include the addition and omission of certain words and phrases, as well as the substitution of existing text with new provisions. It is important to note that these amendments have been made over a period of time and may have different effective dates.