Summary:

THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878, is an Act that amends the law relating to treasure-trove. The Act extends to the whole of India except the territories that were formerly part of Part B States.

The Act is divided into three chapters: PRELIMINARY, PROCEDURE ON FINDING TREASURE, and PENALTIES.

The PRELIMINARY chapter defines the terms used in the Act. Treasure is defined as anything of any value hidden in the soil or anything affixed thereto. The Collector is defined as any Revenue Officer in independent charge of a district or any officer appointed by the State Government to perform the functions of a Collector under this Act. The owner is defined as the person entitled to treasure in a land or thing affixed thereto.

The PROCEDURE ON FINDING TREASURE chapter outlines the steps to be taken when treasure is found. The finder of treasure exceeding ten rupees in amount or value must give notice in writing to the Collector as soon as practicable. The notice must include the nature and amount or approximate value of the treasure, the place it was found, and the date of the finding. The finder must either deposit the treasure in the nearest Government treasury or give the Collector security to produce the treasure at a specified time and place.

The Collector must publish a notification in a manner prescribed by the State Government, requiring all persons claiming the treasure or any part thereof to appear personally or by agent before the Collector on a specified date. The Collector must also serve a special notice in writing on the person in possession of the place where the treasure was found.

Any person having a right to the treasure or any part thereof and not appearing as required by the notification shall forfeit such right.

The Collector must enquire as to the person by whom, the place in which, and the circumstances under which, the treasure was found and as far as possible the person by whom, and the circumstances under which, the treasure was hidden.

If the Collector sees reason to believe that the treasure was hidden within one hundred years before the date of the finding by a person appearing as required by the notification, he may make an order adjourning the hearing of the case for a sufficient period to allow of a suit being instituted in the Civil Court by the claimant to establish his right.

If the Collector sees no reason to believe that the treasure was so hidden, or if no suit is instituted within a specified period, or if such suit is instituted and the plaintiff's claim is finally rejected, the Collector may declare the treasure to be ownerless.

Any person aggrieved by a declaration made under this section may appeal within two months from the date thereof to the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority.

When a declaration has been made in respect of any treasure under section 9, such treasure shall, in accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained, either be delivered to the finder thereof or be divided between him and the owner of the place in which it has been found in manner hereinafter provided.

The PENALTIES chapter outlines the penalties for failing to give notice, making a false declaration, or altering or attempting to alter the treasure so as to conceal its identity. The share of such treasure, or the money in lieu thereof to which the offender would otherwise be entitled, shall vest in Government, and he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

If the owner of the place in which any treasure is found abets any offence under this Act, the share of such treasure, or the money in lieu thereof to which he would otherwise be entitled, shall vest in Government, and he shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

The Act has been extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Daman and Diu, and the whole of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep with modification. The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District. The Act has been amended in Bihar, Madras, Punjab, and Andhra Pradesh.