Summary:

The Government Savings Promotion Act, 1873, is an Act to regulate and channelize the savings from the general public into Government Savings Schemes. The Act extends to the whole of India and applies to various Government Savings Schemes, including Post Office Savings Account, National Savings Monthly Income (Account), National Savings Recurring Deposit, Sukanya Samridhhi Account, National Savings Time Deposit (1 year, 2 years, 3 years and 5 years), Senior Citizens' Savings Scheme, Savings Certificates (Kisan Vikas Patra and National Savings Certificates VIII Issue), and Public Provident Fund Scheme.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "account," "administrator," "Authorised Officer," "banking company," "depositor," "executor," "Government Savings Bank," "guardian," "minor," "prescribed," "Savings Schemes," and "Schedule."

Under the Act, the Central Government may frame new Savings Schemes or amend or discontinue existing Savings Schemes to promote household savings in the country. The Central Government may also include or omit or amend Savings Schemes in the Schedule.

A minor who has attained the age of ten years may open and operate an account in the Government Savings Bank, subject to the provisions of the Savings Scheme. The guardian of a minor may also open and operate an account on behalf of the minor, till he becomes a major.

The Act provides for the nomination by depositors, and the nominee shall be entitled, in the event of the death of the depositor, to receive the sum due, as an owner or a trustee. Any nomination shall become void if the nominee predeceases the depositor or where there are two or more nominees, all the nominees predecease the depositor.

If a depositor dies and there is in force at the time of his death a nomination in favour of any person, the deposit shall be paid to the nominee. Where the nominee is a minor, the deposit shall be paid to the guardian of the minor for the use of the minor.

Where a depositor dies and there is no nomination in force at the time of his death, and probate of his will or letters of administration of his estate or a succession certificate granted under the Indian Succession Act, 1925, is not within three months of the death of the depositor produced to the Authorised Officer of the Government Savings Bank in which the deposit is, then the Authorised Officer may pay the deposit to any person appearing to him to be entitled to receive it or to administer the estate of the deceased.

Any payment made in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Act shall be a full discharge from all further liability in respect of the money so paid.

The Act also provides for the payment of deposits to minor or guardian, payment of deposits belonging to lunatics, operation of account by differently abled persons, payment of married women's deposits, protection of action taken in good faith, protection against attachment, power to make rules, and repeal and savings.