Summary:

The Religious Societies Act, 1880, is an Act that confers certain powers on Religious Societies. The Act is called the Religious Societies Act, 1880 and extends to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States. The Act does not apply to any Hindus, Muhammadans or Buddhists, or to any persons whom the State Government may from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, exclude from the operation of this Act.

The Act provides a process for the appointment of new trustees in cases where no manner of appointing such new trustee is prescribed by any instrument by which such property was so vested or by which the trusts on which it is held have been declared. The appointment of new trustees shall be recorded in a memorandum under the hand of the chairman of the meeting. The property subject to the trust shall forthwith become vested, without any conveyance or other assurance, in such new trustees and the old continuing trustees jointly, or, if there are no old continuing trustees, in such new trustees wholly, upon the same trusts, and with and subject to the same powers and provisions, as it was vested in the old trustees.

The Act also provides provisions for the dissolution of societies and adjustment of their affairs. Any number not less than three-fifths of the members of any such body may determine that such body shall be dissolved, and all necessary steps shall be taken for the disposal and settlement of the property of such body, its claims and liabilities, according to the rules of such body applicable thereto, if any, and, if not, then as such body at such meeting may determine. If upon the dissolution of any such body there remains any property, the same shall not be paid to or distributed among the members of such body or any of them, but shall be given to some other body of persons associated for the purpose of maintaining religious worship or some other religious or charitable purpose.

The Act also allows any person interested in a question as to whether any person is a member of any such body or as to the validity of any appointment under this Act to apply by petition to the High Court for its opinion on such question. The costs of every application under this section shall be in the discretion of the Court.

The Schedule to this Act contains a memorandum of the appointment of the new trustees of the church, chapel, or other buildings and property. The memorandum shall be in the form set forth in the Schedule hereto annexed, or as near thereto as circumstances allow, shall be executed and attested by two or more credible witnesses in the presence of such meeting, and shall be deemed to be a document of which the registration is required by the Indian Registration Act, 1877, section 17.