Summary:

THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882

This Act defines and amends the law relating to easements and licenses. It extends to the territories respectively administered by the Governor of Madras in Council and the Chief Commissioners of the Central Provinces and Coorg. The Act shall come into force on the first day of July, 1882.

Chapter I: Of Easements Generally

An easement is a right which the owner or occupier of certain land possesses, as such, for the beneficial enjoyment of that land, to do and continue to do something, or to prevent and continue to prevent something being done, in or upon, or in respect of, certain other land not his own. The land for the beneficial enjoyment of which the right exists is called the dominant heritage, and the owner or occupier thereof the dominant owner; the land on which the liability is imposed is called the servient heritage, and the owner or occupier thereof the servient owner.

Easements are either continuous or discontinuous, apparent or non-apparent. A continuous easement is one whose enjoyment is, or may be, continual without the act of man. A discontinuous easement is one that needs the act of man for its enjoyment. An apparent easement is one the existence of which is shown by some permanent sign which, upon careful inspection by a competent person, would be visible to him. A non-apparent easement is one that has no such sign.

An easement may be permanent, or for a term of years or other limited period, or subject to periodical interruption, or exercisable only at a certain place or at certain times, or between certain hours, or for a particular purpose, or on condition that it shall commence or become void or voidable on the happening of a specified event or the performance or non-performance of a specified act.

Easements are restrictions of one or other of the following rights: the exclusive right of every owner of immovable property to enjoy and dispose of the same and all products thereof and accessions thereto; and the rights of every owner of immovable property to enjoy without disturbance the natural advantages arising from its situation.

Chapter II: The Imposition, Acquisition and Transfer of Easements

An easement may be imposed by any one in the circumstances, and to the extent, in and to which he may transfer his interest in the heritage on which the liability is to be imposed. A servient owner may impose on the servient heritage any easement that does not lessen the utility of the existing easement. But he cannot, without the consent of the dominant owner, impose an easement on the servient heritage which would lessen such utility. A lessor may impose, on the property leased, any easement that does not derogate from the rights of the lessee as such, and a mortgagor may impose, on the property mortgaged, any easement that does not render the security insufficient. But a lessor or mortgagor cannot, without the consent of the lessee or mortgagee, impose any other easement on such property, unless it be to take effect on the termination of the lease or the redemption of the mortgage.

No lessee of immovable property can acquire, for the beneficial enjoyment of other immovable property of his own, an easement in or over the property comprised in his lease.

An easement may be acquired by the owner of the immovable property for the beneficial enjoyment of which the right is created, or on his behalf, by any person in possession of the same.

Where one person transfers or bequeaths immovable property to another, if an easement in other immovable property of the transferor or testator is necessary for enjoying the subject of the transfer or bequest, the transferee or legatee shall be entitled to such easement; or if such an easement is apparent and continuous and necessary for enjoying the said subject as it was enjoyed when the transfer or bequest took effect, the transferee or legatee shall, unless a different intention is expressed or necessarily implied, be entitled to such easement.

Where immovable property passes by operation of law, the persons from and to whom it so passes are, for the purpose of this section, to be deemed, respectively, the transferor and transferee.

Chapter III: The Incidents of Easements

The rules contained in this Chapter are controlled by any contract between the dominant and servient owners relating to the servient heritage, and by the provisions of the instrument or decree, if any, by which the easement referred to was imposed.

An easement must not be used for any purpose not connected with the enjoyment of the dominant heritage.

The dominant owner must exercise his right in the mode which is least onerous to the servient owner; and when the exercise of an easement can without detriment to the dominant owner be confined to a determinate part of the servient heritage, such exercise shall, at the request of the servient owner, be so confined.

Subject to the provisions of section 22, the dominant owner may, from time to time, alter the mode and place of enjoying the easement, provided that he does not thereby impose any additional burden on the servient heritage.

The dominant owner is entitled, as against servient owner, to do all acts necessary to secure the full enjoyment of the easement; but such acts must be done at such time and in such manner as, without detriment to the dominant owner, to cause the servient owner as little inconvenience as possible; and the dominant owner must repair, as far as practicable, the damage (if any) caused by the act to the servient heritage.

Chapter IV: The Disturbance of Easements

The owner or occupier of the dominant heritage is entitled to enjoy the easement without disturbance by any other person.

The owner of any interest in the dominant heritage, or the occupier of such heritage, may institute a suit for compensation for the disturbance of the easement or of any right accessory thereto; provided that the disturbance has actually caused substantial damage to the plaintiff.

The removal of the means of support to which a dominant owner is entitled does not give rise to a right to recover compensation unless and until substantial damage is actually sustained.

Subject to the provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, an injunction may be granted to restrain the disturbance of an easement: if the easement is actually disturbed when compensation for such disturbance might be recovered under this Chapter; or if the disturbance is only threatened or intended, when the act threatened or intended must necessarily, if performed, disturb the easement.

Notwithstanding the provisions of section 24, the dominant owner cannot himself abate a wrongful obstruction of an easement.

Chapter V: The Extinction, Suspension and Revival of Easements

When, from a cause which preceded the imposition of an easement, the person by whom it was imposed ceases to have any right in the servient heritage, the easement is extinguished.

An easement is extinguished when the dominant owner releases it, expressly or impliedly, to the servient owner. Such release can be made only in the circumstances and to the extent in and to which the dominant owner can alienate the dominant heritage. An easement may be released as to part only of the servient heritage.

An easement is extinguished when the servient heritage is by superior force so permanently altered that the dominent owner can no longer enjoy such easement.

An easement is extinguished where it has been imposed for a limited period, or acquired on condition that it shall become void on the performance or non-performance of a specified act, and the period expires or the condition is fulfilled.

An easement of necessity is extinguished when the necessity comes to an end.

An easement is extinguished when it becomes incapable of being at any time under any circumstances beneficial to the dominant owner.

Where, by any permanent change in the dominant heritage, the burden on the servient heritage is materially increased and cannot be reduced by the servient owner without interfering with the lawful enjoyment of the easement, the easement is extinguished, unless it was intended for the beneficial enjoyment of the dominant heritage, to whatever extent the easement should be used; or the injury caused to the servient owner by the change is so slight that no reasonable person would complain of it; or the easement is an easement of necessity.

An easement is extinguished where the servient heritage is by superior force so permanently altered that the dominent owner can no longer enjoy such easement.

An easement is extinguished when either the dominant or the servient heritage is completely destroyed.

An easement is extinguished when the same person becomes entitled to the absolute ownership of the whole of the dominant and servient heritages.

An easement is extinguished when it totally ceases to be enjoyed as such for an unbroken period of twenty years.

When an easement is extinguished, the rights (if any) accessory thereto are also extinguished.

An easement is suspended when the dominant owner becomes entitled to possession of the servient heritage for a limited interest therein, or when the servient owner becomes entitled to possession of the dominant heritage for a limited interest therein.

The servient owner has no right to require that an easement be continued; and, notwithstanding the provisions of section 26, he is not entitled to compensation for damage caused to the servient heritage in consequence of the extinguishment or suspension of the easement, if the dominant owner has given to the servient owner such notice as will enable him, without unreasonable expense, to protect the servient heritage from such damage.

An easement extinguished under section 45 revives when the destroyed heritage is, before twenty years have expired, restored by the deposit of alluvion; or when the destroyed heritage is a servient building and before twenty years have expired such building is rebuilt upon the same site; and when the destroyed heritage is a dominant building and before twenty years have expired such building is rebuilt upon the same site and in such a manner as not to impose a greater burden on the servient heritage.

An easement extinguished under section 46 revives when the grant or bequest by which the unity of ownership was produced is set aside by the decree of a competent Court. A necessary easement extinguished under the same section revives when the unity of ownership ceases from any other cause.

A suspended easement revives if the cause of suspension is removed before the right is extinguished under section 47.

Chapter VI: Licenses

Where one person grants to another, or to a definite number of other persons, a right to do, or continue to do, in or upon the immovable property of the grantor, something which would, in the absence of such right, be unlawful, and such right does not amount to an easement or an interest in the property, the right is called a license.

A license may be granted by any one in the circumstances, and to the extent in and to which he may transfer his interests in the property affected by the license.

The grant of a license may be express or implied from the conduct of the grantor, and an agreement which purports to create an easement, but is ineffectual for that purpose, may operate to create a license.

All licenses necessary for the enjoyment of any interest, or the exercise of any right, are implied in the constitution of such interest or right. Such licenses are called accessory licenses.

Unless a different intention is expressed or necessarily implied, a license to attend a place of public entertainment may be transferred by the licensee; but, save as aforesaid, a license cannot he transferred by the licensee or exercised by his servants or agents.

The grantor of a license is bound to disclose to the licensee any defect in the property affected by the license, likely to be dangerous to the person or property of the licensee, of which the grantor is, and the licensee is not, aware.

The grantor of a license is bound not to do anything likely to render the property affected by the license dangerous to the person or property of the licensee.

When the grantor of the license transfers the property affected thereby, the transferee is not as such bound by the license.

A license may be revoked by the grantor, unless it is coupled with a transfer of property and such transfer is in force; or the licensee, acting upon the license, has executed a work of a permanent character and incurred expenses in the execution.

The revocation of a license may be express or implied.

A license is deemed to be revoked when, from a cause preceding the grant of it, the grantor ceases to have any interest in the property affected by the license; or when the licensee releases it, expressly or impliedly, to the grantor or his representative; or where it has been granted for a limited period, or acquired on condition that it shall become void on the performance or non-performance of a specified act, and the period expires, or the condition is fulfilled; or where the property affected by the license is destroyed or by superior force so permanently altered that the licensee can no longer exercise his right; or where the licensee becomes entitled to the absolute ownership of the property affected by the license; or where the license is granted for a specified purpose and the purpose is attained, or abandoned, or becomes impracticable; or where the license is granted to the licensee as holding a particular office, employment or character, and such office, employment or character ceases to exist; or where the license totally ceases to be used as such for an unbroken period of twenty years, and such cessation is not in pursuance of a contract between the grantor and the licensee; or in the case of an accessory license, when the interest or right to which it is accessory ceases to exist.

Where a license is revoked, the licensee is entitled to a reasonable time to leave the property affected thereby and to remove any goods which he has been allowed to place on such property.

Where a license has been granted for a consideration, and the licensee, without any fault of his own, is evicted by the grantor before he has fully enjoyed, under the license, the right for which he contracted, he is entitled to recover compensation from the grantor.

The Schedule to the Act sets out the provisions of certain Acts and Regulations relating to easements, which are repealed by this Act.

The Appendix to the Act contains certain forms relating to easements and licenses.

The Footnotes to the Act provide references to the Report of the Select Committee, the Proceedings in Council, the extension of the Act to various territories, the amendments made by various Acts, and the repeal of the Act in its application to Bellary District.