Summary:
The Powers-of-Attorney Act, 1882, is an Act that amends the law relating to Powers-of-Attorney. It applies to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and came into force on the first day of May, 1882. The Act defines a "power-of-attorney" as any instrument empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of the person executing it. The Act also states that the donee of a power-of-attorney may execute or do any instrument or thing in and with his own name and signature, and his own seal, where sealing is required, by the authority of the donor of the power, and every instrument and thing so executed and done shall be as effectual in law as if it had been executed or done by the donee of the power in the name, and with the signature and seal, of the donor thereof.

Section 3 of the Act states that any person making or doing any payment or act in good faith, in pursuance of a power-of-attorney, shall not be liable in respect of the payment or act by reason that, before the payment or act, the donor of the power had died or become of unsound mind, or had revoked the power, if the fact of death, unsoundness of mind, or revocation was not, at the time of the payment or act, known to the person making or doing the same.

Section 4 of the Act allows for the deposit of original instruments creating powers-of-attorney in the High Court or District Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the instrument may be. A separate file of instruments so deposited shall be kept, and any person may search that file and inspect every instrument so deposited, and a certified copy thereof shall be delivered out to him on request.

Section 5 of the Act states that a married woman of full age shall, by virtue of this Act, have power, as if she were unmarried, to appoint an attorney on her behalf for the purpose of executing any non-testamentary instrument or doing any other act which she might herself execute or do, and the provisions of this Act, relating to instruments creating powers-of-attorney, shall apply thereto.

The Act was amended by the Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891), s. 2 and the First Schedule and the Amending Act, 1900 (6 of 1900), s. 48 and the Second Schedule and the Amending Act, 1951 (3 of 1951), s. 3 and the Schedule and the Amending Act, 1982 (55 of 1982), s. 2, 4, 5, and 6.

It is important to note that this summary is not a legal advice and it is recommended to consult a legal professional for any specific legal concerns.