Summary:

The Indian Tramways Act, 1886, is an Act to facilitate the construction and to regulate the working of tramways. The Act extends to the whole of India except the territories which were immediately before the 1st November, 1956, comprised in Part B States and the territories which were on the 12th March, 1886, respectively, administered by the Governor of Fort Saint George in Council, the Governor of Bombay in Council and the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal. The Act may be extended to the whole or any part of the said territories by the State Government concerned.

The Act defines several terms, including "local authority", "road", "road-authority", "tramway", "order", "promoter", "undertaking", "carriage", "toll", "lessee", "District Magistrate", "District Court", "Collector", and "prescribed". The term "Government" in relation to a tramway which is wholly within a municipal area or which is declared not to be a railway under clause (20) of article 366 of the Constitution, means the State Government and, in relation to any other tramway, means the Central Government.

The Act provides for the making of orders authorizing the construction of tramways. An application for an order may be made by the local authority of the circle with the consent of the road-authority of any road or part of a road which is to be traversed by the tramway and of which the local authority is not itself the road-authority, or by any person with the consent of the local authority of the circle and of the road-authority of any road or part of a road which is to be traversed by the tramway and of which the local authority is not the road-authority. A local authority shall not make an application for an order, or be deemed to consent to an application being made by any person for an order, unless the making of the application or the giving of the consent has been approved by the local authority in manner prescribed.

The Act also provides for the construction and maintenance of tramways, traffic on tramways, licenses to use tramways, discontinuance of tramways, insolvency of promoters, purchase of tramways, working of tramways owned by local authorities, rules, offences, settlement of differences, recovery of tolls, savings, supplemental provisions, and forms.

The Act includes several schedules and annexures, which provide additional information and forms for use under the Act. The Act also includes several footnotes, which provide explanations and amendments to other acts and regulations.