Summary:

The Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Courts of Small Causes established in the Presidency towns. The Act defines the term "Small Cause Court" and "Registrar" and establishes Courts of Small Causes in the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay. These Courts are deemed to be subject to the superintendence of the High Court of Judicature at Fort William, Madras or Bombay, respectively, and are considered to be courts subordinate to the High Court within the meaning of section 6 of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879. The Act also provides for the appointment of Judges, their rank and precedence, and the performance of duties of an absent Judge. The Procedure and practice of the Small Cause Court are prescribed by the High Court, and the Chief Judge may make arrangements for the distribution of business among the various Judges. The Court is required to follow the rules of procedure and practice in force or treated as in force in the Small Cause Court on or before the thirty-first day of December, 1894, unless cancelled or varied by rules made by the High Court under this section. The Small Cause Court is also empowered to try all suits of a civil nature when the amount or value of the subject-matter does not exceed two thousand rupees, subject to certain exceptions. The Act also provides for the appointment of a Registrar and other officers, and the Registrar may be invested with the powers of a Judge under this Act for the trial of suits in which the amount or value of the subject-matter does not exceed twenty rupees. The Act also prohibits any Judge or other officer appointed under this Act from practicing or trading during his continuance as such Judge or officer, except as a member of any company incorporated or registered under Royal Charter, Letters Patent, Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom or Central Act or Provincial Act or State Act. The Act also provides for the jurisdiction, procedure, and powers of the Small Cause Court in respect of suits, execution of decrees, new trials, and appeals. The Act also regulates the recovery of possession of immovable property and the execution of distress warrants for arrears of rent. The Act also provides for references to the High Court in certain cases, fees and costs, misconduct of inferior ministerial officers, contempt of court, and miscellaneous provisions.