Summary:
The Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883, is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to loans of money by the Government for agricultural improvements. The Act extends to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States. The Act defines "Collector" as the Collector of land-revenue of a district, or the Deputy Commissioner, or any officer empowered by the State Government by name or by virtue of his office to discharge the functions of a Collector under this Act.

Under this Act, loans may be granted for the purpose of making any improvement to any person having a right to make that improvement, or with the consent of that person, to any other person. "Improvement" means any work which adds to the letting value of land and includes the construction of wells, tanks and other works for the storage, supply or distribution of water for the purposes of agriculture, the preparation of land for irrigation, the drainage, reclamation from rivers or other waters, or protection from floods or from erosion or other damage by water, of land used for agricultural purposes or wasteland which is culturable, the reclamation, clearance, enclosure or permanent improvement of land for agricultural purposes, and such other works as the State Government may declare to be improvements for the purposes of this Act.

When an application for a loan is made under this Act, the officer to whom the application is made may, if it is, in his opinion, expedient that public notice be given of the application, publish a notice calling upon all persons objecting to the loan to appear before him and submit their objections. The officer shall consider every objection submitted and make an order in writing either admitting or overruling it. Every loan granted under this Act shall be repayable by instalments within such period from the date of the actual advance of the loan as may be fixed by the rules made under this Act. The period fixed shall not ordinarily exceed thirty-five years. The State Government shall, in fixing the period, have regard to the durability of the work for the purpose of which the loan is granted and to the expediency of the cost of the work being paid by the generation of persons who will immediately benefit by the work.

All loans granted under this Act, all interest (if any) chargeable thereon, and costs (if any) incurred in making the same, shall be recoverable by the Collector in all or any of the following modes: (a) from the borrower as if they were arrears of land-revenue due by him, (b) from his surety (if any) as if they were arrears of land-revenue due by him, (c) out of the land for the benefit of which the loan has been granted as if they were arrears of land-revenue due in respect of that land, and (d) out of the property comprised in the collateral security according to the procedure for the realization of land-revenue by the sale of immovable property other than the land on which that revenue is due. When any sum due on account of any such loan, interest or costs is paid to the Collector by a surety or an owner of property comprised in any collateral security, or is recovered under sub-section (1) by the Collector from a surety or out of any such property, the Collector shall recover that sum on his behalf from the borrower, or out of the land for the benefit of which the loan has been granted, in manner provided by sub-section (1). It shall be in the discretion of a Collector acting under this section to determine the order in which he will resort to the various modes of recovery permitted by it.

A written order under the hand of an officer empowered to make loans under this Act granting a loan to, or with the consent of, a person mentioned therein, for the purpose of carrying out a work described therein, for the benefit of land specified therein, shall be conclusive evidence: (a) that the work described is an improvement within the meaning of this Act, (b) that the person mentioned had at the date of the order a right to make such an improvement, and (c) that the improvement is one benefiting the land specified.

When a loan is made under this Act to the members of a village-community or to any other persons on such terms that all of them are jointly and severally bound to the Government for the payment of the whole amount payable in respect thereof, and a statement showing the portion of that amount which as among themselves each is bound to contribute is entered upon the order granting the loan and is signed by each of them and by the officer making the order, that statement shall be conclusive evidence of the portion of that amount which as among themselves each of those persons is bound to contribute.

The State Government may, from time to time, make rules consistent with this Act to provide for the following matters: (a) the manner of making applications for loans, (b) the officers by whom loans may be granted, (c) the manner of conducting inquiries relative to applications for loans, and the powers to be exercised by officers conducting those inquiries, (d) the nature of the security to be taken for the due application and repayment of the money, the rate of interest at which, and the conditions under which, loans may be granted, and the manner and time of granting loans, (e) the inspection of works for which loans have been granted, (f) the instalments by which, and the mode in which, loans, the interest to be charged on them and the costs incurred in the making thereof, shall be paid, (g) the manner of keeping and auditing the accounts of the expenditure of loans and of the payments made in respect of the same, and (h) all other matters pertaining to the working of the Act.

When land is improved with the aid of a loan granted under this Act, the increase in value derived from the improvement shall not be taken into account in revising the assessment of land-revenue on the land. The increase may be taken into account after the expiration of such period as may be fixed by rules to be framed by the State Government where the improvement consists of the reclamation of wasteland, or of the irrigation of land assessed at unirrigated rates. Nothing in this section shall entitle any person to call in question any assessment of land-revenue otherwise than as it might have been called in question if this Act had not been passed.

The powers conferred on a State Government by sections 4 (1), 5 (1) and 10 may be exercised in the like manner and subject to the like conditions by the Board of Revenue or Financial Commissioner in a State for which there is a Board of Revenue or a Financial Commissioner. Rules made by a Board of Revenue or Financial Commissioner shall be subject to the Control of the State Government.

Instruments executed by persons taking loans, or by their sureties, as security for the repayment of such loans, are exempted from stamp-duty. The Act has been amended in its application to the State of Madhya Pradesh, Bombay, U.P., Haryana, and Gujarat, and has been extended to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Madhya Pradesh, Goa, Daman and Diu, and the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep. The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District and Malabar District of Kerala.