Summary:

The Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886 (Act No. 6 of 1886) was enacted on the 8th of March, 1886. The Act aims to provide for the voluntary registration of births and deaths among certain classes of persons, for the more effectual registration of those births and deaths and of the marriages registered under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 or the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865, and for the establishment of general registry offices for keeping registers of those births, deaths, and marriages. The Act extends to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States. The Act defines "sign" to include mark, when the person making the mark is unable to write his name. It also defines "prescribed" to mean prescribed by a rule made under this Act, and "Registrar of Births and Deaths" to mean a Registrar of Births and Deaths appointed under this Act. The Act also provides that nothing in this Act or in any rule made under this Act shall affect any law heretofore or hereafter passed providing for the registration of births and deaths within particular local areas. The Act also empowers the State Government to establish general registry offices and appoint Registrars General for the purpose of keeping certified copies of registers of births and deaths registered under this Act, or marriages registered under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 or the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865, and for the authentication and custody of certain existing registers. The Act also provides for the indexing and inspection of the registers, and the admission of copies of entries in the registers as evidence. The Act also empowers the State Government to appoint Registrars of Births and Deaths for local areas or for any class of persons within any part of the territories under its administration. The Act also provides for the registration of births and deaths, the persons authorized to give notice of birth and death, the entry of birth or death to be signed by the person giving notice, the grant of certificate of registration of birth or death, and the duty of Registrars as to sending certified copies of entries in register books to the Registrar General. The Act also provides for the correction of errors in the register of births or deaths, and amendment of the Marriage Acts. The Act also contains special provisions as to certain existing registers, and rules for carrying out the purpose of this Act.