Summary:
The Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1881, is an Act that empowers the Central Government to remove or destroy obstructions in fairways leading to ports in India and to prevent the creation of such obstructions. The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications and to the Union territory of Lakshadweep.

Section 1 of the Act states that it may be called the Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1881.

Section 2 empowers the Central Government to remove or destroy any vessel, fishing-stake, timber, or other thing that is sunk, stranded, or abandoned in a fairway leading to a port if it is, or is likely to become, an obstruction or danger to navigation.

Section 3 states that the Central Government is entitled to receive a reasonable sum for the expenses incurred in removing anything under section 2.

Section 4 requires the Central Government to publish a notification containing a description of any thing removed under section 2, the time at which and the place from which the same was so removed.

Section 5 allows the Central Government to sell any thing removed under section 2 if it is unclaimed or if the person claiming the same fails to pay the amount due for the expenses and any customs-duties or other charges properly incurred by the Central Government in respect thereof.

Section 6 states that on realizing the proceeds of such sale, the amount due for expenses and charges shall be deducted therefrom and the surplus (if any) shall be paid to the owner of the thing sold.

Section 7 defines the term "vessel" to include every article or thing or collection of things being or forming part of the tackle, equipment, cargo, stores, or ballast of a vessel.

Section 8 allows the Central Government to make rules to regulate or prohibit the placing of fishing-stakes, the casting or throwing of ballast, rubbish, or any other thing likely to give rise to a bank or shoal, or the doing of any other act which will, in its opinion, cause, or be likely to cause, obstruction or danger to navigation in any fairway leading to a port.

Section 9 states that whoever is guilty of any act or omission in contravention of the rules made under section 8 may be tried for such offence and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.

Section 10 states that whenever the maintenance or creation of an obstruction in any fairway has become lawful by long usage or otherwise, and such obstruction is removed or destroyed under section 2, or its creation is regulated or prohibited under section 8, any person having a right to maintain or create such obstruction shall be entitled to receive from the Central Government reasonable compensation for any damage caused to him by such removal, destruction, regulation or prohibition.

Section 11 states that whenever any obstruction in a fairway leading to a port has been removed or destroyed, or whenever the creation of any such obstruction has been regulated or prohibited, by an order of the Central Government or a State Government, previous to the passing of this Act, such removal, destruction, regulation or prohibition shall be deemed to have been effected under this Act.

Section 12 states that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prevent the exercise by the Central Government of any other powers possessed by it in this behalf.

Section 13 states that all references in this Act to the Central Government shall, in relation to fairways in inland waterways, be construed as references to State Government.