Summary:

The Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887, is an act that consolidates and amends the law relating to Civil Courts in Bengal, the North-Western Provinces and Assam. The act extends to the territories that were administered by the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal, the Lieutenant -Governor of the North-Western Provinces and the Chief Commissioner of Assam, except those portions that are not subject to the ordinary civil jurisdiction of the High Courts. The act came into force on the first day of July, 1887.

The act is divided into six chapters. Chapter I, Preliminary, contains sections 1 and 2, which deal with the title, extent, and commencement of the act and the repeal of the Bengal Civil Courts Act, 1871, and any enactment thereby repealed.

Chapter II, Constitution of Civil Courts, contains sections 3 to 13. Section 3 lists the classes of courts under this act, which include the Court of the District Judge, the Court of the Additional Judge, the Court of the Subordinate Judge, and the Court of the Munsif. Section 4 allows the State Government to alter the number of District Judges, Subordinate Judges, and Munsifs now fixed. Section 5 has been repealed. Section 6 deals with vacancies among District or Subordinate Judges, and Section 7 has been repealed. Section 8 deals with Additional Judges, and Section 9 deals with the administrative control of courts. Section 10 deals with temporary charge of the District Court, and Section 11 deals with the transfer of proceedings on the vacation of office of a Subordinate Judge. Section 12 has been repealed. Section 13 deals with the power to fix local limits of jurisdiction of courts.

Chapter III, Ordinary Jurisdiction, contains sections 18 and 19. Section 18 deals with the extent of original jurisdiction of District or Subordinate Judges, and Section 19 deals with the extent of jurisdiction of Munsifs.

Chapter IV, Special Jurisdiction, contains sections 22 to 25. Section 22 deals with the power to transfer to Subordinate Judges appeals from Munsifs, and Section 23 deals with the exercise by Subordinate Judge or Munsif of jurisdiction of District Court in certain proceedings. Section 24 deals with the disposal of proceedings referred to in the last foregoing section, and Section 25 deals with the power to invest Subordinate Judges and Munsifs with Small Cause Court jurisdiction.

Chapter V, Misfeasance, has been repealed.

Chapter VI, Ministerial Officers, has also been repealed.

Chapter VII, Supplemental Provisions, contains sections 36 to 40. Section 36 deals with the power to confer powers of Civil Courts on officers, and Section 37 deals with certain decisions to be according to Native law. Section 38 deals with judges not to try suits in which they are interested, and Section 39 deals with the subordination of courts to District Court. Section 40 deals with the application of the act to State Courts of Small Causes.

The act has been amended in its application to various states, including West Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Agra, Assam, Bihar, and Uttar Pradesh. The act has also been declared in force in various scheduled districts and areas in the states of Bihar, Orissa, and West Bengal.