Summary:

THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897 is an Act that provides for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Diseases. The Act extends to the whole of India. The Act defines 'act of violence', 'healthcare service personnel', 'property', and includes the definitions from other Acts.

Section 2 of the Act empowers the State Government to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic diseases if they believe that the ordinary provisions of the law are insufficient to prevent the outbreak or spread of such diseases. These measures and regulations may include the inspection of persons traveling by railway or otherwise, and the segregation, in hospital, temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected of being infected with any such disease.

Section 2A of the Act empowers the Central Government to take measures and prescribe regulations for the inspection of any bus, train, goods vehicle, ship, vessel, or aircraft leaving or arriving at any land port or aerodrome in the territories to which this Act extends and for such detention thereof, or of any person intending to travel therein, or arriving thereby, as may be necessary.

Section 2B of the Act prohibits any person from indulging in any act of violence against a healthcare service personnel or causing any damage or loss to any property during an epidemic.

Section 3 of the Act states that any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). Whoever commits or abets the commission of an act of violence against a healthcare service personnel or abets or causes damage or loss to any property shall be punished with imprisonment and fine.

Section 3A of the Act states that an offence punishable under Section 3 shall be cognizable and non-bailable, and the investigation of the case shall be completed within 30 days from the date of registration of the First Information Report. The inquiry or trial of the case shall be held expeditiously and concluded within a period of one year.

Section 3B of the Act states that where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence punishable under Section 3, such offence may, with the permission of the Court, be compounded by the person against whom such act of violence is committed.

Section 3C of the Act states that where a person is prosecuted for committing an offence punishable under Section 3, the Court shall presume that such person has committed such offence, unless the contrary is proved.

Section 3D of the Act states that in any prosecution for an offence under Section 3 which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the Court shall presume the existence of such mental state, but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.

Section 3E of the Act states that in addition to the punishment provided for an offence under Section 3, the person so convicted shall also be liable to pay, by way of compensation, such amount, as may be determined by the Court for causing hurt or grievous hurt to any healthcare service personnel.

Section 4 of the Act states that no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done or in good faith intended to be done under this Act.