Summary:

The Madras City Civil Court Act, 1892 (Act No. 7 of 1892) was enacted on August 12, 1892, to establish an additional civil court for the City of Madras. The act defines the City Court as a court with jurisdiction to receive, try, and dispose of all suits and other proceedings of a civil nature not exceeding two thousand five hundred rupees in value and arising within the City of Madras, except suits or proceedings that are cognizable by the High Court, the Court for the relief of insolvent debtors, or the Small Cause Court.

The act provides for the appointment, suspension, and removal of Judges by the Local Government. Every person appointed a Judge of the City Court is also a Judge of the Small Cause Court. When the City Court consists of more than one Judge, each of the Judges may exercise all or any of the powers conferred on the Court, and the Local Government may appoint any one of the Judges to be the principal Judge. The principal Judge may make arrangements for the distribution of the business of the Court among the various Judges.

The Judge or principal Judge may appoint ministerial officers as necessary for the administration of justice by the Court. The officers appointed shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties of a ministerial nature as the Judge or principal Judge may direct. The Judge or principal Judge may suspend or remove any officer so appointed or fine any such officer who is guilty of misconduct or neglect in the performance of the duties of his office.

All questions which arise in suits or other proceedings under this Act in the City Court shall be dealt with and determined according to the law for the time being administered by the High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction. When the subject-matter of any suit or other proceeding is land or a house or a garden, its value for the purposes of the jurisdiction conferred on the City Court by this Act shall be fixed in the manner provided by the Court-fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), section 7, clause v.

Fees chargeable for serving or executing processes issued by the City Court, or served or executed under its direction or control, shall be such as the High Court may prescribe. The powers conferred by Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), on High Courts and District Courts as to the appointment of Receivers may be exercised by the City Court or any Judge thereof.

Whenever any suit or proceeding in the City Court is settled by agreement of the parties before issues have been settled or any evidence recorded, half the amount of the institution fees paid by the plaintiff shall be repaid to him by the Court. When, under section 13 of the letters Patent for the High Court, dated the twenty-eight day of December, 1865, or under section 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), the High Court has removed for trial by itself any suit from the City Court, fees on the scale for the time being in force in the High Court as a Court of ordinary original civil jurisdiction shall be payable in that Court in respect of the suit and proceedings therein.

The period of limitation for an appeal from a decree or order of the City Court shall be the same as that provided by law for an appeal from a decree or order of the High Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction. Nothing in this Act contained shall affect the original civil jurisdiction of the High Court. If any suit or other proceeding is instituted in the High Court which, in the opinion of the Judge who tries the same, ought to have been instituted in the City Court, no costs shall be allowed to a successful plaintiff, and a successful defendant shall be allowed his costs as between attorney and client.

The City Court shall use a seal of such form and dimensions as may be for the time being prescribed by the local Government. The Judge or principal Judge shall, at the commencement of each year, draw up a list of holidays and vacations to be observed in the Court, and such list, when it has received approval, shall be published in the official Gazette, and the said holidays and vacations shall be observed accordingly.