Summary:

THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890, is an Act to provide for the vesting and administration of property held in trust for charitable purposes. It extends to the whole of India and came into force on the first day of October, 1890. The Act defines "charitable purpose" as including relief of the poor, education, medical relief, and the advancement of any other object of general public utility, but not including a purpose that relates exclusively to religious teaching or worship.

The Act establishes the position of the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments, who is appointed by the Central Government for India or by the Government of any State for the State. The Treasurer is a corporation sole by the name of the treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India or the State and has perpetual succession and a corporate seal, and may sue and be sued in his corporate name.

The Act allows the appropriate Government to order that property held or to be applied in trust for charitable purposes be vested in the treasurer of Charitable Endowments on terms agreed upon between the appropriate Government and the person or persons making the application. The treasurer is entitled to all documents of title relating to the property.

The Act also allows the appropriate Government to settle a scheme for the administration of any property that has been or is to be vested in the treasurer of Charitable Endowments, and to appoint a person or persons to administer the property. The scheme may be modified or substituted in its stead. A scheme settled, modified, or substituted under this section comes into operation on a day appointed by the appropriate Government and remains in force until the property is no longer vested in the treasurer of Charitable Endowments or until it has been modified or another scheme has been substituted in its stead.

The Act sets out the mode of applying for vesting orders and schemes and specifies the persons who may make the application. It also includes provisions for the annual publication of a list of properties vested in the treasurer and for the limitation of the functions and powers of the treasurer.

The Act includes provisions for the continuance of the office of the treasurer in certain contingencies and for the transfer of property from one treasurer to another. The Act also empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for the implementation of the Act.

The Act includes provisions for the indemnity of the Government and the treasurer and for the saving of the authority of the Advocate General and the Official Trustee. The Act also includes provisions for the general controlling authority of the Governor General in Council, which have been omitted by subsequent legislation.

The Act includes a schedule of forms and footnotes. The Act has been extended to and brought into force in various territories, and it has been amended in its application to Bengal and Mysore. The Act has been ceased to be in force in the State of Madras. The Act has been amended by various Acts, including the Bengal Wakf Act, 1934, the Devolution Act, 1920, and the Official Trustees Act, 1913.