Summary:

The Indian Post Office Act, 1898 is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Post Offices in India. The Act applies to the whole of India and its citizens outside India. It came into force on the first day of July, 1898. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "Director General", "inland", "mail bag", "mail ship", "officer of the Post Office", "postage", "postage stamp", "Post Office", "postal article", "Post Master General", and "Post Office".

The Act also provides for the transmission of postal articles and the payment of postage and other sums due in respect of postal articles. It empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding the registration, insurance, and value-payable post of postal articles. It also provides for the disposal of undelivered postal articles and the transmission of ship letters.

The Act imposes penalties for various offences, such as misconduct of person employed to carry or deliver mail bags or postal articles, voluntary withdrawal from duty without permission or notice of person employed to carry or deliver mail bags or postal articles, making false entry in register kept by person employed to carry or deliver any postal articles, theft, dishonest misappropriation, secretion, destruction, or throwing away of postal articles, opening, detaining or delaying postal articles, fraud in connection with official marks and for receipt of excess postage, fraudulently preparing, altering secreting or destroying Post Office documents, fraudulently sending unpaid postal articles, and retaining postal articles wrongly delivered or mail bags.

The Act also provides for the penalty for contravention of certain sections of the Act, such as sections 4, 5, 19, 19A, 20, 40, 41, 60, 61, 64, 65, 66, and 67. It authorizes the Director General to exercise any of the powers conferred upon the Central Government by this Act, other than a power to make rules. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out any of the purposes or objects of this Act. All rules made by the Central Government under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall have effect as if enacted by this Act. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.