Summary:

THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS PRESERVATION ACT, 1904, is an Act to provide for the preservation of ancient monuments and objects of archaeological, historical, or artistic interest. The Act defines "ancient monument" as any structure, erection or monument or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, rock-sculpture, inscription or monolith, which is of historical, archeological or artistic interest, or any remains thereof. The Act also defines "antiquities" as any moveable objects which the Central Government, by reason of their historical or archeological associations, may think it necessary to protect against injury, removal or dispersion.

The Act empowers the Central Government to declare an ancient monument to be a protected monument within the meaning of this Act. The Central Government may also acquire rights in or guardianship of an ancient monument, either by purchase or lease, acceptance of gift or bequest, or by assuming guardianship through a written instrument. When the Commissioner has accepted the guardianship of a monument under sub-section (3), the owner shall, except as expressly provided in this Act, have the same estate, right, title and interest in and to the monument as if the Commissioner had not been constituted guardian thereof.

The Act also enables the Central Government to enter into an agreement with the owner of a protected monument for its preservation, and such agreement may provide for the maintenance, custody, restriction of the owner's right to destroy, remove, alter or deface the monument or to build on or near the site of the monument, facilities of access to be permitted to the public or to any portion of the public and to persons deputed by the owner or the Collector to inspect or maintain the monument, notice to be given to the Central Government in case the land on which the monument is situated is offered for sale by the owner, payment of any expenses incurred by the owner or by the Central Government in connection with the preservation of the monument, appointment of an authority to decide any dispute arising out of the agreement, and any matter connected with the preservation of the monument which is a proper subject of agreement between the owner and the Central Government.

The Act empowers the Collector to make an order prohibiting any contravention of the agreement, and to authorize any person to do any act necessary for the preservation of the monument. The owner or other person who is bound by an agreement for the preservation or maintenance of a monument under section 5 and refuses or fails to enter into such an agreement when proposed to him by the Collector may be sued by the Collector for the proper application of an endowment created for the purpose of keeping such monument in repair.

The Act also empowers the Central Government to direct the State Government to acquire a protected monument under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as if the preservation of a protected monument were a “public purpose” within the meaning of that Act, subject to certain conditions. The Act also enables the Central Government to make rules for regulating mining, quarrying, excavating, blasting and other operations of a like nature near an ancient monument.

The Commissioner is responsible for maintaining every monument in respect of which the Government has acquired any of the rights mentioned in section 4 or which the Government has acquired under section 10. The Commissioner shall, for the purpose of maintaining such monument, have access to the monument at all reasonable times, by himself and by his agents, subordinates and workmen, for the purpose of inspecting the monument, and for the purpose of bringing such materials and doing such acts as he may consider necessary or desirable for the maintenance thereof.

The Act also provides for the protection of places of worship from misuse, pollution or desecration, and for the relinquishment of Government rights in a monument. The Act also enables the public to have a right of access to any monument maintained by the Government under this Act, subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government. The Act also provides for penalties for destroying, removing, injuring, altering, defacing or imperilling a protected monument, and for moving any sculptures, carvings, images, bas-reliefs, inscriptions or other like objects without the written permission of the Collector. The Act also empowers the Central Government to acquire a protected area, and provides for the assessment of market-value or compensation.