Summary:

THE REGISTRATION ACT, 1908, Act No. 16 of 1908, was enacted on the 18th of December, 1908. The Act aims to consolidate the laws relating to the registration of documents. Part I of the Act is the preliminary section, which includes the short title, extent, commencement, and definitions of various terms used throughout the Act. The Act defines "addition" as the place of residence, profession, trade, rank, title (if any), and father's name of a person, or where he is usually described as the son of his mother, then his mother's name. "Book" includes a portion of a book and any number of sheets connected together with a view of forming a book or portion of a book. "District" and "sub-district" mean a district and sub-district formed under this Act. "District Court" includes the High Court in its ordinary original civil jurisdiction. "Endorsement" and "endorsed" include and apply to an entry in writing by a registering officer on a rider or covering slip to any document tendered for registration under this Act. "Immovable Property" includes land, buildings, hereditary allowances, rights to ways, lights, ferries, fisheries or any other benefit to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth, or permanently fastened to anything which is attached to the earth, but not standing timber, growing crops nor grass. "India" means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. "Lease" includes a counterpart, kabuliyat, and undertaking to cultivate or occupy, and an agreement to lease. "Minor" means a person who, according to the personal law to which he is subject, has not attained majority. "Movable Property" includes standing timber, growing crops and grass, fruit upon and juice in trees, and property of every other description, except immovable property. "Representative" includes the guardian of a minor and the committee or other legal curator of a lunatic or idiot.

Part II of the Act deals with the registration-establishment. The Inspector-General of Registration is appointed by the State Government, who may also direct that all or any of the powers and duties hereinafter conferred and imposed upon the Inspector-General shall be exercised and performed by such officer or officers, and within such local limits, as the State Government appoints in this behalf. The State Government may also appoint one or more Sub-Registrars for the same Sub-District and delegate to the Inspector-General of Registration, the power of appointing Sub-Registrars. The State Government may establish an office to be styled the office of the Registrar in every district and in every sub-district an office or offices to be styled the office of the Sub-Registrar or the offices of the Joint Sub-Registrars. The State Government may also appoint officers to be called Inspectors of Registration offices, and may prescribe the duties of such officers. Every such Inspector shall be subordinate to the Inspector-General.

The document also includes several state amendments, including Karnataka and Orissa amendments, which have made changes to various sections of the Act. For example, the Karnataka amendment allows the State Government to delegate the power of appointing Sub-Registrars to the Inspector-General of Registration, and the Orissa amendment substitutes the words "Additional Inspector-General of Registration, Joint Inspector-General of Registration and Deputy Inspector-General of Registration" for "Inspector of Registration Offices" in section 8 of the Act.
Summary of the Indian Registration Act:

The Indian Registration Act is a law that governs the registration of certain documents in India. The Act requires the registration of specific documents related to immovable property, such as instruments of gift, non-testamentary instruments that create or transfer rights in immovable property, and leases of immovable property for more than one year or that reserve a yearly rent. The Act also provides for the registration of documents of which registration is optional, including instruments that create or transfer rights in movable property, wills, and all other documents not required by the Act to be registered.

The Act mandates that the books provided for the purposes of this Act may also be kept in computer floppies, diskettes, or any other electronic form, in the manner and subject to the safeguards as may be prescribed by the Inspector-General with the sanction of the State Government. A copy or extracts from the books kept under this section, given by the registering officer under his hand and seal, shall be deemed to be a copy given under section 57 for the purposes of sub-section (5) of that section.

The Act also requires the State Government to provide for the office of every registering officer the books necessary for the purposes of this Act and to supply the office of every Registrar with a fire-proof box. The State Government is also responsible for making suitable provision for the safe custody of the records connected with the registration of documents in such district.

Exemptions:

The Act provides for certain exemptions from the registration of documents. These exemptions include composition deeds, instruments relating to shares in a joint-stock company, debentures issued by such a company, endorsements upon or transfers of any debenture issued by such a company, documents not themselves creating, declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing any right, title or interest of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards to or in immovable property, but merely creating a right to obtain another document which will, when executed, create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish any such right, title or interest, decrees or orders of a Court except a decree or order expressed to be made on a compromise and comprising immovable property other than that which is the subject-matter of the suit or proceeding, grants of immovable property by Government, instruments of partition made by a Revenue-Officer, orders granting a loan or instrument of collateral security granted under the Land Improvement Act, 1871 or the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883, orders granting a loan under the Agriculturists, Loans Act, 1884, or instrument for securing the repayment of a loan made under that Act, orders made under the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890 vesting any property in a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments or divesting any such Treasurer of any property, endorsements on a mortgage-deed acknowledging the payment of the whole or any part of the mortgage-money, and any other receipt for payment of money due under a mortgage when the receipt does not purport to extinguish the mortgage, and certificates of sale granted to the purchaser of any property sold by public auction by a Civil or Revenue-Officer.

Amendments:

The Indian Registration Act has been amended by various state governments to include additional documents for mandatory registration. For example, the Kerala Act 31 of 2013 has added instruments purporting or operating to effect a contract for the sale of immovable property of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards, and power of attorney creating any power or right of management, administration, development, transfer or any other transaction relating to immovable property of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards other than those executed in favour of certain relatives of the executant. The Orissa Act 8 of 2002 has added agreement to sell immovable property possession whereof has been or is handed over to the purported purchaser, and power of-attorney relating to transfer of immovable property possession whereof has been or is handed over to the purported attorney holder. The Kerala Act 7 of 1968 has omitted clause (ix) and (x) of sub-section (1) of section 17 of the principal Act.
Summary:
The Indian Registration Act, 1908, has undergone several amendments by various states. This summary focuses on the amendments related to the registration of documents concerning immovable properties.

Himachal Pradesh introduced Section 18A, requiring that any document presented for registration must be accompanied by a true copy. The amendment to Section 19 stipulates that if a document is presented in a language not understood by the registering officer, it must be accompanied by a true translation into a commonly used language in the district and a true copy.

Karnataka inserted Section 19A, mandating that no document shall be accepted for registration unless it is accompanied by a true copy. The true copy must be neatly handwritten, printed, typewritten, lithographed, or otherwise prepared in accordance with rules made in this matter.

Kerala amended Section 19, omitting the words "and also by a true copy." The state also inserted Section 19A, similar to Karnataka's amendment.

Orissa amended Section 19, omitting the words "and also by a true copy." The state also inserted Section 19-A, declaring that the registration of any document or class of documents is opposed to public policy. The registering officer shall refuse to register any document to which a notification issued under sub-section (1) is applicable. The state further amended Section 22-A, substituting a new section that empowers the registering officer to refuse to register certain documents, including those relating to the transfer of immovable properties by way of sale, gift, mortgage, exchange, or lease, belonging to the State Government, Local Authority, or religious institutions.

Assam inserted Section 21A, requiring a No Objection Certificate from the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned district containing the description of the immovable property to be transferred and other No Objection Certificates required by law. The certificate must be issued within 30 days from the date of application.

Karnataka inserted Section 22A, empowering the State Government to declare that the registration of any document or class of documents is opposed to public policy. The registering officer shall refuse to register any document to which a notification issued under sub-section (1) is applicable.

Overall, these amendments aim to ensure that documents presented for registration are accompanied by true copies and translated into commonly used languages in the district. They also empower the registering officer to refuse to register certain documents that are opposed to public policy, including those relating to the transfer of immovable properties belonging to the State Government, Local Authority, or religious institutions. The amendments also introduce the requirement of No Objection Certificates from the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned district for the registration of non-testamentary instruments relating to immovable property in Assam.
Summary:

The Wakf Act, 1995 (43 of 1995) establishes the Wakf Board, which is responsible for managing and administering wakfs (endowments for religious or charitable purposes) in India. The Act lays down the rules and regulations for the registration of wakf deeds, including the requirement for the transferor to produce the record of rights for the satisfaction of the registering officer. The Act also specifies the time limit for presenting documents for registration, with certain exceptions for unavoidable accidents or urgent necessity. In addition, the Act sets out the place of registration for different types of documents, including those relating to land and other documents. The Registration Act, 1908 governs the registration of documents in India, and sets out the rules and procedures for presenting documents for registration, including the requirement for the person presenting the document to affix their photograph and fingerprints. The Act also specifies the persons who are authorized to present documents for registration, including the executor or claimant, their representative or assign, or their authorized agent.
Summary:

The Indian Registration Act of 1908 outlines the powers-of-attorney that are recognized in India. These include powers executed before and authenticated by the Registrar or Sub-Registrar within whose district or sub-district the principal resides, if the principal resides in a part of India where the Act is in force. If the principal resides in a part of India where the Act is not in force, the power-of-attorney must be executed before and authenticated by any Magistrate. If the principal does not reside in India, the power-of-attorney must be executed before and authenticated by a Notary Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of the Central Government. Certain persons are exempt from appearing in person for the execution of a power-of-attorney, including those who are unable to attend due to bodily infirmity, those who are in jail under civil or criminal process, and those who are exempt by law from personal appearance in Court. The Act also outlines the procedure for enquiry before registration by the registering officer, including the requirement for the persons executing the document or their representatives, assigns or agents to appear before the registering officer within the time allowed for presentation. If owing to urgent necessity or unavoidable accident all such persons do not so appear, the Registrar may direct that the document may be registered on payment of a fine. The registering officer is required to enquire whether or not the document was executed by the persons by whom it purports to have been executed, satisfy himself as to the identity of the persons appearing before him and alleging that they have executed the document, and in the case of any person appearing as a representative, assign or agent, satisfy himself of the right of such person so to appear. The Act also outlines the procedure for presenting wills and authorities to adopt, as well as the deposit of wills.
Summary:

The Indian Registration Act, 1908, outlines the procedures for registering various types of documents in India. Section 42 of the Act allows a testator to deposit a will with the Registrar, who must then seal and retain the will in a fire-proof box. If the testator wishes to withdraw the will, they may apply to the Registrar, who must be satisfied that the applicant is the testator or their agent. Upon the testator's death, if an application is made to open the sealed cover, the Registrar must open the cover in the applicant's presence and cause the contents to be copied into Book No. 3. The original will must then be re-deposited. State amendments to this section have been made by Karnataka, Kerala, and Orissa. Section 46 states that nothing in the previous sections affects the provisions of certain sections of the Indian Succession Act, 1865, or the power of any Court to compel the production of a will. When an order is made to produce a will, the Registrar must open the cover and cause the will to be copied into Book No. 3, making a note on the copy that the original has been removed into Court. State amendments have been made by Karnataka, Kerala, and Orissa. Section 47 states that a registered document takes effect from the time it would have commenced to operate if no registration had been required or made. Section 48 states that registered documents relating to property take effect against any oral agreement or declaration relating to such property, unless the agreement or declaration has been accompanied or followed by delivery of possession. Section 49 states that no document required by section 171 or by the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, to be registered shall affect any immovable property comprised therein or confer any power to adopt, or be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property or conferring such power, unless it has been registered. Section 50 states that certain registered documents relating to land take effect against unregistered documents, unless the unregistered document is a decree or order. This section applies to leases exempted under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 17 or to any document mentioned in sub-section (2) of the same section, or to any registered document which had not priority under the law in force at the commencement of this Act. The Explanation states that in certain cases, unregistered means not registered according to the applicable registration act.
Summary:

This document discusses amendments to various sections of the Indian Registration Act, 1908. The amendments include changes to the filing and authentication of documents in Books No. 1, 3, and 4. The changes are specific to certain states, including Karnataka, Kerala, and Orissa, and are aimed at improving the accuracy and reliability of the registration process.

The amendments to Section 51 include the substitution of sub-sections (2) and (3), and the insertion of a new sub-section (5). The new sub-section allows the Registrar to direct the recopying and authentication of any book or portion of a book if it is in danger of being destroyed or becoming illegible.

The amendments to Section 52 include the substitution of clause (c) of sub-section (1) in Karnataka, Kerala, and Orissa. The new clause requires the filing of a true copy of the document in the appropriate book according to its order of admission.

The amendments to Section 54 include the substitution of the words "copied, or filed a memorandum of" with "filed a true copy or memorandum of" in Karnataka, Kerala, and Orissa.

The amendments to Section 55 include the substitution of the words "documents entered or memorandum filed" with "documents of which a true copy or memorandum is filed" in sub-section (2) of Section 55, and the substitution of the words "copied or filed" with "filed a true copy or" in sub-section (4) of Section 55 in Karnataka, Kerala, and Orissa.

Overall, these amendments aim to improve the accuracy and reliability of the registration process by requiring the filing of true copies of documents and memoranda, and by allowing for the recopying and authentication of books or portions of books in danger of being destroyed or becoming illegible. The amendments are specific to certain states and are aimed at addressing the unique challenges and needs of those jurisdictions.
Summary:
The document summarizes amendments made to certain sections of the Indian Registration Act, 1908. The amendments are made by the state governments of Karnataka, Kerala, and Orissa. The changes relate to sections 55, 58, 59, 60, 61, and 62 of the Act. The key changes include substituting the words "document entered" with "document of which a true copy is filed" in various sections, and requiring the registration officer to endorse a note of refusal if any person admitting the execution of a document refuses to endorse the same. Additionally, in the case of Karnataka and Kerala, the amendments require the registering officer to copy the endorsements and certificate onto the true copy of the document presented along with the document, and file the true copy of the map or plan, if any, mentioned in section 21. In the case of Orissa, the same changes apply. These amendments aim to improve the registration process and ensure that accurate records are maintained.
Summary:

The document summarizes various sections and amendments related to the Registration Act, 1908. The sections discussed include (A) Documents to be presented for registration, (B) Power to require production of certain documents, (C) Special duties of Sub-Registrar, (D) Special duties of Registrar, and (E) Of the Controlling powers of Registrar and Inspector-General.

Under Section 62, the amendments made by various states, such as Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, and Orissa, regarding the translation of documents presented for registration are discussed. The changes made by these states involve the substitution of sub-sections and the requirement of pasting or filing copies of the translation.

Section 63 outlines the power to administer oaths and record of the substance of statements made by a person examined under this Act. The registering officer may administer an oath and record a note of the statement made by the person, which shall be admissible for the purpose of proving the statements made.

Sections 64 and 65 discuss the special duties of the Sub-Registrar where the document relates to land in several sub-districts or districts. The Sub-Registrar is required to make a memorandum of the document and send it to the Sub-Registrar subordinate to the same Registrar as himself in whose sub-district any part of the property is situate. The Registrar is required to forward a copy of the document and a copy of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in section 21 to the Registrar of every district in which any part of the property is situate.

Section 66 outlines the procedure after registration of documents relating to land. The Registrar is required to forward a memorandum of such documents to each Sub-Registrar subordinate to himself in whose sub-district any part of the property is situate. A copy of the document, together with a copy of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in section 21, is required to be forwarded to every other Registrar in whose district any part of the property is situate.

Section 68 provides for the power of the Registrar to superintend and control Sub-Registrars. Every Sub-Registrar shall perform the duties of his office under the superintendence and control of the Registrar in whose district the office of such Sub-Registrar is situate.

Section 69 provides for the power of the Inspector-General to superintend registration offices and make rules. The Inspector-General shall exercise a general superintendence over all the registration offices in the territories under the State Government and shall have power from time to time to make rules consistent with this Act. The rules made shall be submitted to the State Government for approval and, after they have been approved, they shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall have effect as if enacted in this Act. The amendments made by the states of Karnataka, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, and Orissa regarding the grant of licenses to document writers, the revocation of such licenses, and the terms and conditions subject to which and the authority by whom such licenses shall be granted are discussed.
Summary:

The document pertains to the Indian Registration Act, 1908, specifically focusing on Part XII and XIII. Part XII, titled 'Of Refusal to Register,' includes Sections 71-77 and outlines the reasons for refusal to register a document, the procedure for appealing such refusal, and the process for establishing the right to have the document registered. Section 71 states that every Sub-Registrar refusing to register a document must record their reasons for such refusal and endorse the document with 'registration refused.' Section 72 allows for an appeal against an order of refusal, excluding cases where the refusal is based on denial of execution. Section 73 outlines the procedure for establishing the right to have a document registered when it has been refused on the ground of denial of execution. Section 74 permits the Registrar to inquire into the execution of the document and the compliance with legal requirements. Section 75 outlines the procedure for registering the document if the Registrar finds it to be executed and in compliance with legal requirements. Section 76 mandates that the Registrar must record their reasons for refusal to register a document and no appeal lies from any order made by a Registrar under this section or Section 72. Section 77 allows for a suit to be instituted in the Civil Court for a decree directing the document to be registered if the Registrar refuses to order its registration. Part XIII, titled 'Of the Fees for Registration, Searches and Copies,' includes Section 78 and outlines the fees payable for the registration of documents, searching the registers, and making or granting copies of reasons, entries, or documents. The section also outlines extra or additional fees payable for various other matters. Assam and Kerala have made amendments to the principal Act, adding Section 78A and inserting a new sub-section (2) to Section 78, respectively, both of which provide the State Government with the power to reduce or remit fees in the public interest. Orissa has also inserted a new section 78-A, which allows the State Government to prescribe different fees for different classes of documents or instruments.
Summary:

The document focuses on various sections and amendments related to Indian laws, specifically dealing with the Registration Act, 1908. The amendments are made by different states, including Orissa, Karnataka, and Kerala. The main sections discussed in the document are:

1. Section 78-A: This section grants the State Government the power to remit fees for certain instruments involving donation of property for public charitable purpose or exchange of land on the initiative of the State Government in the public interest.

2. Section 79: This section mandates the publication of fees in the Official Gazette and their exposure in every registration office in English and the vernacular language of the district.

3. Section 80: It requires the payment of fees for the registration of documents under this Act at the time of presentation.

4. Section 80A (Kerala): This section empowers the Inspector General of Registration or an officer authorized by him to recover registration fees in certain cases where the fee payable under this Act has not been paid, has been insufficiently paid, or has been found to be insufficient due to incorrect valuation of property or consideration. The recovery can be made from the person who presented the document for registration within three years from the date of presentation.

5. Section 80A (Karnataka): This section imposes a requirement to pay consequential increase in fees for the registration of documents under this Act when the value of the property has been increased under section 45A of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957. The fee payable under sub-section (1) may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.

6. Section 80B (Karnataka): This section mandates that no person other than an advocate or other legal practitioner shall write deeds for payment unless they hold a license granted in accordance with rules made under section 69.

7. Section 80A (Karnataka): This section enables the recovery of registration fee not levied or short levied, etc., from the person who presented the document for registration as an arrear of land revenue.

8. Section 80-A (Himachal Pradesh): This section allows the recovery of registration fee as arrears of land revenue and provides for refund of excess fee charged and paid under the provisions of this Act.

9. Section 80-A (Orissa): This section enables the recovery of deficient registration fee as arrears of land revenue.

10. Section 81: This section imposes penalties for incorrectly endorsing, copying, translating, or registering documents with the intent to injure. The penalties include imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.

11. Section 82: This section imposes penalties for making false statements, delivering false copies or translations, false personation, and abetment. The penalties include imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.

The document also includes various state amendments to sections 81 and 82, made by Orissa, Karnataka, and Kerala, which involve substituting the words "or registering of any document" with "registering, or filing a true copy, of any document" and substituting the words "or registers such document" with "registers, or files a true copy of, such document."
Summary:

The document summarizes amendments to the Indian Registration Act, 1908. Section 82 of the Act is amended to replace the words "under section 19 or section 21" with "under this Act or the rules made thereunder." Additionally, a new section 82A is inserted, which imposes a penalty on anyone who contravenes section 80B or any term or condition of a license granted under rules made under section 69.

The State of Karnataka has made an amendment to section 82, substituting the words "this Act or the rules made thereunder" for "section 19 or section 21." Similarly, the States of Kerala and Orissa have made similar amendments to section 82.

A new section 83A is inserted in the Act, which allows for the cancellation of registered documents in certain cases, such as when someone has falsely personated another and presented a document for registration. The Inspector General of Registration has the authority to cancel the registration of such a document.

Section 84 deems every registering officer appointed under the Act as a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code. Every person is legally bound to furnish information to such a registering officer when required by him to do so.

Documents (other than wills) remaining unclaimed in any registration office for a period exceeding two years may be destroyed under section 85. Section 86 states that no registering officer shall be liable to any suit, claim, or demand by reason of anything in good faith done or refused in his official capacity.

Section 87 states that nothing done in good faith pursuant to the Act or any Act hereby repealed by any registering officer shall be deemed invalid merely by reason of any defect in his appointment or procedure. The State of Orissa has inserted a new section 87-A, which allows for the delegation of powers conferred on the State Government under the Act to the Inspector-General of Registration.

Section 88 exempts certain officers from appearing in person or by agent at any registration office in any proceeding connected with the registration of any instrument executed by him or in his favour.

Section 89 requires every officer granting a loan under the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883, to send a copy of his order to the registering officer within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the land to be improved or of the land to be granted as collateral security is situate. Similarly, every Court granting a certificate of sale of immovable property under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall send a copy of such certificate to the registering officer within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the immovable property comprised in such certificate is situate.

The State of Karnataka has inserted a new section 89A, which allows the State Government to make rules for all purposes connected with the filing of true copies of documents in the appropriate books under the Act.
Summary:

The Indian Registration Act, 1908, governs the registration of certain documents related to immovable property in India. This summary focuses on specific sections of the Act, including sections 89, 89A, and 89B, as well as the exemptions provided in section 90.

Section 89 outlines the requirement for courts to send copies of decrees or orders related to immovable property to the registering officer within the local limits of the property's jurisdiction. This includes decrees or orders that create, declare, transfer, limit, or extinguish a right, title, or interest in immovable property, as well as orders for the attachment or release of immovable property from attachment.

Section 89A grants the State Government the power to make rules for the filing of true copies of documents in the appropriate books under the Act. These rules may cover the manner in which true copies of documents are prepared and filed.

Section 89B provides the State Government with the power to make rules for all purposes connected with the filing of true copies of documents in the appropriate books under the Act. These rules may cover the furnishing of true copies of documents by the person presenting the documents for registration, as well as the manner of filing such copies.

Section 90 exempts certain documents executed by or in favor of the Government from the registration requirements of the Act, including documents related to land-revenue settlements, surveys, and village records, as well as sanads, inam, title-deeds, and other documents granting or assigning land or interests in land by the Government. Notices given under specific sections of the Bombay Land-Revenue Code and relinquishments of occupancy or alienated land are also exempted.

Section 91 permits the inspection of certain documents and maps mentioned in section 90 and the provision of copies of such documents, subject to rules and the payment of fees prescribed by the State Government.

It is important to note that all documents and maps mentioned in section 90, clauses (a), (b), (c), and (e), and all registers of the documents mentioned in clause (d), shall be open to the inspection of any person applying to inspect the same, and, subject as aforesaid, copies of such documents shall be given to all persons applying for such copies.

The Repealing Act of 1938 repealed the Schedule of the Act, which contained a list of repealed enactments.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments and extensions to the Indian Evidence Act of 1872, which governs the admission of evidence in legal proceedings in India. The Act has been amended and extended to various states and union territories including Maharashtra, Madras, Andhra, Orissa, Punjab, Bihar, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Pondicherry, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, and West Bengal. The Act has also been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Daman and Diu, and the Union territory of Lakshadweep by various regulations.

The document includes various amendments made to the Act by different acts such as Act 45 of 1969, Act 3 of 1951, Act 17 of 1956, Act 4 of 1914, Act 3 of 1951, Act 3 of 1951, Act 17 of 1956, Act 2 of 1927, Act 33 of 1940, Act 48 of 2001, Act 21 of 1929, Act 4 of 1914, Act 39 of 1948, Act 2 of 1927, Act 33 of 1940, Act 39 of 1948, Act 15 of 1917, Act 3 of 1951, Act 32 of 1940, Act 48 of 2001, Act 3 of 1951, Act 39 of 1948, Act 13 of 1926, Act 21 of 1929, Act 48 of 2001, Act 5 of 1917, Act 48 of 2001, Act 39 of 1948, Act 20 of 1983, and Act 38 of 1920.

These amendments have made changes to various sections of the Act, such as section 2, section 3, section 4, section 5, section 6, section 7, section 8, section 9, section 10, section 11, section 12, section 13, section 14, section 15, section 16, section 17, section 18, section 19, section 20, section 21, section 22, section 23, section 24, section 25, section 26, section 27, section 28, section 29, section 30, section 31, section 32, section 33, section 34, section 35, section 36, section 37, section 38, section 39, section 40, section 41, section 42, section 43, section 44, section 45, section 46, section 47, section 48, section 49, section 50, section 51, section 52, section 53, section 54, section 55, section 56, section 57, section 58, section 59, section 60, section 61, section 62, section 63, section 64, section 65, section 66, section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70, section 71, section 72, section 73, section 74, section 75, section 76, section 77, section 78, section 79, section 80, section 81, section 82, section 83, section 84, section 85, section 86, section 87, section 88, section 89, section 90, section 91, section 92, section 93, section 94, section 95, section 96, section 97, section 98, section 99, section 100, section 101, section 102, section 103, section 104, section 105, section 106, section 107, section 108, section 109, section 110, section 111, section 112, section 113, section 114, section 115, section 116, section 117, section 118, section 119, section 120, section 121, section 122, section 123, section 124, section 125, section 126, section 127, section 128, section 129, section 130, section 131, section 132, section 133, section 134, section 135, section 136, section 137, section 138, section 139, section 140, section 141, section 142, section 143, section 144, section 145, section 146, section 147, section 148, section 149, section 150, section 151, section 152, section 153, section 154, section 155, section 156, section 157, section 158, section 159, section 160, section 161, section 162, section 163, section 164, section 165, section 166, section 167, section 168, section 169, section 170, section 171, section 172, section 173, section 174, section 175, section 176, section 177, section 178, section 179, section 180, section 181, section 182, section 183, section 184, section 185, section 186, section 187, section 188, section 189, section 190, section 191, section 192, section 193, section 194, section 195, section 196, section 197, section 198, section 199, section 200.

These amendments have made changes to various provisions of the Act, such as the definition of "Indian", the powers of the Central Government, the appointment of Inspectors, the powers of the Inspector-General, the powers of the Provincial Government, the powers of the State Government, the destruction of books, papers and documents, the control of the Governor-General in Council, and the Branch Inspector-General of Sindh.

In summary, the document summarizes various amendments and extensions to the Indian Evidence Act of 1872, which have made changes to various provisions of the Act and have extended the Act to various states and union territories.