Summary:
THE VICTORIA MEMORIAL ACT, 1903 is an Act to provide for the erection and management of the Victoria Memorial at Calcutta. The Act is divided into 6 sections and a schedule.
Section 1 of the Act is the short title, which is the Victoria Memorial Act, 1903.
Section 2 of the Act deals with the Trustees of the Victoria Memorial. The Trustees shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession by the name of “The Trustees of the Victoria Memorial” and a common seal. The Trustees shall consist of 15 members, including the Government of West Bengal, the Chief Justice of the High Court of West Bengal, three persons nominated by the Central Government, a representative of the Central Government in the Ministry concerned with matters relating to the Victoria Memorial, a representative of the Central Government in the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, concerned with matters relating to the Victoria Memorial, the Mayor of the Corporation of Calcutta or where the Corporation of Calcutta is superseded, the Administrator of that Corporation, an officer nominated by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the Secretary to the Government of West Bengal in the Department of Education, and four persons nominated by the Trustees from among persons who have expert knowledge of the exhibits in the Victoria Memorial or are museologists, historians, or art historians.
Section 3 of the Act deals with the property vested in the Trustees. All sums of money now in the custody of the Provisional Executive Committee and all other property, whether movable or immovable, which has been or may hereafter be given, bequeathed or otherwise transferred for the purposes of the said Memorial or acquired for the said purposes by the Trustees shall vest in the Trustees.
Section 4 of the Act deals with the officers and servants employed by the Trustees and deems them to be public servants within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Section 5 of the Act deals with rules and provides that the Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. The rules may provide for the manner in which Trustees, other than ex officio Trustees, shall be appointed, and for the periods of time for which such Trustees shall hold office, for the manner in which meetings of the Trustees shall be convened, the quorum necessary for the transaction of business, and the procedure at such meetings, for the appointment of Committees of the Trustees, and the powers of expenditure and control which may be delegated to such Committees, for the erection, maintenance, and management of the Memorial, the care and custody of the objects deposited therein, and the conditions under which the public shall have access thereto, for the fees to be levied for admission to the Victoria Memorial, and for the form of accounts to be kept by the Trustees, and for the audit and publication of such accounts.
Section 6 of the Act deals with the power of Trustees to make regulations. The Trustees may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for enabling the body to discharge its functions under this Act. The regulations may provide for the conditions and restrictions subject to which articles and things vested in the Trustees may be given on loan, and the recruitment and conditions of service of the employees of the Victoria Memorial.
The Schedule to the Act contains the form of oath or affirmation to be made by members of the Trustees.
This summary is provided for informational purposes only and is not intended to be legal advice.