Summary:

The Works of Defence Act, 1903, is a law in India that aims to keep land in the vicinity of works of defence free from buildings and other obstructions. The Act extends to the whole of India and imposes restrictions on the use and enjoyment of land in the vicinity of works of defence. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, including "land," "person interested," "District," "Central Officer Commanding the District," "Commanding Officer," "Collector," and "Court." The Act also includes provisions for the construction of references to laws not in force or any functionary not in existence in any area.

The Act is divided into five parts. Part I, titled "Preliminary," includes sections 1 and 2, which provide for the short title and extent of the Act and definitions of terms used in the Act. Part II, titled "Imposition of Restrictions," includes sections 3 to 7, which provide for the declaration and notice that restrictions will be imposed, power to do preliminary acts after publication of notice under section 3, sub-section (2), payment for damage, further powers exercisable after publication of notice under section 3, sub-section (2), and restrictions. Part III, titled "Reference to Court and Procedure Thereon," includes sections 18 to 28, which provide for the reference to Court, Collector's statement to the Court, service of notice, restriction on scope of proceedings, proceedings to be in open Court, matters to be considered in determining compensation, supplementary proceedings, and form of awards. Part IV, titled "Apportionment of Compensation," includes sections 29 and 30, which provide for particulars of apportionment to be specified and dispute as to apportionment. Part V, titled "Payment," includes sections 31 to 34, which provide for payment of compensation or deposit of same in Court, investment of money deposited in respect of lands belonging to persons incompetent to alienate, investment of money deposited in other cases, and payment of interest. Part VI, titled "Miscellaneous," includes sections 35 to 44, which provide for service of notices, penalties, Magistrate to enforce the terms of the Act, completion of imposition of restrictions not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded when not completed, demolition of part of house or building and imposition of restrictions on part of land, exemption from stamp duty and fees, notice in case of suits for anything done in pursuance of Act, Code of Civil Procedure to apply to proceedings before Court, appeals in proceedings before Court, and power to make rules.

The Act includes a schedule that provides for the procedure for the imposition of restrictions and payment of compensation. The Act also includes forms for various notices and orders issued under the Act. The Act includes footnotes that provide for the extension of the Act to Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry, and the omission of certain words and provisions. The Act also includes provisions for the previous publication of rules made under the Act and the laying of such rules before both Houses of Parliament.