Summary:
The Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, provides for the more speedy trial of certain offences and the prohibition of associations dangerous to the public peace. The Act is divided into two parts. Part I, which has been repealed, dealt with special procedure for the trial of certain offences. Part II, titled "Unlawful Associations," outlines the powers of the State Government to declare an association unlawful, penalties for membership or involvement in an unlawful association, and provisions for taking possession of places used for the purposes of an unlawful association, as well as forfeiture of funds of such associations. The Act applies to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States. The Act extends to Assam and to the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the State of West Bengal, but the State Government may bring the whole or any part of the Act into force in the territories under its administration to which this Act extends. The Act defines "association" as any combination or body of persons, whether the same be known by any distinctive name or not, and "unlawful association" as an association which encourages or aids persons to commit acts of violence or intimidation or of which the members habitually commit such acts, or which has been declared to be unlawful by the State Government under the powers conferred by this Act. The Act empowers the State Government to declare an association unlawful if it interferes or has for its object interference with the administration of the law or with the maintenance of law and order, or that it constitutes a danger to the public peace. The Act imposes penalties on members and managers of unlawful associations, and provides for the forfeiture of funds of such associations. The Act also empowers the State Government to take possession of places used for the purposes of an unlawful association, and to seize and forfeit movable property found in a notified place. The Act also makes trespass upon notified places a criminal offence. The Act provides for the relinquishment of property and forfeiture of funds of an unlawful association. The Act also prohibits any person from paying, delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing in any manner whatsoever with the monies, securities or credits of an unlawful association, save in accordance with the written orders of the State Government. The Act also provides for the investigation of claims and the adjudication of the forfeiture of monies, securities or credits of an unlawful association. The Act also provides that every report of the taking possession of property and every declaration of forfeiture made, or purporting to be made under this Act, shall, as against all persons, be conclusive proof that the property specified therein has been taken possession of by Government or has been forfeited, as the case may be. The Act also provides that no civil or criminal proceedings shall be instituted against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under the said sections or against Government or any person acting on behalf of or by authority of Government for any loss or damage caused to or in respect of any property whereof possession has been taken by Government under this Act. The Act also provides that an association shall not be deemed to have ceased to exist by reasons only of any formal act of dissolution or change of title, but shall be deemed to continue so long as any actual combination for the purposes of such association continues between any members thereof. The Act also repealed the Schedule which contained the list of offences triable summarily under this Act.