Summary:
The Official Trustees Act, 1913, is an Act to consolidate and amend the Law constituting the office of Official Trustee. This Act provides for the appointment, powers, duties, and liabilities of an Official Trustee, who is a corporation sole, with perpetual succession and an official seal, and who may sue and be sued in his corporate name. The Act also specifies the extent of jurisdiction of the High Court in relation to proceedings instituted by or against the Official Trustee. The Act is applicable throughout India, and it came into force on such date as the Central Government may direct. The Act defines certain terms, such as "Government" or "the Government," which mean, in relation to a State, the State Government and, in relation to a Union territory, the Central Government. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee shall have the same powers, duties, and liabilities and be entitled to the same rights and privileges and be subject to the same control and orders of the Court as any other trustee acting in the same capacity. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee may decline to accept any trust under certain circumstances, such as if the estate is insolvent or if the trust involves the management or carrying on of any business. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee shall not administer the estate of a deceased person, unless he is expressly appointed sole executor of, and sole trustee under, the will of such person. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee shall always be sole trustee, and it shall not be lawful to appoint the Official Trustee to be trustee along with any other person. The Act also specifies that any person intending to create a trust other than a trust which the Official Trustee is prohibited from accepting under the provisions of this Act may appoint him to be the trustee of the property subject to such trust, with his consent, and upon such appointment, the property subject to the trust shall vest in such Official Trustee, and shall be held by him upon the trusts declared in such instrument. The Act also specifies that when the Official Trustee has by that name or any other sufficient description been appointed trustee under any will, the executor of the will of the testator or the administrator of his estate shall, after obtaining probate or letters of administration, notify in the prescribed manner the contents of such will to such Official Trustee, and if such Official Trustee consents to accept the trust, then upon the execution by such executor or administrator of an instrument in writing transferring the property subject to the Official Trustee, such property shall vest in such Official Trustee, and shall be held by him upon the trusts expressed in the said will. The Act also specifies that if any property is subject to a trust other than a trust which the Official Trustee is prohibited from accepting under the provisions of this Act, and there is no trustee within the local limits of the ordinary or extraordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court willing or capable to act in the trust, the High Court may on application make an order for the appointment of the Official Trustee by that name with his consent to be the trustee of such property, and upon such order such property shall vest in the Official Trustee and shall be held by him upon the same trusts as the same was held previously to such order. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee may decline, either absolutely or except on such conditions as he may impose, to accept any trust. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee shall not accept any trust under any composition or scheme of arrangement for the benefit of creditors, nor of any estate known or believed by him to be insolvent. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee shall not, save as provided by any rules made under this Act, accept any trust for a religious purpose or any trust which involves the management or carrying on of any business. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee shall not administer the estate of a deceased person, unless he is expressly appointed sole executor of, and sole trustee under, the will of such person. The Act also specifies that the Official Trustee shall always be sole trustee, and it shall not be lawful to appoint the Official Trustee to be trustee along with any other person.