Summary:
The Poisons Act, 1919, is an Indian law that aims to regulate the importation, possession, and sale of poisons. The Act is divided into nine sections and includes a schedule of specified poisons. The Act begins by defining its purpose and stating that it applies to the whole of India, except for the State of Jammu and Kashmir, in relation to the importation of poisons.

Section 2 of the Act grants the State Government the power to regulate the possession for sale and sale, both wholesale and retail, of any specified poison. The rules made under this section may provide for the grant of licenses, the classes of persons who may be granted licenses, the classes of persons to whom poisons may be sold, the maximum quantity of poison that may be sold to any one person, the maintenance of registers of sales, the safe custody of poisons and the labelling of vessels, packages or coverings, and the inspection and examination of poisons.

Section 3 grants the Central Government the power to prohibit the importation of any specified poison, except under and in accordance with the conditions of a licence, into India across any customs frontier defined by the Central Government. The section also allows for the regulation of the grant of licences.

Section 4 grants the State Government the power to regulate the possession of any poison in any local area in which the use of such poison for the purpose of committing murder or mischief by poisoning cattle appears to be of such frequent occurrence as to render restrictions on the possession thereof desirable. The section also allows for the imposition of penalties for breaches of the rules made under this section.

Section 5 provides for a presumption as to specified poisons. Any substance specified as a poison in a rule made or notification issued under this Act shall be deemed to be a poison for the purposes of this Act.

Section 6 sets out penalties for unlawful importation, possession, or sale of poisons. The penalties include imprisonment and fines, as well as confiscation of the poison and any vessels, packages, or coverings in which the same is found.

Section 7 grants the District Magistrate, the Sub-divisional Magistrate, and, in a presidency-town, the Commissioner of Police, the power to issue warrants for the search of any place in which they have reason to believe or to suspect that any poison is possessed or sold in contravention of this Act or any rule thereunder, or that any poison liable to confiscation under this Act is kept or concealed.

Section 8 grants the State Government the power to make rules generally to carry out the purposes and objects of this Act, except for section 3. Every power to make rules conferred by this Act is subject to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication.

Section 9 contains savings provisions, including that nothing in this Act or in any licence granted or rule made thereunder shall extend to, or interfere with, anything done in good faith in the exercise of his profession as such by a medical or veterinary practitioner. The section also allows for the State Government to declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act, except section 3, shall be deemed not to apply to any article or class of articles of commerce specified in such order, or to any poison or class of poisons used for any purpose so specified.

The Act includes a schedule of specified poisons. The Poisons Act, 1919, has been extended to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh, and has been repealed in its application to Bellary District. The Act has also been amended by various Acts, including the Repealing Act, 1927, the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.