Summary:
The Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914 (Act No. 2 of 1914) is a law in India that aims to prevent the introduction and transport of insects, fungi, or other pests that are destructive to crops. The Act applies to the entire country and was enacted on 3rd February 1914. The Act defines "crops" to include all agricultural or horticultural crops and all trees, bushes, or plants. "Import" means the bringing or taking of any article or class of articles by sea, land, or air across any customs frontier as defined by the Central Government. "Infection" means infection by any insect, fungus, or other pest injurious to a crop.

The Act gives the Central Government the power to regulate or prohibit the import of articles likely to infect crops or insects. The Central Government may specify any article or class of articles or any insect or class of insects, either generally or in any particular manner, with reference to the country of origin or the route by which imported or otherwise. The Central Government may also levy and collect fees for making an application for a permit to import, or for making inspection, fumigation, disinfection, disinfestation, or supervision of any article or class of articles or any insect or class of insects under this section.

A notification under section 3 of this Act shall operate as if it had been issued under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878). The officers of Customs at every port shall have the same powers in respect of any article with regard to the importation of which such a notification has been issued as they have for the time being in respect of any article the importation of which is regulated, restricted, or prohibited by the law relating to Sea Customs, and the law for the time being in force relating to Sea Customs or any such article shall apply accordingly.

The Central Government may also prohibit or regulate the export from a State or the transport from one State to another State of any article or class of articles likely to cause infection to any crop or of insects generally or any class of insects. The person responsible for the booking of goods or parcels at any railway station or inland steam vessel station shall refuse to receive for carriage at, or to forward or knowingly allow to be carried on, the railway or inland steam vessel from that station anything, of which import or transport is prohibited, consigned to any place in a State other than the State in which such station is situate.

The Central Government may make rules prescribing the nature of the documents which shall accompany any article or insect the export or transport whereof is subject to conditions imposed under section 4A, or, which shall be held by the consignor or consignee thereof, the authorities which may issue such documents and the manner in which the documents shall be employed. Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.

The State Government may make rules for the detention, inspection, disinfection, or destruction of any insect or class of insects or of any article or class of articles in respect of which a notification has been issued under section 3 or under section 4A or of any article which may have been in contact or proximity thereto, and for regulating the powers and duties of the officers whom it may appoint in this behalf. In making any rule under this section, the State Government may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine, which may extend to one thousand rupees. Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

Any person who knowingly exports any article or insect from a State or transports any article or insect from one State to another in contravention of a notification issued under section 4A, or attempts so to export or transport any article or insect and any person responsible for the booking of goods or parcels at a railway or inland steam vessel station who knowingly contravenes the provisions of section 4B shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees and, upon any subsequent conviction, with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.