Summary:

THE DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS ACT, 1917 (Modified as on 3rd December, 2018) is an Act that consolidates and amends the law regarding the destruction or other disposal of certain documents in the possession or custody of Courts, Revenue and other public officers in India. The Act extends to the whole of India, except for the territories that were previously part of Part B States.

Section 1 of the Act specifies the short title and extent of the Act. The Act can be called the Destruction of Records Act, 1917 and extends to the whole of India, excluding the territories that were previously part of Part B States. The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu, the Union territory of Lakshadweep, and the Union territory of Pondicherry.

Section 2 of the Act, which defined certain terms, has been repealed.

Section 3 of the Act empowers certain authorities to make rules for the disposal of documents that are not of sufficient public value to justify their preservation. These authorities include High Courts, Revenue Courts and officers, and any other public officer. The rules made by these authorities are subject to the previous approval of the State Government or the Central Government, depending on the case.

Section 4 of the Act validates former rules for the disposal of documents that were made by a State Government or with the approval of the State Government by any authority not empowered to make such rules under the Destruction of Records Act, 1879. These rules are deemed to have had the force of law from the date on which they were made and continue to have the force of law until they are superseded by rules made under this Act.

Section 5 of the Act states that nothing in this Act shall be deemed to authorize the destruction of any document that is required to be kept and maintained under the provisions of any law for the time being in force.

Section 6 of the Act, which repealed certain enactments, has been repealed.

The Schedule to the Act lists the enactments that have been repealed.

In summary, THE DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS ACT, 1917 (Modified as on 3rd December, 2018) provides a legal framework for the disposal of certain documents in the possession or custody of Courts, Revenue and other public officers in India. The Act empowers certain authorities to make rules for the disposal of documents that are not of sufficient public value to justify their preservation, subject to the previous approval of the State Government or the Central Government. The Act also validates former rules for the disposal of documents and prohibits the destruction of any document required to be kept and maintained under the provisions of any law for the time being in force.