Summary:
The Indian Museum Act, 1910, consolidates and amends the law relating to the Indian Museum. The Act establishes the Trustees of the Indian Museum, which is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal. The Trustees have the exclusive possession, occupation, and control of the land and buildings specified in the schedule, other than those portions set apart for the records and offices of the Geological Survey of India. The Trustees may exchange, sell, and destroy articles in the collections, subject to the provisions of any bye-laws made in this behalf. They may also present duplicates of articles contained in any such collection to other museums in India. The Trustees may make bye-laws for any purpose necessary for the execution of their trust, consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder. The Trustees may appoint such officers and servants as they may consider necessary or proper for the care or management of the trust-property, and determine their functions. The recruitment and the conditions of service of such officers and servants shall be regulated by rules made under this Act. The Trustees shall submit to the Central Government for approval the budget of the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure during the next financial year. The Trustees shall cause an inventory of all additions to the collections in the said Indian Museum formerly belonging to the Asiatic Society of Bengal and all additions that may hereafter be made thereto otherwise than by purchase under section 6 to be made, one copy whereof shall be signed by the Trustees and delivered to the said society, and another copy shall be signed by the Council of the said Society and delivered to the Trustees, and shall be kept by them along with the inventory delivered to the predecessors in office of the Trustees when the said collections were deposited in the said Museum. All objects taken in exchange and articles purchased under section 7 and all moneys realised from sales made in accordance with the terms of the same section shall be held on trust and subject to powers and declarations corresponding as nearly as may be with the trusts, powers and declarations by this Act limited and declared. The Trustees shall cause every article in the collections in the said Museum formerly belonging to the Asiatic Society of Bengal and all additions that may hereafter be made thereto otherwise than by purchase under section 6, to be marked and numbered and (subject to the provisions contained in sections 7 and 16) to be kept and preserved in the said Museum with such marks and numbers. An inventory of such additions shall be made by the said Society, one copy whereof shall be signed by the Trustees and delivered to the said society, and another copy shall be signed by the Council of the said Society and delivered to the Trustees, and shall be kept by them along with the inventory delivered to the predecessors in office of the Trustees when the said collections were deposited in the said Museum. All officers and servants appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). The Trustees may, if they think fit, with the previous sanction of the Central Government and subject in each case to such conditions as it may approve and to such rules as it may prescribe, assume the custody and administration of collections which are not the property of the Trustees for the purposes of their trust under this Act, and keep and preserve such collections either in the Indian Museum or elsewhere. Subject to such conditions as the Central Government may approve, the Trustees may deliver possession of the whole or any part of the property described in the schedule to such person as that Government may appoint. The Central Government may, in consultation with the Trustees, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. If the trust constituted by this Act is at any time determined, the collections and additions mentioned in section 11 shall become the property of the said Asiatic Society or their assigns, and all the other collections then in the said Indian Museum shall, save as otherwise provided by section 14, become the property of Government.