Summary:

THE USURIOUS LOANS ACT, 1918 (Act No. 10 OF 1918)

The Usurious Loans Act, 1918, is an Act that aims to give additional powers to Courts to deal with usurious loans of money or in kind. The Act, which came into force on 22nd March 1918, extends to the whole of India except the territories which were comprised in Part B States before 1st November 1956. The State Government may specify any area, class of persons, or class of transactions to which the Act shall not apply.

The Act defines "interest" as the rate of interest and includes the return to be made over and above what was actually lent, whether the same is charged or sought to be recovered specifically by way of interest or otherwise. "Loan" means a loan whether of money or in kind and includes any transaction which is, in the opinion of the Court, in substance a loan. "Suit to which this Act applies" means any suit for the recovery of a loan made after the commencement of this Act or for the enforcement of any security taken or any agreement, whether by way of settlement of account or otherwise, made, after the commencement of this Act, in respect of any loan made either before or after the commencement of this Act or for the redemption of any security given after the commencement of this Act in respect of any loan made either before or after the commencement of this Act.

Under Section 3 of the Act, the Court may exercise powers to re-open the transaction, take an account between the parties, and relieve the debtor of all liability in respect of any excessive interest. The Court may also re-open any account already taken between the parties and relieve the debtor of all liability in respect of any excessive interest. The Court may set aside any security given or agreement made in respect of any loan, and if the creditor has parted with the security, order him to indemnify the debtor in such manner and to such extent as it may deem just. However, the Court shall not re-open any agreement purporting to close previous dealings and to create a new obligation which has been entered into by the parties or any persons from whom they claim at a date more than twelve years from the date of the transaction or do anything which affects any decree of a Court.

Under Section 4, on any application relating to the admission or amount of a proof of a loan in any insolvency proceedings, the Court may exercise the like powers as may be exercised under Section 3 by a Court in a suit to which this Act applies.

The Act applies to any suit, whatever its form may be, if such suit is substantially one for the recovery of a loan or for the enforcement of any agreement or security in respect of a loan or for the redemption of any such security. The Act does not affect the rights of any transferee for value who satisfies the Court that the transfer to him was bona fide, and that he had at the time of such transfer no notice of any fact which would have entitled the debtor as against the lender to relief under this section. The Act does not derogate from the existing powers or jurisdiction of any Court.

The Act has been amended in several states, including Uttar Pradesh, the Central Provinces, Madras, East Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, and Himachal Pradesh. The Act has been extended to the whole of Madhya Pradesh and the Union territory of Pondicherry. The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.