Summary:

The Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925 (Act No. 26 OF 1925) is an Act to amend the law with respect to the carriage of goods by sea. The Act is based on the draft convention for the unification of certain rules relating to bills of lading agreed upon at the International Conference on Maritime Law held at Brussels in October, 1922. The Act extends to the whole of India.

The Act applies to the carriage of goods by sea in ships carrying goods from any port in India to any other port whether in or outside India. The Act states that there shall not be implied in any contract for the carriage of goods by sea to which the Rules apply any absolute undertaking by the carrier of the goods to provide a seaworthy ship. Every bill of lading or similar document of title issued in India which contains or is evidence of any contract to which the Rules apply shall contain an express statement that it is to have effect subject to the provisions of the said Rules as applied by this Act.

The Act also modifies certain provisions of the Rules in relation to goods carried in sailing ships and by prescribed routes. The Act also modifies Rules 4 and 5 of Article III in relation to bulk cargoes. The Act specifies that nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of certain sections of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 or the operation of any other enactment for the time being in force limiting the liability of the owners of sea-going vessels. The Rules shall not by virtue of this Act apply to any contract for the carriage of goods by sea before a certain day appointed by the Central Government.

The Schedule to the Act sets out the Rules relating to bills of lading. The Rules define various expressions used in the Act, such as "carrier", "contract of carriage", "goods", "ship", and "carriage of goods". The Rules also specify the responsibilities and liabilities of the carrier, including the duty to exercise due diligence to make the ship seaworthy, properly man, equip, and supply the ship, and make the holds, refrigerating and cool chambers, and all other parts of the ship in which goods are carried, fit and safe for their reception, carriage and preservation. The Rules also specify the rights and immunities of the carrier, including the limitation of liability to a certain amount unless the nature and value of the goods have been declared by the shipper before shipment and inserted in the bill of lading. The Rules also provide for the surrender of rights and immunities and the increase of responsibilities and liabilities by agreement between the carrier and the shipper. The Rules do not apply to charterparties, but if bills of lading are issued in the case of a ship under a charterparty, they shall comply with the terms of these Rules. The Rules also provide for special conditions and limitations on the application of the Rules.