Summary:
THE INDIAN BAR COUNCILS ACT, 1926, is an Act to provide for the constitution of Bar Councils for certain courts, confer powers and impose duties on such Bar Councils, and consolidate and amend the law relating to legal practitioners entitled to practice in such courts. The Act consists of 20 sections divided into three chapters: Preliminary, Constitution of Bar Councils, and Miscellaneous.

In the Preliminary chapter, Section 1 provides the short title, extent, and application of the Act, while Section 2 explains the interpretation of terms used in the Act. The term "advocate" refers to an advocate entered in the roll of advocates of a High Court under the provisions of this Act; "Advocate-General" includes, where there is no Advocate-General, the Government Advocate and, where there is no Advocate-General or Government Advocate, such officer as the State Government may declare to be the Advocate-General for the purposes of this Act; "High Court" means a High Court to which this Act applies; and "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

The Constitution of Bar Councils chapter includes Sections 3 to 7. Section 3 provides for the constitution and incorporation of Bar Councils, while Section 4 explains the composition of Bar Councils. Every Bar Council shall consist of fifteen members, of whom one shall be the Advocate-General, four shall be persons nominated by the High Court, and ten shall be elected by the advocates of the High Court from amongst their number. Of the elected members of every Bar Council, not less than five shall be persons who have for not less than ten years been entitled as of right to practise in the High Court for which the Bar Council has been constituted.

Section 5 contains special provisions regarding the constitution of the first Bar Councils, while Section 5A provides for the Ad hoc Bar Council for the Gujarat High Court. Section 6 allows for the making of rules regarding the constitution and procedure of Bar Councils, while Section 7 permits the Bar Council to make bye-laws for the appointment of ministerial officers and servants, and the appointment and constitution of Committees of the Council, the procedure of such Committees, and the determination of the powers or duties of the Council which may be delegated to such Committees.

The Miscellaneous chapter includes Sections 8 to 20. Section 8 provides for the enrolment of advocates, while Section 9 explains the qualifications and admission of advocates. The Bar Council may, with the previous sanction of the High Court, make rules to regulate the admission of persons to be advocates of the High Court. Section 10 to 13, which dealt with punishment of advocate for misconduct, tribunal of Bar Council, procedure in inquiries, and powers of the Tribunal and Courts in inquiries, respectively, have been repealed by the Advocates Act, 1961.

Section 14 provides for the right of advocates to practice, while Section 15 allows the Bar Council to make rules consistent with this Act to provide for and regulate any of the following matters, namely: the rights and duties of the advocates of the High Court and their discipline and professional conduct; the conditions subject to which advocates of other High Courts may be permitted to practise in the High Court; the giving of facilities for legal education and training and the holding and conduct of examinations by the Bar Council; the charging of fees payable to the Bar Council in respect of the enjoyment of educational facilities provided, or of the right to appear at examinations held, by the Bar Council; the investment and management of the funds of the Bar Council; and any other matter in respect of which the High Court may require rules to be made under this section.

Section 16 allows for the fixing of fees payable as costs, while Section 17 provides for indemnity against legal proceedings. Section 18 requires the publication of rules, while Section 19 deals with amendment of enactments, etc. When sections 8 to 16 come into force in respect of any High Court, any enactment mentioned in the first column of the Schedule which is in force in any State in which the High Court exercises jurisdiction shall, for the purpose of its application to that State, be amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the second column of the Schedule.

Section 20 contains a transitional provision regarding certain Bar Councils affected by States' reorganisation. The Bar Councils for the High Courts of the States of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Punjab, Rajasthan and Travancore-Cochin functioning immediately before the 1st day of November, 1956, shall be deemed to be the Bar Councils for the High Courts of the corresponding new States of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Punjab, Rajasthan and Kerala, respectively. As from the said day, the Bar Councils for the High Courts of Hyderabad and Saurashtra shall stand dissolved, and the assets and liabilities of the Bar Council for the High Court of Hyderabad shall stand transferred to, the Bar Councils for the High Courts of Andhra Pradesh, Bombay and Mysore and be divided among them in such proportion as may be agreed upon, and in default of such agreement, in the proportion of 57:61:27.81:14:58.