Summary:

THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925, is an Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to Government and other Provident Funds. The Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and came into force on a date appointed by the Central Government. The Act defines various terms such as 'compulsory deposit', 'contribution', 'dependant', 'Government Provident Fund', 'Provident Fund', 'Railway administration', and 'Railway Provident Fund'.

The Act provides protection to compulsory deposits in Government or Railway Provident Funds, which cannot be assigned or charged and are not liable to attachment under any decree or order of any Civil, Revenue, or Criminal Court. The sum standing to the credit of any subscriber or depositor at the time of his decease and payable under the rules of the Fund to any dependant of the subscriber or depositor or to such person as may be authorized by law to receive payment on his behalf shall, subject to any deduction authorized by this Act and, save where the dependant is the widow or child of the subscriber or depositor, subject also to the rights of an assignee under an assignment made before the commencement of this Act, vest in the dependant and shall be free from any debt or other liability incurred by the deceased or incurred by the dependant before the death of the subscriber or depositor.

When under the rules of any Government or Railway Provident Fund the sum standing to the credit of any subscriber or depositor, or the balance thereof after the making of any deduction authorized by this Act, has become payable, the officer whose duty is to make the payment shall pay the sum or balance, as the case may be, to the subscriber or depositor, or, if he is dead, shall pay the same to the dependant, nominee, or any person appearing to him to be otherwise entitled to receive it. If the whole or any part of any sum standing to the credit of the subscriber or depositor has been assigned to any other person before the commencement of this Act and notice in writing of the assignment has been received by the officer, the officer shall pay the assigned amount to the assignee, provided that the subscriber or depositor or, if he is dead, the person to whom in the absence of any valid assignment the sum or balance would be payable under this sub-section gives his consent in writing, or if such consent is not forthcoming, withhold payment of the sum, part, or balance pending a decision of a competent Civil Court as to the person entitled to receive it.

The Act also provides for the rights of nominees, power to make deductions, protection for acts done in good faith, power to apply the Act to other Provident Funds, savings as to estates of soldiers, and savings. The Schedule to the Act contains a list of institutions to which the Act applies. The Act has been amended several times, and the latest amendment was made by the Provident Funds (Amendment) Act, 1975.