Lighthouse Act, 1927: Summary

The Lighthouse Act, 1927, is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the provision, maintenance, and control of lighthouses by the government in India. The Act is divided into two main parts: General Lighthouses and Local Lighthouses.

Under General Lighthouses, the superintendence and management of all general lighthouses are vested in the Central Government. The Central Government may require any local lighthouse authority to undertake the superintendence and management of any general lighthouse situated in or adjacent to the local limits within which the authority exercises its powers, and shall pay to the authority such sums to defray the cost of superintendence and management as the Central Government may determine.

Under Local Lighthouses, the Central Government has the power to inspect local lighthouses and make inquiries in respect of them. The Central Government may direct any local lighthouse authority to remove or discontinue any lighthouse under its superintendence and management or to make or refrain from making any variation in the character or mode of use of any such lighthouse. A local lighthouse authority shall not erect, place, remove, or discontinue any lighthouse or vary the character or mode of use of any lighthouse without giving one month's notice in writing to the Central Government.

The Act also provides for the levy and collection of light-dues for the purpose of providing or maintaining or of providing and maintaining lighthouses for the benefit of ships voyaging to or from India or between ports in India. The rates of light-dues are prescribed by the Central Government and may be different for different classes of ships or sailing vessels, or for ships or sailing vessels of the same class when in use for different purposes or in different circumstances.

The Act also provides for the recovery of light-dues, expenses, and costs, the refusal of port-clearance, the determination of disputes as to liability for payment, the light-dues payable at one port recoverable at another, the penalty for evading payment of light-dues, exemption from payment of light-dues, refund of excess payments, and fees.

The Central Government may make rules consistent with this Act to carry into effect the purposes thereof. In particular, such rules may provide for the powers and duties of the Director-General of Lighthouses and Lightships and Directors and Deputy Directors -General of Lighthouses and Lightships, the procedure and conduct of business of Advisory Committees constituted under this Act, the manner in which the light may be removed and the height of the building, structure or tree may be reduced under sub-section (5) of section 8A, the rate of travelling and subsistence allowance payable to members of Advisory Committees, the rates of fees for providing assistance to ships for calibrating their Wireless Direction Finders and for rendering other services to vessels, and the period in respect of which and the form in which the separate account referred to in sub-section (1) of section 20 shall be kept and the forms in which that account and the statement referred to in sub-section (2) of that section shall respectively be presented to the Central Advisory Committee.