Summary:

The Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, is an Act to mandate the requirement of passports for entry into India. The Act is defined as taking power to require passports of persons entering India. The Act consists of five sections and one definition section.

Section 1 of the Act deals with the short title and extent of the Act. The Act can be called The Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, and it extends to the whole of India.

Section 2 of the Act defines the terms used in the Act, including "entry," which means entry by water, land, or air, "passport," which means a passport issued or renewed by the prescribed authority, and "prescribed," which means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Section 3 of the Act deals with the power to make rules. The Central Government may make rules requiring that persons entering India shall be in possession of passports and for all matters ancillary or incidental to that purpose. The rules may prohibit the entry into India or any part thereof of any person who has not in his possession a passport issued to him, prescribe the authorities by whom passports must have been issued or renewed, and provide for the exemption of any person or class of persons from any provision of such rules. The rules made under this section may provide that any contravention thereof or of any order issued under the authority of any such rule shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 3A of the Act deals with punishment for subsequent offences. Whoever having been convicted of an offence under any rule or order made under this Act is again convicted of an offence under this Act shall be punishable with double the penalty provided for the later offence.

Section 4 of the Act deals with the power of arrest. Any officer of police, not below the rank of a sub-inspector, and any officer of the Customs Department empowered by a general or special order of the Central Government in this behalf may arrest without warrant any person who has contravened or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has contravened any rule or order made under section 3. Every officer making an arrest under this section shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case or to the officer in charge of the nearest police-station, and the provisions of section 57 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall so far as may be, apply in the case of any such arrest.

Section 5 of the Act deals with the power of removal. The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct the removal of any person from India who, in contravention of any rule made under section 3 prohibiting entry into India without passport, has entered therein, and thereupon any officer of the Government shall have all reasonable powers necessary to enforce such direction.

The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Regulation 12 of 1962, to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Regulation 6 of 1963, to Lakshadweep by Regulation 8 of 1965, and to Sikkim (w.e.f. 20-0-1976). The Act has also been amended by various acts, including Act 3 of 1951, Act 36 of 1949, Act 15 of 1967, Act 4 of 1986, and Act 47 of 2000.