Summary:
THE INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY ACT, 1920, is an Act to constitute an Indian Red Cross Society. The Act aims to provide for the future administration of the various monies and gifts received from the public for the purpose of medical and other aid to the sick and wounded, and other purposes of a like nature during the late war, and more especially for the administration of the monies and property held by a Committee known as the Joint War Committee, Indian Branch, of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem in England and the British Red Cross Society. The Act seeks to constitute an Indian Red Cross Society with a view to the continuation in peace time, on a wider basis and with a wider purpose, of the work carried on by the said Committee during the war, and to provide for the affiliation therewith of other societies and bodies having similar objects.

The Act has 4 sections and 3 schedules. Section 1 is the short title, Section 2 constitutes the Indian Red Cross Society, Section 3 appoints the Managing Body, and Section 4 incorporates the Society. Section 4A appoints the President of India as the President of the Society, Section 4B composes the Managing Body, Section 4C appoints the Secretary General and Treasurer of the Society, Section 4D outlines the powers and functions of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, Section 4E allows the President to supersede the Managing Body, and Section 5 empowers the Managing Body to make rules for the management, functions, control, and procedure of the Society. Section 6 dissolves the Joint War Committee and transfers its property to the Society, Section 7 outlines the purposes to which the funds of the Society may be applied, Section 8 constitutes Branch Committees, Section 9 affiliates other societies, Section 10 gives the Managing Body the authority to determine in all cases what matters properly fall within the scope of clause (b) of Section 7, Section 11 allows the Managing Body to receive and hold gifts, Section 12 gives the Branch Committees the power to receive gifts and expend all monies received by it for its purposes, and Section 13 allows the transfer of property to Pakistan.

The First Schedule outlines the objects to which the funds of the Society may be applied, the Second Schedule lists the approximate percentage of the claim of the States and Union territories to the income of the property vested in the Society under clause (b) of Section 6, and the Third Schedule lists the share of Pakistan Red Cross Society in the funds specified in column 1. The Act has been extended with modifications to Goa, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep, and Pondicherry. The Act has been amended by several Acts, including Act 22 of 1956, Act 14 of 1992, and the Adaptation of Laws (No. 4) Order, 1957. The Act has also been adapted to the Reorganisation of States.