Summary:
The Indian Soldiers (Litigation) Act, 1925, provides special protection to Indian soldiers serving under special conditions in civil and revenue litigation. The Act extends to the whole of India and came into force on April 1, 1925. The Act defines "Court," "Indian soldier," "prescribed," and "proceeding." An Indian soldier is deemed to be serving under special conditions if they are serving under war conditions, overseas, or at any place beyond India or at any specified place within India. An Indian soldier is serving under war conditions if they are serving out of India, under orders to proceed on field service, serving with any unit which is mobilized, or serving under conditions that preclude them from obtaining leave of absence to attend a Court. An Indian soldier is serving overseas if they are serving in any place outside India, other than Ceylon, the journey between which and India is ordinarily undertaken wholly or in part by sea. If a person presenting any plaint, application, or appeal to any Court has reason to believe that any adverse party is an Indian soldier who is serving under special conditions, they shall state the fact in their plaint, application, or appeal. The Collector may intervene in a case where an Indian soldier, who ordinarily resides or has property in their district, is unable to appear in any proceeding pending before any Court. The Court shall suspend the proceeding and give notice thereof in the prescribed manner to the prescribed authority if the soldier is not represented by any person duly authorized to appear, plead, or act on their behalf. The Court may refrain from suspending the proceeding and issuing the notice if the proceeding is instituted or made by the soldier alone or conjunctly with others with the object of enforcing a right of pre-emption or the interests of the soldier in the proceeding are identical with those of any other party to the proceeding and adequately represented by such other party or merely of a formal nature. If it appears to the Court that an Indian soldier, though not a party to the proceeding, is materially concerned in the outcome of the proceeding and that his interests are likely to be prejudiced by his inability to attend, the Court may suspend the proceeding and shall give notice thereof in the prescribed manner to the prescribed authority. If the prescribed authority certifies that the soldier is serving under special conditions and that a postponement of the proceeding in respect of the soldier is necessary, the Court shall postpone the proceeding in respect of the soldier for the prescribed period or such period as it thinks fit. The Court may proceed when no certificate is received from the prescribed authority within the prescribed period. When any document purporting to be signed by the Commanding Officer of an Indian soldier who is a party to any proceeding is produced before the Court, and is to the effect that the soldier is on leave of absence for a period not exceeding two months or on sick leave for a period not exceeding three months, the proceeding in respect of such soldier may be postponed in the manner provided in section 7.