Summary:
The Murshidabad Estate Administration Act, 1933, was enacted on the 21st of September, 1933, with the purpose of providing for the appointment of a Manager on behalf of the Secretary of State for the management of the properties of the Nawab Bahadur of Murshidabad. The Act applies to the whole of India except for the territories that were previously part of Part B States.

The Act defines various terms used throughout the document, including "Immoveable properties of the estate," "issues and profits of the immoveable properties of the estate," "Manager," "Nawab Bahadur," "Board of Revenue," and "Prescribed."

The Act empowers the State Government of West Bengal to appoint a Manager to manage the immoveable properties of the estate and the rents, issues, and profits thereof. The Manager is authorized to exercise the powers granted to the Secretary of State under the Murshidabad Act, 1891, and the Government of India Act, 1935, as well as any additional powers conferred upon him by the State Government.

The Act also provides protection to the Nawab Bahadur against the disabilities to which he is exposed by reason of his embarrassed circumstances and prevents further increase in his debts. It further provides means for repayment to his creditors as are compatible with the payment to the Nawab Bahadur of a sum sufficient for the maintenance of his position and dignity.

The Act contains provisions for the short title and extent, definitions, appointment of Manager, effect of order under section 3, suits and appeals during management, Manager to receive rents, issues and profits, application by Manager of sums received, notice to claimants, presentation of claims, debt not duly notified to be barred, determination of debts, power to inquire into consideration for leases, etc., appeals to Board of Revenue, scheme for settlement of debts, power to call for further particulars, power to summon witnesses, investigation to be deemed a judicial proceeding, power to order production of accounts, papers, etc., and evidence of title, powers of Manager for realization of rents, etc., power to lease, power of Manager to contract and take action for the benefit of the estate, powers of supervision and control, Manager to be deemed a public servant, recovery of fines, bar of suits, etc., against certain persons, power of State Government to make orders, effect of withdrawal from entry by State Government, and power to make rules.

The Act also includes a schedule that lists the immoveable properties of the estate. The document concludes with various footnotes that provide information about amendments made to the Act over time.

In summary, the Murshidabad Estate Administration Act, 1933, provides for the appointment of a Manager to manage the properties of the Nawab Bahadur of Murshidabad and sets out the powers and duties of the Manager. The Act also includes provisions for the protection of the Nawab Bahadur and the repayment of his debts. The Act applies to the whole of India except for the territories that were previously part of Part B States.