Summary:

The Indian Partnership Act, 1932, is an Act that defines and amends the law relating to partnership. The Act applies to the whole of India and came into force on the 1st day of October, 1932, except section 69, which came into force on the 1st day of October, 1933.

The Act defines partnership as the relation between persons who have agreed to share the profits of a business carried on by all or any of them acting for all. The persons who have entered into partnership with one another are called individually "partners" and collectively "a firm", and the name under which their business is carried on is called the "firm name".

The Act states that the relation of partnership arises from contract and not from status. In determining whether a group of persons is or is not a firm, regard shall be had to the real relation between the parties, as shown by all relevant facts taken together.

The Act defines "business" as including every trade, occupation and profession. "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. "Third party", used in relation to a firm or to a partner therein, means any person who is not a partner in the firm. Expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Contract Act, 1872, shall have the meanings assigned to them in that Act.

The Act states that the unrepealed provisions of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, save in so far as they are inconsistent with the express provisions of this Act, shall continue to apply to firms.

The Act defines "partnership at will" as a partnership where no provision is made by contract between the partners for the duration of their partnership or for the determination of their partnership.

A person may become a partner with another person in particular adventures or undertakings.

Partners are bound to carry on the business of the firm to the greatest common advantage, to be just and faithful to each other, and to render true accounts and full information of all things affecting the firm to any partner or his legal representative.

Every partner shall indemnify the firm for any loss caused to it by his fraud in the conduct of the business of the firm.

The mutual rights and duties of the partners of a firm may be determined by contract between the partners, and such contract may be expressed or may be implied by a course of dealing.

Subject to contract between the partners, every partner has a right to take part in the conduct of the business; every partner is bound to attend diligently to his duties in the conduct of the business; any difference arising as to ordinary matters connected with the business may be decided by a majority of the partners, and every partner shall have the right to express his opinion before the matter is decided, but no change may be made in the nature of the business without the consent of all the partners; and every partner has a right to have access to and to inspect and copy any of the books of the firm.

Subject to contract between the partners, a partner is not entitled to receive remuneration for taking part in the conduct of the business; the partners are entitled to share equally in the profits earned, and shall contribute equally to the losses sustained by the firm; where a partner is entitled to interest on the capital subscribed by him such interest shall be payable only out of profits; a partner making, for the purposes of the business, any payment or advance beyond the amount of capital he has agreed to subscribe, is entitled to interest thereon at the rate of six per cent. per annum; the firm shall indemnify a partner in respect of payments made and liabilities incurred by him in the ordinary and proper conduct of the business, and such acts bind the firm; a partner shall indemnify the firm for any loss caused to it by his wilful neglect in the conduct of the business of the firm.

Subject to contract between the partners, the property of the firm includes all property and rights and interests in property originally brought into the stock of the firm, or acquired, by purchase or otherwise, by or for the firm, or for the purposes and in the course of the business of the firm, and includes also the goodwill of the business. Unless the contrary intention appears, property and rights and interests in property acquired with money belonging to the firm are deemed to have been acquired for the firm.

Subject to contract between the partners, the property of the firm shall be held and used by the partners exclusively for the purposes of the business.

Subject to contract between the partners, if a partner derives any profits for himself from any transaction of the firm, or from the use of the property or business connection of the firm or the firm name, he shall account for that profit and pay it to the firm; if a partner carries on any business of the same nature as and competing with that of the firm, he shall account for and pay to the firm all profits made by him in that business.

Subject to contract between the partners, where a change occurs in the constitution of a firm, the mutual rights and duties of the partners in the reconstituted firm remain the same as they were immediately before the change, as far as may be; where a firm constituted for a fixed term continues to carry on business after the expiry of that term, the mutual rights and duties of the partners remain the same as they were before the expiry, so far as they may be consistent with the incidents of partnership at will; and where a firm constituted to carry out one or more adventures or undertakings carries out other adventures or undertakings, the mutual rights and duties of the partners in respect of the other adventures or undertakings are the same as those in respect of the original adventures or undertakings.

Subject to contract between the partners, a partner is the agent of the firm for the purposes of the business of the firm.

Subject to the provisions of this Act, the act of a partner which is done to carry on, in the usual way, business of the kind carried on by the firm, binds the firm. The authority of a partner to bind the firm conferred by this section is called his "implied authority".

The partners in a firm may, by contract between the partners, extend or restrict the implied authority of any partner. Notwithstanding any such restriction, any act done by a partner on behalf of the firm which falls within his implied authority binds the firm, unless the person with whom he is dealing knows of the restriction or does not know or believe that partner to be a partner.

A Partner has authority, in an emergency, to do all such acts for the purpose of protecting the firm from loss as would be done by a person of ordinary prudence, in his own case, acting under similar circumstances, and such acts bind the firm.

In order to bind a firm, an act or instrument done or executed by a partner or other person on behalf of the firm shall be done or executed in the firm name, or in any other manner expressing or implying an intention to bind the firm.

An admission or representation made by a partner concerning the affairs of the firm is evidence against the firm, if it is made in the ordinary course of business.

Notice to a partner who habitually acts in the business of the firm of any matter relating to the affairs of the firm operates as notice to the firm, except in the case of a fraud on the firm committed by or with the consent of that partner.

Every partner is liable, jointly with all the other partners and also severally, for all acts of the firm done while he is a partner.

Where, by the wrongful act or omission of a partner acting in the ordinary course of the business of a firm, or with the authority of his partners, loss or injury is caused to any third party, or any penalty is incurred, the firm is liable therefor to the same extent as the partner.

Where a partner acting within his apparent authority receives money or property from a third party and misapplies it, or where a firm in the course of its business receives money or property from a third party, and the money or property is misapplied by any of the partners while it is in the custody of the firm, the firm is liable to make good the loss.

Anyone who by words spoken or written or by conduct represents himself, or knowingly permits himself to be represented, to be a partner in a firm, is liable as a partner in that firm to anyone who has on the faith of any such representation given credit to the firm, whether the person representing himself or represented to be a partner does or does not know that the representation has reached the person so giving credit.

A person who is a minor according to the law to which he is subject may not be a partner in a firm, but, with the consent of all the partners for the time being, he may be admitted to the benefits of partnership.

Where any person has been admitted as a minor to the benefits of partnership in a firm, the burden of proving the fact that such person had no knowledge of such admission until a particular date after the expiry of six months of his attaining majority shall lie on the persons asserting that fact.

Where such person becomes a partner, his rights and liabilities as a minor continue up to the date on which he becomes a partner, but he also becomes personally liable to third parties for all acts of the firm done since he was admitted to the benefits of partnership, and his share in the property and profits of the firm shall be the share to which he was entitled as a minor.

Where such person elects not to become a partner, his rights and liabilities shall continue to be those of a minor under this section up to the date on which he gives public notice, but his share shall not be liable for any acts of the firm done after the date of the notice, and he shall be entitled to sue the partners for his share of the property and profits in accordance with sub-section (4).

Nothing in sub-sections (7) and (8) shall affect the provisions of section 28.

A partner may retire with the consent of all the other partners, in accordance with an express agreement by the partners, or where the partnership is at will, by giving notice in writing to all the other partners of his intention to retire.

A retiring partner may be discharged from any liability to any third party for acts of the firm done before his retirement by an agreement made by him with such third party and the partners of the reconstituted firm, and such agreement may be implied by a course of dealing between such third party and the reconstituted firm after he had knowledge of the retirement.

Notwithstanding the retirement of a partner from a firm, he and the partners continue to be liable as partners to third parties for any act done by any of them which would have been an act of the firm if done before the retirement, until public notice is given of the retirement.

Notices under sub-section (3) may be given by the retired partner or by any partner of the reconstituted firm.

A partner may not be expelled from a firm by any majority of the partners, save in the exercise in good faith of powers conferred by contract between the partners.

The provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 32 shall apply to an expelled partner as if he were a retired partner.

Where a partner in a firm is adjudicated an insolvent he ceases to be a partner on the date on which the order of adjudication is made, whether or not the firm is thereby dissolved.

Where under a contract between the partners the firm is not dissolved by the adjudication of a partner as an insolvent, the estate of a partner so adjudicated is not liable for any act of the firm done after the date on which the order of adjudication is made.

Where under a contract between the partners the firm is not dissolved by the death of a partner, the estate of a deceased partner is not liable for any act of the firm done after his death.

A partner may carry on a business competing with that of the firm and he may advertise such business, but, subject to contract to the contrary, he may not use the firm name, represent himself as carrying on the business of the firm, or solicit the custom of persons who were dealing with the firm before he ceased to be a partner.

A partner may make an agreement with his partners that on ceasing to be a partner he will not carry on any business similar to that of the firm within a specified period or within specified local limits; and, notwithstanding anything contained in section 27 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), such agreement shall be valid if the restrictions imposed are reasonable.

Where any member of a firm has died or otherwise ceased to be a partner, and the surviving or continuing partners carry on the business of the firm with the property of the firm without any final settlement of accounts as between them and the outgoing partner or his estate, then, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, the outgoing partner or his estate is entitled at the option of himself or his representatives to such share of the profits made since he ceased to be a partner as may be attributable to the use of his share of the property of the firm or to interest at the rate of six per cent. per annum on the amount of his share in the property of the firm.

A continuing guarantee given to a firm, or to a third party in respect of the transactions of a firm, is, in the absence of agreement to the contrary, revoked as to future transactions from the date of any change in the constitution of the firm.

The dissolution of partnership between all the partners of a firm is called the "dissolution of the firm".

A firm may be dissolved with the consent of all the partners or in accordance with a contract between the partners.

A firm is dissolved by the adjudication of all the partners or of all the partners but one as insolvent.

A firm is dissolved by the happening of any event which makes it unlawful for the business of the firm to be carried on or for the partners to carry it on in partnership.

Subject to contract between the partners, a firm is dissolved if constituted for a fixed term, by the expiry of that term.

Subject to contract between the partners, a firm is dissolved if constituted to carry out one or more adventures or undertakings, by the completion thereof.

Subject to contract between the partners, a firm is dissolved by the death of a partner.

Subject to contract between the partners, a firm is dissolved by the adjudication of a partner as an insolvent.

A firm is dissolved by any partner giving notice in writing to all the other partners of his intention to dissolve the firm.

At the suit of a partner, the Court may dissolve a firm on any of the following grounds, namely:—

That a partner has become of unsound mind.

That a partner, other than the partner suing, has become in any way permanently incapable of performing his duties as partner.

That a partner, other than the partner suing, is guilty of conduct which is likely to affect prejudicially the carrying on of the business, regard being had to the nature of the business.

That a partner, other than the partner suing, wilfully or persistently commits breach of agreements relating to the management of the affairs of the firm or the conduct of its business, or otherwise so conducts himself in matters relating to the business that it is not reasonably practicable for the other partners to carry on the business in partnership with hint.

That a partner, other than the partner suing, has in any way transferred the whole of his interest in the firm to a third party, or has allowed his share to be charged under the provisions of rule 49 of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or has allowed it to be sold in the recovery of arrears of land-revenue or of any dues recoverable as arrears of land-revenue due by the partner.

That the business of the firm cannot be carried on save at a loss.

On any ground which renders it just and equitable that the firm should be dissolved.

Notwithstanding the dissolution of a firm, the partners continue to be liable as such to third parties for any act done by any of them which would have been an act of the firm if done before the dissolution, until public notice is given of the dissolution.

The dissolution of a firm does not affect any rights or obligations of the partners in respect of any transactions entered into and incomplete at the time of the dissolution.

The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to 1[that State] or to any part thereof specified in the notification.

The State Government may appoint Registrars of Firms for the purposes of this Act, and may define the areas within which they shall exercise their powers and perform their duties.

The registration of a firm may be effected at any time by sending by post or delivering to the Registrar of the area in which any place of business of the firm is situated or proposed to be situated, a statement in the prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed fee, stating the firm name, the place or principal place of business of the firm, the names of any other places where the firm carries on business, the date when each partner joined the firm, the names in full and permanent addresses of the partners, and the duration of the firm.

Where the Registrar is satisfied that the provisions of section 58 have been duly complied with, he shall record an entry of the statement in a register called the Register of Firms, and shall file the statement.

When an alteration is made in the firm name or in the location of the principal place of business of a registered firm, a statement may be sent to the Registrar accompanied by the prescribed fee, specifying the alteration, and signed and verified in the manner required under section 58.

When the Registrar is satisfied that the provisions of sub-section (1) have been duly complied with, he shall