Summary:

The Commercial Documents Evidence Act, 1939, is an Act that amends the Law of Evidence with respect to certain commercial documents. The Act is called the Commercial Documents Evidence Act, 1939, and it extends to the whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States.

The Act has two main sections. Section 1 outlines the short title and extent of the Act, while Section 2 states that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, statements of facts in issue or of relevant facts made in any document included in the Schedule as to matters usually stated in such document shall be themselves relevant facts within the meaning of that Act.

Section 3 outlines the presumption as to the genuineness of documents. It states that for the purposes of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and notwithstanding anything contained therein, a Court shall presume, within the meaning of that Act, in relation to documents included in Part I of the Schedule, and may presume, within the meaning of that Act, in relation to documents included in Part II of the Schedule, that any document purporting to be a document included in Part I or Part II of the Schedule, as the case may be, and to have been duly made by or under the appropriate authority, was so made and that the statements contained therein are accurate.

The Act also includes a Schedule that lists the documents in relation to which the Court shall presume and may presume. Part I of the Schedule lists the documents in relation to which the Court shall presume, while Part II lists the documents in relation to which the Court may presume.

The Schedule includes various documents related to marine insurance, certificates of registration and airworthiness of aircraft, licenses and certificates of competency of aircraft personnel, ground engineer's licenses, consular certificates, certificates of origin, receipts for payment of customs duty, schedules issued by port, dock, harbor, wharfage or warehouse authority, the publication known as the Indian Railway Conference Association Coaching and Goods Tariffs, copies of the Memorandum or the articles of association of a company filed under the Indian Companies Act, 1913, and copies, certified by the Registrar of Companies, of the balancesheet, profit and loss account, and audit report of a company, filled with the said Registrar under the Indian Companies Act, 1913, and the rules made thereunder.

The Act has been applied to the Darjeeling district, w.e.f. the 8th February, 1940, and has been extended in its application to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep (w.e.f. 15-10-1970) and the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch.