Summary:
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 is an Act to amend the law relating to marriage and divorce among Parsis. The Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and applies to all Parsis, whether they have changed their religion or domicile or not. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as Chief Justice, Court, desert, grievous hurt, husband, marriage, Parsi, priest, and wife.

The Act has three parts. Part I, titled "Preliminary," includes sections 1 and 2, which deal with the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act, as well as the definitions of terms used in the Act.

Part II, titled "Marriages between Parsis," includes sections 3 to 17, which deal with the requisites to validity of Parsi marriages, remarriage when unlawful, punishment for bigamy, certificate and registry of marriage, appointment of Registrar, marriage register to be open for public inspection, copy of certificate to be sent to Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages, registration of divorces, penalty for solemnizing marriage contrary to section 4, penalty for priest's neglect of requirements of section 6, penalty for omitting to subscribe and attest certificate, penalty for making, etc., false certificate, penalty for failing to register certificate, and penalty for secreting, destroying or altering register.

Part III, titled "Parsi Matrimonial Courts," includes sections 18 to 28, which deal with the constitution of Special Courts under the Act, Parsi Chief Matrimonial Courts, Parsi District Matrimonial Courts, power to alter territorial jurisdiction of District Courts, certain districts to be within jurisdiction of the Chief Matrimonial Court, court seal, appointment of delegates, power to appoint new delegates, delegates to be deemed public servants, selection of delegates under sections 19 and 20 to be from those appointed under section 24, and practitioners in Matrimonial Courts.

Part IV, titled "Matrimonial Suits," includes sections 30 to 43, which deal with suits for nullity, suits for dissolution, grounds for divorce, non-resumption of cohabitation or restitution of conjugal rights within one year in pursuance of a decree to be ground for divorce, divorce by mutual consent, joining of co-defendant, suits for judicial separation, decrees in certain suits, suit for restitution of conjugal rights, counter-claim by defendant for any relief, documentary evidence, alimony pendente lite, permanent alimony and maintenance, payment of alimony to wife or to her trustee, disposal of joint property, suits to be heard in camera and may not be printed or published, validity of trial, provisions of Civil Procedure Code to apply to suits under the Act, determination of questions of law and procedure and of fact, appeal to High Court, and liberty to parties to marry again.

Part V, titled "Children of the Parties," includes sections 49 to 50, which deal with custody of children, settlement of wife’s property for benefit of children, and superintendence of High court.

Part VI, titled "Miscellaneous," includes sections 51 to 53, which deal with the applicability of provisions of the Act, repeal of certain enactments, and savings.

The Act includes Schedules I and II, which deal with the table of prohibited degrees of consanguinity and affinity and certificate of marriage, respectively.