Summary:
The Sugar-cane Act, 1934, is an Act to regulate the price of sugar-cane intended for use in sugar factories. The Act is intended to ensure a fair price for sugar-cane growers. It applies to the whole of India, except the territories which were not part of Part B States before November 1, 1956. The Act defines certain terms, including "controlled area," "factory," and "sugar." A controlled area is any area specified in a notification issued under section 3. A factory is any premises where 20 or more workers are working or were working in the preceding 12 months, and in any part of which any manufacturing process connected with the production of sugar is being carried on with the aid of power. Sugar is any form of sugar containing more than 90% sucrose.

The Act allows the State Government to declare any area as a controlled area for the purposes of this Act and to fix a minimum price or minimum prices for the purchase of sugar-cane intended for use in any factory in a controlled area. The Act also prohibits the purchase of sugar-cane intended for use in any factory otherwise than from the grower of the sugar-cane or from a person licensed by the State Government to act as a purchasing agent.

The Act requires the State Government to publish a draft of any proposed notification specifying a date on or after which the draft will be taken into consideration and to consider any objection or suggestion received from any person with respect to the draft before the date so specified. The Act provides for a penalty for the purchase of sugar-cane in contravention of any notification under section 3. The penalty is a fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.

The Act also provides for the sanction for prosecution under this Act. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under section 5 except upon complaint made by order of, or under authority from, the District Magistrate.

The Act allows the State Government to make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the objects of this Act. Such rules may provide for the carrying out of inquiries preliminary to the exercise of the powers conferred by section 3, establishing Advisory Committees, the issue of licences to purchasing agents, the organization of growers of sugar-cane into societies for the sale of sugar-cane to factories, the authorities by which any functions under this Act or the rules made thereunder are to be performed, and the records, registers, and accounts to be maintained for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Act.

The Act also allows the State Government to make rules providing for the exemption of factories or any class of factories from the provisions of this Act. Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.