Summary:

The Seaward Artillery Practice Act, 1949 (Act No. 8 of 1949) was enacted on 17th February, 1949, with the purpose of providing facilities for carrying out seaward artillery practice. The Act applies to all the States with a sea coast and to persons on any vessel registered in India or belonging to any person domiciled in India, wherever it may be.

The Act defines certain key terms. 'Notified area' refers to any part of the area of the sea and the shores adjoining that area which may be specified in the notification under section 3. 'Prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 'Seaward artillery practice' includes artillery practice or coastal firing towards the sea, whether within or beyond the territorial waters, and includes air armament practice. 'Vessel' includes any ship, boat, country craft, or any other description of vessel.

The Central Government has the power to authorize seaward artillery practice over a specified area and during a specified period or periods by notification in the Official Gazette. The substance of the notification must be published in a newspaper circulating in and in the language commonly understood in the area specified in the notification and in such other manner as may be prescribed.

Persons engaged in seaward artillery practice may within the notified area and during the period or periods specified in the notification give directions prohibiting or restricting the use of the notified area or any part thereof, including the use of any part of the area of the sea by any vessel. They may also carry out seaward artillery practice with lethal missiles. The Officer Commanding the forces engaged in any such practice may declare any portion of the notified area to be a danger zone and prohibit the entry into and secure the removal of any person, property, or vessel during the times when the discharge of lethal missiles is taking place or there is danger to life or property.

Compensation is payable for any damage to person or property or interference with rights or privileges arising from seaward artillery practice, including expenses reasonably incurred in protecting person, property, rights, or privileges. The Collector of the district in which any notified area is situate shall depute one or more Revenue Officers to accompany the forces engaged in the practice. The Revenue Officer so deputed shall consider all claims for compensation and determine the amount of compensation, if any, which shall be awarded in each case. Compensation payable under sub-section (2) shall include compensation for the removal from any portion of a notified area declared to be a danger zone of any person, property, or vessel and for any damage sustained in the course of any such removal.

If within a notified area and during any period specified in a notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 3, any person wilfully obstructs or interferes with the carrying out of seaward artillery practice, enters or remains in any camp or area declared to be a danger zone at a time when entry thereto is prohibited, or interferes with any flag or mark or target or buoy or any apparatus used for the purposes of seaward artillery practice, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty rupees or with imprisonment which may extend to fifteen days, or with both.

No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made thereunder. Except as otherwise provided in this Act, no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the State Government in respect of any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made thereunder.

The Central Government may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Act and different rules may be made for different States or for different areas thereof. These rules may provide for the manner in which the substance of a notification under section 3 may be published, regulating the use under this Act of the notified area for seaward artillery practice, the minimum rates at which compensation shall be payable, and generally regarding the making of claims for compensation, the procedure to be followed by the authorities granting the compensation, the expeditious settlement of claims and the filling of appeals from original awards of compensation, and the principles to be followed in assessing the amount of compensation to be awarded under this Act.