Summary:
THE DELHI RESTRICTION OF USES OF LAND ACT, 1941 is an Act to regulate in the Province of Delhi the use of land for purposes other than agricultural purposes. The Act applies to the Union territory of Delhi and came into force on the date specified by the Central Government. The Act defines various terms such as agriculture, building, Chief Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner, place of worship, prescribed, road, and erect or re-erect. The Act empowers the Chief Commissioner to declare any land adjacent to and within a distance of four hundred and forty yards from the center line of any road to be a controlled area for the purposes of this Act. The Deputy Commissioner is responsible for depositing plans showing all lands declared to be controlled areas for the purposes of this Act and setting forth the nature of the restrictions applicable to the land in any such controlled area. No person shall erect or re-erect any building, or make or extend any excavation, or lay out any means of access to a road in a controlled area except with the previous permission of the Deputy Commissioner in writing. The Deputy Commissioner may grant permission subject to conditions or refuse to grant such permission. The Deputy Commissioner shall not refuse permission to the erection or re-erection of a building which was in existence on the date on which the declaration under sub-section (1) of section 3 was made, nor shall he impose any conditions in respect of such erection or re-erection unless it involves the addition of one or more storeys to the building or the extension of the plinth area of the building by more than one-eight of the original plinth area, or there is a probability that the building will be used for a purpose other than for which it was used on the date on which the said declaration was made. If at the expiration of a period of three months after an application under sub-section (1) has been made to the Deputy Commissioner no order in writing has been passed by the Deputy Commissioner permission shall be deemed to have been given without the imposition of any conditions. The Deputy Commissioner shall maintain a register with sufficient particulars of all permissions given by him under this section and the register shall be available for inspection without charge by all persons interested and such persons shall be entitled to take extracts therefrom. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Deputy Commissioner under sub-section (2) of section 6 granting permission subject to conditions or refusing permission may within thirty days from the date of such order prefer an appeal to the Chief Commissioner. The order of the Chief Commissioner on appeal shall be final. No person shall be entitled to claim compensation under this or any other act for any injury, damage or loss caused or alleged to have been caused by an order refusing permission to make or extend an excavation, or granting such permission but imposing conditions on the grant, or refusing permission to lay out a means of access to a road, or granting such permission but imposing conditions on the grant, or granting permission to erect or re-erect a building but imposing conditions on the grant. When an order has been made refusing permission to erect or re-erect a building any person who has exercised the right of appeal given by sub-section (1) of section 7 may, within three months of the date of the order of the Chief Commissioner, make to the Chief Commissioner a claim for compensation on the ground that his interest in the land concerned is injuriously affected by the said order. The Chief Commissioner shall either proceed to acquire the land concerned under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), or transfer the claim for disposal to an officer exercising the powers of a Collector under the said Act. If the Chief Commissioner decides to acquire the land, the claimant shall be entitled to be repaid by the acquiring authority the amount of expense which he may have properly incurred in connection with the preparation and submission of his claim for compensation under this section, and in default of agreement such amount shall be determined by the authority deciding the value of the land in the proceedings under Land Acquisition Act, 1894. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the settlement of a claim by mutual agreement. The Chief Commissioner may charge such fees for the grant and renewal of such licences and may impose such conditions in respect thereof as may be prescribed. No person shall be entitled to claim compensation under this or any other Act for any injury, damage or loss caused or alleged to have been caused by the refusal of a licence under sub-section (1). Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 5 or any conditions imposed by an order under section 6 or section 7 or uses any land in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 12 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and, in the case of a continuing contravention, with a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day after the date of the first conviction during which he is proved to have persisted in the contravention. The Deputy Commissioner may order any person who has committed a breach of the provisions of sub-section (1) to restore to its original state or to bring into conformity with the conditions which have been violated, as the case may be, any building or land in respect of which a contravention such as is described in the said sub-section has been committed, and if such person fails to do so within three months of the order may himself take such measures as may appear to him to be necessary to give effect to the order, and the cost of such measures shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of land-revenue. No Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. Nothing in this Act shall apply to the erection or re-erection of buildings upon land included in the inhabited site of any village as defined in the revenue records, the erection or re-erection of a place of worship or a tomb or cenotaph or of a wall enclosing a graveyard, place of worship, cenotaph or samadhi on land which is at the time a notification under sub-section (2) of section 3 is published by the Chief Commissioner occupied by or for the purposes of such place of worship, tomb, Samadhi, cenotaph or graveyard, excavations (including wells) made in the ordinary course of agricultural operations, or the construction of an unmetalled road intended to give access to land solely for agricultural purposes. The Chief Commissioner may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may provide for the form in which applications under sub-section (1) of section 6 shall be made and the information to be furnished in such applications, the regulation of the laying out of means of access to roads, and the fees to be charged for the grant and renewal of licences under section 12 and the conditions governing such licences. All rules made under this section shall be subject to the condition of previous publication, which publication shall be made in the Official Gazette and in at least two newspapers printed in a language other than English; and the date to be specified under clause (3) of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) shall not be less than two months from the date on which the draft of the proposed rules was published.