Summary:

THE CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE ACT, 1949, is an Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed Central Reserve Police Force. The Act extends to the whole of India and applies to members of the Force, wherever they may be.

The Act is divided into several sections, with the first section being the Short title and extent, which states that the Act may be called the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949, and it extends to the whole of India.

The second section, Definitions, defines various terms used in the Act, including "active duty," "close arrest," "the Force," "member of the Force," "open arrest," "prescribed," "subordinate officer," "assault," "criminal force," "fraudulently," "reason to believe," and "voluntarily causing hurt," which have the meanings assigned to them in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

The third section, Constitution of the Force, states that there shall continue to be an armed force maintained by the Central Government and called the Central Reserve Police Force. The Force shall be constituted in such manner, and the members of the Force shall receive such pay, pension, and other remuneration as may be prescribed.

The fourth section, Appointment and powers of superior officers, states that the Central Government may appoint to the Force a Commandant and such other persons as it thinks fit to be assistant commandants and company officers. The Commandant and every other officer so appointed shall have, and may exercise, such powers and authority as may be provided by or under this Act.

The fifth section, Enrolment, states that before a person is appointed to be a member of the Force, the statement contained in the recruiting roll set out in the Schedule shall be read out and, if necessary, explained to him in the presence of an officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4, and shall be signed by such person in acknowledgement of its having been so read out to him.

The sixth section, Resignation and withdrawal from the Force, states that no member of the Force shall be at liberty to resign his appointment during the term of his engagement, except before the expiration of the first three months of his service, or withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment, without the previous permission in writing of the Commandant or assistant commandant or any other officer authorized by the Commandant to grant such permission.

The seventh section, General duties of members of the Force, states that it shall be the duty of every member of the Force promptly to obey and to execute all orders and warrants lawfully issued to him by any competent authority, to detect and bring offenders to justice and to apprehend all persons whom he is legally authorized to apprehend and for whose apprehension sufficient grounds exist. Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve without and beyond, as well as within, the territory of India.

The eighth section, Superintendence, control and administration of the Force, states that the superintendence of, and control over, the Force shall vest in the Central Government, and the Force shall be administered by the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, through such officers as the Central Government may from time to time appoint in this behalf.

The ninth section, More heinous offences, states that every member of the Force who commits any of the specified offences shall be punishable with transportation for life for a term of not less than seven years or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or with fine which may extend to three months’ pay or with fine to that extent in addition to such sentence of transportation or imprisonment.

The tenth section, Less heinous offences, states that every member of the Force who commits any of the specified offences shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to three months' pay, or with both.

The eleventh section, Minor punishments, states that the Commandant or any other authority or officer as may be prescribed, may, subject to any rules made under this Act, award in lieu of, or in addition to, suspension or dismissal any one or more of the following punishments to any member of the Force whom he considers to be guilty of disobedience, neglect of duty, or remissness in the discharge of any duty or of other misconduct in his capacity as a member of the Force.

The twelfth section, Place of imprisonment and liability to dismissal on imprisonment, states that every person sentenced under this Act to imprisonment may be dismissed from the Force, and shall further be liable to forfeiture of pay, allowance, and any other moneys due to him, as well as of any medals and decorations received by him.

The thirteenth section, Deductions from pay and allowances, states that the following penal deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of a member of the Force by his company officer.

The fourteenth section, Collective fines, states that whenever any weapon, part of a weapon, or ammunition, forming part of the equipment of a company, or other similar unit of the Force, is lost or stolen, the Commandant may impose a collective fine upon the subordinate officers and men of such unit.

The fifteenth section, Arrest, states that any member of the Force who commits any offence specified in section 9 or section 10 may be placed on open or close arrest by any officer of the Force.

The sixteenth section, Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force, states that the Central Government may confer or impose upon any member of the Force any of the powers or duties conferred or imposed on a police officer of any class or grade by any law for the time being in force.

The seventeenth section, Protection for acts of members of the Force, states that in any suit or proceeding against any member of the Force for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant or order of a competent authority, it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under the authority of such warrant or order.

The eighteenth section, Power to make rules, states that the Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

The nineteenth section, Validation of acts done before commencement of Act, states that any order made, thing done, or action taken by or in relation to a member of the Force, on or after the 15th day of August, 1947, but before the commencement of this Act, shall for all purposes be deemed to have been made, done, or taken under this Act as if this Act were in force on the day on which such order was made, thing was done, or action was taken.

The Schedule, Recruiting Roll, states that after a person has served in the Force for such period as the Central Government may prescribe, he may apply for discharge, through the officer to whom he may be subordinate, to the Commandant, and he will be granted his discharge after two months from the date of his application, unless his discharge would cause the vacancies in the Force to exceed one-tenth of the sanctioned strength in which case he shall be bound to remain until this objection is waived or removed.