Summary:
THE REHABILITATION FINANCE ADMINISTRATION ACT, 1948, establishes the Rehabilitation Finance Administration for the purpose of giving financial assistance on reasonable terms to displaced persons to enable them to settle in business or industry. The Act defines key terms such as "Act," "Administration," "borrower," "displaced person," and "loan." The Administration is established as a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and it has the power to acquire, hold, and transfer property, both movable and immovable. The Administration shall have its head office at Delhi and may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, open branches at such places in India as it may consider necessary to discharge effectively its functions under this Act. The Administration shall consist of a Chairman, four officials appointed by the Central Government, and four non-officials nominated by the Central Government. No act done by the Administration shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or any defect in the constitution of the Administration. The Central Government shall constitute an Advisory Board to advise the Administration on matters of policy and may where necessary constitute a Regional Committee to advice each branch of the Administration. The Advisory Board shall consist of such members, not exceeding fifteen in number, as may be nominated by the Central Government. A member appointed under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government. A member nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 4 or sub-section (2) of section 5 shall hold office for a term of two years from the date of his nomination and shall be eligible for re-nomination. A nominated member may resign his membership by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government and he shall thereupon cease to be a member. A casual vacancy created by resignation under sub-section (3) or by any other reason shall be filled by fresh nomination and the person nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member whose place he takes was nominated.