Summary:

The National Cadet Corps Act, 1948, establishes a National Cadet Corps (NCC) in India, which is a voluntary organization that encourages young people to participate in defense-related activities. The Act extends to the whole of India and applies to all persons enrolled or appointed under this Act, wherever they may be.

Key definitions under this Act include "corps," which refers to the National Cadet Corps; "enrolled," which means enrolled in the Corps under this Act; "prescribed," which means prescribed by rules made under this Act; "school," which includes any institution recognized in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government; and "university," which means any university established by law in India and includes colleges affiliated to universities, intermediate colleges, and such technical institutions of collegiate status, as are recognized in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government.

The Act provides for the constitution of the NCC, which shall be raised and maintained in the manner provided. The Central Government may constitute one or more units of the Corps in any State, and may disband or reconstitute any unit so constituted. The Corps shall be divided into three Divisions: the Senior Division, recruitment to which shall be from amongst the students of any university; the Junior Division, recruitment to which shall be from amongst the students of the male sex of any school; and the Junior Division, recruitment to which shall be from amongst the students of the female sex of any university or school.

Any student of the male sex of any university may offer himself for enrolment as a cadet in the Senior Division, and any student of the male sex of any school may offer himself for enrolment as a cadet in the Junior Division if he is of the prescribed age or over. Any student of the female sex of any University or school may offer herself for enrolment as a cadet in the Girls Division, provided that she is of the prescribed age or over.

The Central Government may provide for the appointment of officers in or for any unit of the Corps, either from amongst members of the staff of any university or school or otherwise, and may prescribe the duties, powers, and functions of such officers. No person subject to this Act shall by virtue of being a member of the Corps be liable for active military service, but subject thereto, any such person shall be liable to perform such duties and discharge such obligations as may be prescribed.

Any person enrolled under this Act may be punished for the contravention of any rule made under this Act with fine, which may extend to fifty rupees, to be recovered in such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed. The Central Government may for the purpose of advising it on all matters of policy connected with the constitution and administration of the Corps appoint a Central Advisory Committee, and may also appoint such State Advisory Committees as it may consider desirable from time to time.

The Central Government may make rules to carry out the objects of this Act, including prescribing the conditions subject to which universities or schools shall be allowed to raise units under this Act, prescribing the persons or class of persons who may be eligible for enrolment under section 7, prescribing the manner in which, the period for which, and the conditions subject to which any person or class of persons may be enrolled under this Act, and providing for the removal or discharge of any person subject to this Act. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days.