Summary:

THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946, is an Act to require employers in industrial establishments to define conditions of employment under them. The Act applies to every industrial establishment wherein one hundred or more workmen are employed or were employed in the preceding twelve months. The Act does not apply to certain industries and industrial establishments under the control of the Central Government or a Railway administration or in a major port, mine or oil-field, and the provisions of this Act shall apply to all industrial establishments under the control of the Central Government.

Under this Act, the employer is required to submit to the Certifying Officer five copies of the draft standing orders proposed by him for adoption in his industrial establishment within six months from the date on which this Act becomes applicable to an industrial establishment. The draft standing orders submitted under this section shall be accompanied by a statement giving prescribed particulars of the workmen employed in the industrial establishment including the name of the trade union, if any, to which they belong.

Standing orders shall be certifiable under this Act if provision is made therein for every matter set out in the Schedule which is applicable to the industrial establishment, and the standing orders are otherwise in conformity with the provisions of this Act. The Certifying Officer or appellate authority shall adjudicate upon the fairness or reasonableness of the provisions of any standing orders.

The Act also provides for the powers of the Certifying Officer and appellate authorities, who shall have all the powers of a Civil Court for the purposes of receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, and compelling the discovery and production of documents. The text of the standing orders as finally certified under this Act shall be prominently posted by the employer in English and in the language understood by the majority of his workmen on special boards to be maintained for the purpose at or near the entrance through which the majority of the workmen enter the industrial establishment and in all departments thereof where the workmen are employed.

The Act also provides for the duration and modification of standing orders, payment of subsistence allowance, and penalties and procedure for non-compliance with the provisions of the Act. The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, conditionally or unconditionally, any industrial establishment or class of industrial establishments from all or any of the provisions of this Act. The appropriate Government may also delegate its powers under this Act to any officer or authority subordinate to it.

The Schedule to the Act sets out the matters to be provided in standing orders under this Act, including classification of workmen, manner of intimating to workmen periods and hours of work, holidays, pay-days and wage rates, shift working, attendance and late coming, conditions of, procedure in applying for, and the authority which may grant, leave and holidays, requirement to enter premises by certain gates, and liability to search, closing and re-opening of sections of the industrial establishment, and temporary stoppages of work and the rights and liabilities of the employer and workmen arising therefrom, termination of employment, and the notice thereof to be given by employer and workmen, suspension or dismissal for misconduct, and acts or omissions which constitute misconduct, means of redress for workmen against unfair treatment or wrongful exactions by the employer or his agents or servants, and any other matter which may be prescribed.