Summary:

THE DOCK WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1948, is an Act to provide for regulating the employment of dock workers in India. The Act extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Act defines "dock worker" as a person employed or to be employed in, or in the vicinity of, any port on work in connection with the loading, unloading, movement or storage of cargoes, or work in connection with the preparation of ships or other vessels for the receipt or discharge of cargoes or leaving port. The Act also defines "employer," "Government," and "scheme."

The Act provides for the regulation of the employment of dock workers through a scheme made by the Government. The scheme may provide for the registration of dock workers and employers, regulation of the recruitment and entry of dock workers, regulation of the employment of dock workers and the terms and conditions of such employment, securing of minimum pay for dock workers during periods of non-availability of employment, prohibition, restriction or control of the employment of dock workers who are not registered, creation of funds for the purposes of the scheme, training of dock workers, welfare of the officers and other staff of the Board, manner of defraying the cost of operating the scheme, and constitution of the authority responsible for the administration of the scheme.

The Government may make one or more schemes for a port or group of ports and may add to, amend, vary, or revoke any scheme made by it. The Government may also direct the port authority to prepare a draft scheme for the port. The Government may constitute an Advisory Committee to advise upon matters arising out of the administration of this Act or any scheme made thereunder. The Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members representing the Government, the dock workers, and the employers of dock workers and shipping companies.

The Government may establish a Dock Labour Board for a port or group of ports to be known by such name as may be specified in the notification. Every such Board shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract and may, by that name, sue and be sued. Every such Board shall consist of a Chairman and such number of other members as may be appointed by the Government, including an equal number of members representing the Government, the dock workers, and the employers of dock workers and shipping companies.

A Board shall be responsible for administering the scheme for the port or group of ports for which it has been established and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be conferred on it by the scheme. In the exercise of its powers and the discharge of its functions, a Board shall be bound by such directions as the Government may, for reasons to be stated in writing, give to it from time to time. Every Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including a balance-sheet in such form as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Every Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be specified by rules made under this Act, its annual report, giving full accounts of its activities during the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Government. The annual report, and the audited accounts of the Board, together with auditor's report thereon and a review by the Government on the working of the Board, shall, within a period of nine months of the close of the financial year, be laid before each House of Parliament, if such report and accounts have been submitted to the Central Government, and before the Legislature of the State, if such report and accounts have been submitted to the State Government.

The Government may appoint Inspectors for the purposes of this Act at such ports as may be specified in the notification. Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code. An Inspector may enter any premises or vessel where dock workers are employed, require any authority or person to produce any register, muster-roll or other document relating to the employment of dock workers, and take on the spot or otherwise the evidence of any person for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of any scheme made for the port are, or have been, complied with.

The Government may, at any time, appoint any person to investigate or inquire into the working of a Board and submit a report to the Government. The Board shall give to the person so appointed all facilities for the proper conduct of the investigation or inquiry and furnish to him such documents, accounts or information in the possession of the Board as he may require.

If the person committing an offence made punishable by a scheme or any abetment thereof is a company, every person who, at the time the offence or abetment was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence or abetment and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. Every scheme and every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the scheme or rule or both Houses agree that the scheme or rule should not be made, the scheme or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that scheme or rule. Every Dock Labour Board established for a port or a group of ports before the commencement of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Amendment Act, 1962, under a scheme made under section 4, and functioning as such immediately before such commencement shall be deemed to be a Board established under section 5A and, accordingly, all the provisions of this Act shall apply to every such Board.