Summary:

The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area Act, 1957 is an Act that aims to form the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area as an administrative unit in the State of Assam. This Act came into force on December 1, 1957.

According to Section 2 of this Act, the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area is formed by combining the tribal areas known as the Naga Hills District and Tuensang Frontier Division of the North East Frontier Agency.

Section 3 amends the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution by adding a new sub-paragraph (2B) to paragraph 20, stating that the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area comprises the areas known as the Naga Hills District and the Naga Tribal Area. It also amends sub-paragraph (3) by inserting the brackets and words "(other than the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area)" after "Administrative area". Furthermore, it omits item 4 in Part A of the Table and substitutes item 2 in Part B of the Table with "The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area".

Section 4 amends the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, by omitting the words "Naga Hills" in the First Schedule and omitting the heading "Naga Hills District" and all entries against serial Nos. 16, 17, and 18 in the Second Schedule.

Section 5, which repealed the Amendment of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, has been omitted.

Section 6 states that the sitting member of the House of the People representing the Autonomous Districts Parliamentary constituency in Assam shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so altered.

Section 7 states that the provisions of Section 2 shall not be deemed to have effected any change in the areas to which any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act extends or applies. It also explains that territorial references in any such law to the Naga Hills District, the Naga Tribal Area, or the Tuensang Frontier Division shall continue to have the same meaning until otherwise provided by a competent legislature or other competent authority.