Summary:
The National Highways Act, 1956 (Act No. 48 of 1956), is a law that provides for the declaration of certain highways as national highways and for matters connected therewith. The Act defines land as benefits arising out of land and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth. The Act grants the Central Government the power to acquire land for the building, maintenance, management, or operation of a national highway or part thereof. The Act also provides for the entry of authorized persons for survey, inspection, measurement, valuation, enquiry, and other acts necessary for the purposes of the Act. The competent authority is required to hear objections to the acquisition of land and make an order allowing or disallowing the objections. The Act also provides for the declaration of acquisition, possession, and right of entry into the land where land has vested in the Central Government. The amount payable as compensation is determined by the competent authority and may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Central Government. The competent authority has certain powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The Act also provides that the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 shall not apply to an acquisition under this Act. The Act defines national highways as highways, including all lands appurtenant thereto, whether demarcated or not, all bridges, culverts, tunnels, causeways, carriageways, and other structures constructed on or across such highways, and all fences, trees, posts, and boundary, furlong, and milestones of such highways or any land appurtenant to such highways. The Central Government is responsible for the development and maintenance of national highways, but may direct that any function in relation to the development or maintenance of any national highway or part thereof may be exercised by the Government of the State within which the national highway is situated or by any officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or to the State Government. The Act also provides for the levy of fees for services or benefits rendered in relation to the use of ferries, bridges, tunnels, and national highways. The Act provides for the appointment of a competent authority and grants it certain powers for the purposes of the Act. The Act also provides that all notifications or agreements issued or entered into under this Act shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after they are issued or entered into. The Schedule to the Act lists the national highways specified in the Act.