Summary:
The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959, is a law in India that requires employers to notify certain vacancies to employment exchanges. The Act applies to the whole of India and came into force on different dates for different states or areas. The Act defines various terms such as "appropriate Government," "employee," "employer," "employment exchange," "establishment," "establishment in public sector," "establishment in private sector," "prescribed," and "unskilled office work." The Act does not apply to vacancies in agriculture, domestic service, employment of less than three months' duration, employment connected with the staff of Parliament, or vacancies proposed to be filled through promotion or by absorption of surplus staff. The employer in every establishment in public sector must notify vacancies to employment exchanges before filling them up, and the employer in every establishment in private sector or every establishment pertaining to any class or category of establishments in private sector may also be required to do so. The manner and particulars of notifying vacancies are prescribed. The Act does not impose any obligation upon any employer to recruit any person through the employment exchange to fill any vacancy merely because that vacancy has been notified. The employer in every establishment in public sector must also furnish information or returns in relation to vacancies to employment exchanges, and the employer in every establishment in private sector or every establishment pertaining to any class or category of establishments in private sector may also be required to do so. The form, intervals of time, and particulars of such information or returns are prescribed. Officers of Government or any person authorized by him in writing have the right to access any relevant record or document in the possession of any employer required to furnish any information or returns under section 5 and may enter at any reasonable time any premises where he believes such record or document to be and inspect or take copies of relevant records or documents or ask any question necessary for obtaining any information required under that section. If any employer fails to notify to the employment exchanges prescribed for the purpose any vacancy in contravention of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 4, he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. If any person required to furnish any information or return refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return, or furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he knows to be false, or refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to, any question necessary for obtaining any information required to be furnished under section 5, or impedes the right of access to relevant records or documents or the right of entry conferred by section 6, he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees and for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted except by, or with the sanction of, such officer of Government as may be prescribed in this behalf or any person authorized by him in writing. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.