Summary:

The Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954, provides for the salary, allowances and pension of Members of Parliament. The Act includes definitions of terms used in the Act, such as "committee," "dependent," "member," "new member," "period of residence on duty," and "term of office."

Section 3 of the Act specifies the salary and daily allowance that a member is entitled to receive. The salary is at the rate of one lakh rupees per mensem, and the daily allowance is at the rate of two thousand rupees for each day during any period of residence on duty.

Section 4 of the Act outlines the travelling allowances that a member is entitled to receive for journeys performed in India for the purpose of attending a session of a House of Parliament or a meeting of a committee or for the purpose of attending to any other business connected with his duties as a member. The travelling allowances include one air fare for each such journey, one fare by steamer for each such journey or part thereof, or a road mileage at the rate of sixteen rupees per kilometre for each such journey or part thereof.

Section 5 of the Act specifies the travelling allowances for intermediate journeys. A member is entitled to receive travelling allowances in respect of such journey to such place and for the return journey, if the journey is performed for the purpose of attending a session of a House of Parliament or a sitting of a committee for visiting any place in India.

Section 5A of the Act provides for transit accommodation for a person referred to in sub-section (4) of section 4.

Section 6 of the Act provides for free transit by Railway. Every member is provided with one free non-transferable first class air-conditioned or executive class of any train pass which entitles him to travel at any time by any railway in India.

Section 6A of the Act provides for free transit by Steamer. Every member representing the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands or the Union territory of Lakshadweep is entitled to one free non-transferable pass which entitles him to travel at any time by the highest class by steamer to and from any part of his constituency and any other part of his constituency or the nearest part in the main land of India.

Section 6AA of the Act provides for special facility to members from Ladakh. Every member who has his ordinary place of residence in the Ladakh area of the State of Jammu and Kashmir is entitled to an amount equal to the fare by air for each single journey by air performed by him from any airport in Ladakh to the airport in Delhi and back at any time.

Section 6B of the Act provides for travel facilities to members. Every member is entitled to one free air-conditioned two-tier class railway pass for one person to accompany the member when he travels by rail and free travel by any railway in India in first class air-conditioned or executive class in any train with the spouse, if any, of the member from any place in India to any other place in India.

Section 6C of the Act provides for air travel facilities in certain circumstances. Where during any part of a year the usual place of residence of a member in his constituency is inaccessible to or from any place outside his constituency by road, rail or steamer due to climatic conditions, such member shall be entitled to travel to and from by air from the nearest place in his constituency where there is air service to such place having rail service.

Section 6D of the Act provides for special facilities to blind and physically incapacitated Members. A member who is blind or who is, in the opinion of the Chairman of the Council of States or, as the case may be, the Speaker of the House of the People, so incapacitated physically as to require the facility of an attendant shall, with respect to each such journey, be entitled to an amount equal to one fare by air for such journey.

Section 7 of the Act provides for allowances during short intervals between the termination of one session and the commencement of another session, etc.

Section 8 of the Act provides for constituency allowance and amenities. A member is entitled to such constituency allowance office expense allowance and to such medical facilities for himself and for members of his family and to such housing, telephone, water, electricity facilities or such amount in cash in lieu of all or any of such facilities, as may be prescribed by rules under section 9.

Section 8A of the Act provides for pension. With effect from the 18th day of May, 2009, there shall be paid a pension of twenty five thousand rupees per mensem to every person who has served for any period as a Member of the Provisional Parliament or either House of Parliament.

Section 8AA of the Act provides for rounding off period of pension. Where the period for which the pension is payable under this Act contains a part of a year, then, if such part is nine months or more, it shall be reckoned equivalent to complete one year for the purpose of payment of additional pension under sub-section (1) of section 8A.

Section 8AB of the Act provides for family pension. On the death of a member of either House of Parliament during his term of office, his spouse, if any, or dependent of such member shall be paid during the remaining period of life of such spouse or, as the case may be, such dependent so long as such dependent continues to be a dependent within the meaning of clause (aa) of section 2, family pension equivalent to one-half of the pension which such member of Parliament would have received had he retired.

Section 8B of the Act provides for advances for purchase of conveyance. There may be paid to a member by way of re-payable advance such sum of money not exceeding four lakh rupees as may be determined by rules made in this behalf under section 9 for the purchase of a conveyance.

Section 9 of the Act provides for power to make rules. The Joint Committee constituted under sub-section (1) may make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: (a) the routes for the performance of any journey; (b) the manner in which fractions of a day shall be dealt with for the purpose of determining the daily allowance admissible for that day; (c) the travelling allowance admissible where a member is provided with free transit for the whole or any part of a journey and the reduction of the daily allowance where a member is provided with free board or lodging at the expense of the Government or a local authority; (d) the travelling allowance admissible where the place from which a member commences his journey or to which he returns is not his usual place of residence; (e) the form in which certificates, if any, shall be furnished by a member for the purpose of claiming any allowance under this Act; (f) the constituency allowance and medical and other facilities mentioned in section 8 and the amount to be paid in cash in lieu of such facilities; (g) the amount which may be paid by way of repayable advance for the purchase of conveyance; the rate of interest thereon and the mode of recovery of such amount and interest thereon.

Section 10 of the Act, which provided for validation of payment of certain travelling allowances, has been repealed.