Summary:
The Air Force Act, 1950, is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the government of the Air Force. The Act applies to officers and warrant officers of the Air Force, persons enrolled under this Act, persons belonging to the Regular Air Force Reserve or the Air Defence Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force, and persons not otherwise subject to air force law who are employed by, or are in the service of, or are followers of, or accompany any portion of the Air Force on active service, in camp, on the march, or at any frontier post specified by the Central Government. The Act defines various terms related to the Air Force, such as active service, aircraft, aircraft material, Air Force, Air Force custody, Air Force law, Air Force reward, airman, air officer, air signal, Chief Legal Adviser, civil offence, civil prison, Chief of the Air Staff, commanding officer, court-martial, criminal court, enemy, the Forces, non-commissioned officer, notification, offence, officer, prescribed, provost-marshal, regulation, superior officer, unit, and warrant officer. The Act also provides for the application of its provisions to certain forces under the Central Government and special provisions for the application of the Act in certain cases.
Summary:
The Air Force Act of India outlines the rules and regulations for the Indian Air Force. This act specifies the conditions for enrolment, appointment, and commission, as well as the terms of service. No person who is not a citizen of India can be enrolled in the Air Force without the consent of the Central Government, except for subjects of Nepal. Females are not eligible for enrolment or employment, except in specified corps, departments, branches, or bodies. The procedure for enrolment includes an explanation of the conditions of service and recording of answers to questions set forth in the prescribed form of enrolment. Every person who has been in receipt of pay as an enrolled person for three months and been borne on the rolls of any unit is deemed to have been duly enrolled. The following persons shall be attested: all persons enrolled as combatants, all persons selected to hold a non-commissioned or acting non-commissioned rank, and all other persons subject to this Act as may be prescribed by the Central Government. The tenure of service under the Act is during the pleasure of the President. The Central Government may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act, and the Chief of the Air Staff may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act other than an officer. The Chief of the Air Staff may reduce to a lower grade or rank any warrant officer or any non-commissioned officer. The commanding officer of an acting non-commissioned officer may order him to revert to his substantive rank as a non-commissioned officer. The exercise of any powers under this section shall be subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder. The Central Government may make rules restricting the right of any person subject to this Act to be a member of, or to be associated in any way with, any trade union or labour union, or any class of trade or labour unions or any society, institution or association, or any class of societies, institutions or associations, to attend or address any meeting or to take part in any demonstration organised by any body of persons for any political or other purposes, and to communicate with the press or to publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other document. Any person subject to this Act may be retired, released or discharged from the service by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed. Every warrant officer, or enrolled person who is dismissed, removed, discharged, retired or released from the service shall be furnished by his commanding officer with a certificate, in the language which is the mother tongue of such person and also in the English language setting forth the authority terminating his service, the cause for such termination, and the full period of his service in the Air Force. Any person enrolled under this Act who is dismissed, removed, discharged, retired or released from the service while out of India shall be furnished with a certificate as soon as practicable after his arrival in India.
Summary:

The document outlines several provisions related to the Indian Air Force. Chapter V, titled "Service Privileges," specifies that the pay of every person subject to this Act shall be paid without any deduction other than those authorized by law. Any airman who feels wronged by a superior or other officer may complain to the officer under whose command or orders they are serving, or if attached to a unit or detachment, to the officer commanding the same. If the officer complained against is the officer to whom the complaint should be preferred, the aggrieved airman may complain to the officer's next superior officer. Every officer receiving a complaint shall make as complete an investigation as possible and give full redress to the complainant. The decision of the Chief of the Air Staff shall be final, subject to revision by the Central Government.

Chapter VI, titled "Offences," outlines several offences related to the enemy that are punishable by death or lesser punishment. These offences include shamefully abandoning or delivering up any garrison, fortress, post, place, or guard committed to one's charge or using any means to compel or induce any commanding officer or other person to commit the said act. Intentionally using any means to compel or induce any person subject to military, naval, or air force law to abstain from acting against the enemy or to discourage such person from acting against the enemy is also an offence. In the presence of the enemy, shamefully casting away arms, ammunition, tools, or equipment or misbehaving in such a manner as to show cowardice is punishable by death. Treacherously holding correspondence with or communicating intelligence to the enemy or any person in arms against the Union is also an offence. Directly or indirectly assisting the enemy with money, arms, ammunition, stores, or supplies is punishable by death. Treacherously or through cowardice sending a flag of truce to the enemy is an offence, as is intentionally occasioning a false alarm in action, camp, or quarters or spreading reports calculated to create alarm or despondency. Failing to use one's utmost exertions to carry out air force operations when ordered by a superior officer or otherwise under orders is also punishable by death.

Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say,—

(a) is taken prisoner, by want of due precaution, or through disobedience of orders, or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner, fails to rejoin his service when able to;

(b) while a prisoner of war, assists the enemy with information or in any other manner;

(c) quits his post or guard without being regularly relieved or without leave;

(d) is guilty of cowardice;

(e) through disobedience or neglect of duty or wilful breach or neglect of any lawful command with which he is charged, causes or attempts to cause mutiny or sedition in any formation, unit or ship or part thereof under his command or in which he is serving, or fails to take all reasonable measures to prevent the same;

(f) shamefully abandons, surrenders or delivers up any place, post or guard, committed to his charge or belonging to or in the occupation of the regular Army, Navy or Air Force or any forces co-operating therewith or any part of such forces or any ship, aircraft or other property appertaining thereto, or which it is his duty to defend;

(g) directly or indirectly holds communication with or gives or attempts to give any information, whether on active service or not, to any person in arms against the Union or any foreign State at war with the Union or to any person or persons acting on behalf of such person or persons or to any person who, he knows or has reason to believe, is about to communicate or has communicated with an enemy;

(h) being a sentry or guard, sleeps upon his post or quits his post without being regularly relieved or without leave;

(i) through cowardice or disaffection or wilful disobedience of lawful commands, refuses to serve in any unit or ship or other body in which he is serving when such unit or ship or other body is ordered to proceed to any place of danger or is about to be engaged in action;

(j) being a person in charge of any ammunition or explosives or any other dangerous thing, intentionally or negligently causes the same to be lost, destroyed, damaged or rendered unserviceable;

(k) being in charge of any arms or ammunition, intentionally or negligently loses, destroys or damages the same or renders the same unserviceable;

(l) being a person in charge of any public property belonging to or in the possession of any of the Armed Forces of the Union, intentionally or negligently loses, destroys, damages or renders unserviceable the same or any part thereof;

(m) being a person in charge of any property, funds or stores, intentionally or negligently misappropriates, destroys, damages or renders unserviceable the same or any part thereof;

(n) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a deserter or absentee without leave or a person who has committed any of the offences specified in this Chapter;

(o) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a spy;

(p) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of an enemy power;

(q) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power;

(r) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power against whom the Union is at war;

(s) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace but with whom the Union is engaged in warlike operations in the interests of the United Nations;

(t) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is acting or is believed to be acting against the interests of the Union;

(u) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted against the interests of the Union;

(v) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the Union;

(w) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the safety of the Union;

(x) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the defence of the Union;

(y) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the security of the Union;

(z) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the Union in any place outside India;

(za) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the safety of the Union in any place outside India;

(zb) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the defence of the Union in any place outside India;

(zc) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the security of the Union in any place outside India;

(zd) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a spy;

(ze) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of an enemy power;

(zf) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power against whom the Union is at war;

(zg) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace but with whom the Union is engaged in warlike operations in the interests of the United Nations;

(zh) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is acting or is believed to be acting against the interests of the Union;

(zi) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted against the interests of the Union;

(zj) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the Union in any place outside India;

(zk) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the safety of the Union in any place outside India;

(zl) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the defence of the Union in any place outside India;

(zm) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the security of the Union in any place outside India;

(zn) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a spy;

(zo) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of an enemy power;

(zp) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power against whom the Union is at war;

(zq) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace but with whom the Union is engaged in warlike operations in the interests of the United Nations;

(zr) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is acting or is believed to be acting against the interests of the Union;

(zs) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted against the interests of the Union;

(zt) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the Union in any place outside India;

(zu) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the safety of the Union in any place outside India;

(zv) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the defence of the Union in any place outside India;

(zw) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the security of the Union in any place outside India;

(zx) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a spy;

(zy) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of an enemy power;

(zz) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power against whom the Union is at war;

(zza) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace but with whom the Union is engaged in warlike operations in the interests of the United Nations;

(zzb) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is acting or is believed to be acting against the interests of the Union;

(zzc) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted against the interests of the Union;

(zzd) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the Union in any place outside India;

(zze) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign power with whom the Union is at peace and who is believed to be acting or to have acted in a manner prejudicial to the safety of the Union in any place outside India;

(zzf) being a person subject to this Act, knowingly harbours or protects any person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be a person in the service of a foreign
Summary:

The document summarizes various sections of the Indian Air Force Act, focusing on offenses and their corresponding punishments. These offenses include communicating with the enemy, breaking into places for plunder, being intoxicated on duty, leaving a guard or post without orders, causing false alarms, altering air signals, committing mutiny, desertion, absence without leave, striking or threatening a superior officer, disobedience to a superior officer, insubordination and obstruction, fraudulent enrolment, and giving false answers on enrolment. The punishments for these offenses range from imprisonment to death, depending on the severity of the offense and whether it is committed during active service or not.
Summary of the document:
This document outlines various offenses and their corresponding punishments under the Indian military law. The offenses include making a false statement during enrolment, engaging in unbecoming conduct, committing disgraceful conduct, ill-treating a subordinate, being intoxicated, permitting escape of a person in custody, committing irregularities in connection with arrest or confinement, escaping from custody, committing offenses related to property, committing extortion and corruption, making away with equipment, injuring property, making false accusations, and falsifying official documents and false declarations. The punishments for these offenses range from cashiering, dismissal, imprisonment, and/or lesser punishments as mentioned in the Act. The maximum term of imprisonment that can be awarded for these offenses is fourteen years.
Summary:

The Indian Air Force Act of 1932 outlines various offenses and their corresponding punishments for individuals subject to this Act. These offenses include making false statements, signing documents in blank, refusing to attend court-martial, refusing to answer questions, providing false evidence, unlawfully detaining pay, damaging or destroying aircraft, violating good order and air force discipline, and committing miscellaneous offenses. The punishments for these offenses range from imprisonment for a term of up to seven years to fourteen years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. The Act also specifies the punishment for attempts and abetment of these offenses.
Summary:

The document outlines various laws related to the punishment of offences committed by individuals subject to the Indian military, naval, or air force laws.

Section 69 deals with abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed. If a person subjects to this Act abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 66 inclusive and punishable with imprisonment, they shall be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

Section 70, headed "Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed," states that any person subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 66 inclusive and punishable with imprisonment shall, on conviction by court-martial, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

Section 71, headed "Civil offences," states that subject to the provisions of section 72, any person subject to this Act who at any place in or beyond India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this Act and, if charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to be tried by a court-martial and, on conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to say,—

* if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India with death or with transportation, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and
* in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment other than whipping “assigned for the offence by any law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

Section 72, headed "Civil offences not triable by court-martial," states that a person subject to this Act who commits an offence of murder against a person not subject to military, naval or air force law, or of culpable homicide not amounting to murder against such a person or of rape in relation to such a person, shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall not be tried by a court-martial, unless he commits any of the said offences—

* while on active service, or
* at any place outside India, or
* at a frontier post specified by the said Government by notification in this behalf.

Section 73, headed "Punishments awardable by courts-martial," states that punishments may be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by courts-martial according to the scale following, that is to say,—

* death;
* transportation for life or for any period not less than seven years, in respect of civil offences;
* imprisonment, either rigorous or simple, for any period not exceeding fourteen years;
* detention for a term not exceeding two years in the case of airmen;
* cashiering, in the case of officers;
* dismissal from service;
* reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or classification, in the case of warrant officers and non-commissioned officers:
* forfeiture of seniority of rank, in the case of officers, warrant officers and non-commissioned officers; and forfeiture of all or any part of their service for the purpose of promotion, in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of service;
* forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose;
* severe reprimand or reprimand, in the case of officers, warrant officers and non-commissioned officers;
* forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence committed on active service;
* forfeiture, in the case of a person sentenced to cashiering or dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such cashiering or dismissal;
* stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted is made good.

Section 74, headed "Alternative punishments awardable by court-martial," states that a court-martial may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 70 inclusive, award either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable, or, in lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower in the scale set out in section 73, regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.

Section 75, headed "Combination of punishments," states that a sentence of a court-martial may award in addition to, or without any one other punishment, the punishment specified in clause (e) or clause (f) of section 73 and any one or more of the punishments specified in clauses (g) to (m) of that section.

Section 76, headed "Cashiering of officers," states that an officer shall be sentenced to be cashiered before he is awarded any of the punishments specified in clauses (a) to (c) of section 73.

Section 77, headed "Field punishment," states that where any person subject to this Act and under the rank of warrant officer commits any offence on active service, it shall be lawful for a court-martial to award for that offence any such punishment as is prescribed as a field punishment.

Section 78, headed "Position of field punishment in scale of punishments," states that field punishment shall, for the purpose of commutation, be deemed to stand next below dismissal in the scale of punishments specified in section 73.

Section 79, headed "Result of certain punishments in the case of a warrant officer or a non-commissioned officer," states that a warrant officer or a non-commissioned officer sentenced by a court-martial to transportation, imprisonment, detention, field punishment or dismissal from the service shall be deemed to be reduced to the ranks.

Section 80, headed "Retention in the ranks of a person convicted on active service," states that when, on active service, any enrolled person has been sentenced by a court-martial to dismissal, or to transportation, imprisonment or detention, whether combined with dismissal or not, the prescribed officer may direct that such person may be retained to serve in the ranks and such service shall be reckoned as part of his term of transportation, imprisonment or detention, if any.

Section 81, headed "Punishments otherwise than by court-martial," states that punishments may, also, be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of a court-martial and in the manner stated in sections 82 and 86.

Section 82, headed "Punishment of persons other than officers and warrant officers," states that subject to the provisions of section 84, a commanding officer or such other officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by 1[the Chief of the Air Staff], may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a person subject to this Act otherwise than as an officer or warrant officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and award such person, to the extent prescribed, one or more of the following punishments, that is to say,—

* detention up to twenty-eight days;
* confinement to the camp up to fourteen days;
* extra guards or duties not exceeding three in number;
* deprivation of acting rank;
* forfeiture of badge pay;
* severe reprimand or reprimand;
* fine up to fourteen days' pay in any one month;
* penal deductions under clause 8: (g) of section 92;
* admonition;
* any prescribed field punishment up to twenty-eight days, in the case of a person on active service.

Section 83, headed "Requirement of sanction in certain cases," states that (1) subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the punishments mentioned in section 82 shall not be inflicted in respect of an offence under any of the sections 34, 35 and 36 when committed on active service or under any of the sections 37, 38, 40, 42 (f) and (g), 43, 47, 52, 60, 62, 63, 64, 66(a), (b) and (c) and 71 except with the previous sanction in writing of an officer having power to convene a district court-martial. (2) The said punishments may be awarded without such sanction in the case of any offence other than an offence under section 34 or section 71, committed by persons who have not been enrolled as combatants.

Section 84, headed "Limit of punishments under section 82," states that (1) An Award of punishment under section 82 shall not include field punishment in addition to one or more of the punishments specified in clauses (a) and (b) of that section. (2) In the case of an award of two or more of the punishments specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of the said section, the punishment specified in clause (b) or clause (c) shall take effect only at the end of the punishment specified in clause (a). (3) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses (a) and (b) are awarded to a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said punishments, the whole extent of the punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate forty-two days. (4) The punishments specified in clauses (a), (b), (c), (e), (g) and (j) of section 82 shall not be awarded to any person who is of the rank of non-commissioned officer or above.
Summary:

This document outlines the punishments and penalties for officers and airmen in the Indian Air Force. Section 82 lists the various punishments that can be awarded to officers and airmen, including imprisonment, dismissal, and forfeiture of pay and allowances. Section 85 allows the Chief of the Air Staff to specify additional punishments with the consent of the Central Government. Section 86 allows for the punishment of officers and warrant officers by an officer with the power to convene a general court-martial or a specified officer with the consent of the Central Government. The punishments that can be awarded include forfeiture of seniority, severe reprimand or reprimand, stoppage of pay and allowance, and forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months. Section 87 requires certified true copies of the proceedings to be forwarded to a superior air force authority in every case where punishment has been awarded under Section 86. Section 88 allows for the review of proceedings by a superior air force authority if the punishment is deemed to be illegal, unjust, or excessive. Section 89 defines a superior air force authority as an officer superior in command to the commanding officer in the case of punishments awarded by a commanding officer, or the Central Government, the Chief of the Air Staff, or another officer specified by the Chief of the Air Staff in the case of punishments awarded by any other authority. Section 90 allows for the imposition of a collective fine on warrant officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of a unit or detachment in the case of the loss or theft of a weapon or part of a weapon forming part of the equipment. Section 91 lists the penal deductions that can be made from the pay and allowances of an officer, including deductions for absence without leave, being in custody or under suspension, unlawfully retaining or refusing to pay pay or allowances, and making good compensation for expenses, loss, damage, or destruction caused by the commission of an offence. Section 92 lists the penal deductions that can be made from the pay and allowances of an airman, including deductions for absence without leave, being in custody, being in hospital due to sickness caused by an offence, misconduct, or imprudence, and making good compensation for expenses, loss, damage, or destruction caused by the airman. Section 93 defines the computation of time of absence or custody for the purposes of Sections 91 and 92. Section 94 allows for the withholding of pay and allowances pending the result of a trial. Section 95 sets a limit on certain deductions.
Summary:

The document outlines various sections of the Indian Air Force Act, 1950 related to arrest and proceedings before trial. Section 102 states that any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may be taken into air force custody. Section 103 mandates that the commanding officer of a unit must take care that a person under his command who is charged with an offence is not detained in custody for more than forty-eight hours without the charge being investigated. Section 104 states that in every case where a person remains in custody for a longer period than eight days without a court-martial being ordered, a special report shall be made by his commanding officer. Section 105 states that whenever any person subject to this Act is within the jurisdiction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to air force custody of such person. Section 106 outlines the procedure for the capture of deserters. Section 107 states that when any person subject to this Act has been absent from his duty without due authority for a period of thirty days, a Court of inquiry shall be assembled to inquire respecting the absence of the person. Section 108 states that provost-marshals may be appointed to take charge of persons confined for any offence and to preserve good order and discipline. Section 109 states that there shall be three kinds of courts-martial, namely, general courts-martial, district courts-martial, and summary general courts-martial. Section 110 states that a general court-martial may be convened by the Central Government or the Chief of the Air Staff or any officer empowered in this behalf. Section 111 states that a district court-martial may be convened by an officer having power to convene a general court-martial or any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of any such officer. Section 112 states that a warrant issued under section 110 or section 111 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may think fit. Section 113 states the authorities that shall have the power to convene a summary general court-martial.
The document discusses the composition, powers, and procedures of courts-martial in the Indian Air Force. A court-martial is a military court that tries members of the armed forces for violations of military law. The document outlines the minimum number of officers required for different types of courts-martial, as well as the powers of these courts to try offences and pass sentences.

There are three types of courts-martial in the Indian Air Force: general, district, and summary general. A general court-martial is the most serious type and consists of at least five officers, each of whom has held a commission for not less than three whole years and of whom not less than four are of a rank not below that of flight-lieutenant. A district court-martial consists of at least three officers, each of whom has held a commission for not less than two whole years. A summary general court-martial consists of at least three officers.

If a court-martial is reduced below the minimum number of officers required by law, it must be dissolved. A court-martial may also be dissolved if it is impossible to continue the trial due to the illness of the judge advocate or the accused, or if the exigencies of the service or the necessities of discipline make it impossible or inexpedient to continue the trial. If a court-martial is dissolved, the accused may be tried again.

A general or summary general court-martial has the power to try any person subject to the Act for any offence punishable therein and to pass any sentence authorized thereby. A district court-martial has the power to try any person subject to the Act other than an officer or warrant officer for any offence made punishable therein, and to pass any sentence authorized by the Act other than a sentence of death, transportation, or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.

No trial by court-martial of any person subject to the Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expiration of a period of three years from the date of such offence, except in the case of an offence of desertion or fraudulent enrolment or for any of the offences mentioned in section 37. In the computation of the period of time mentioned in sub-section (1), any time spent by such person as a prisoner of war, or in enemy territory, or in evading arrest after the commission of the offence, shall be excluded.

When a person subject to the Act is sentenced by a court-martial to transportation or imprisonment, the Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, though he is cashiered or dismissed from the Air Force, or has otherwise ceased to be subject to the Act. He may be kept, removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to the Act. When a person subject to the Act is sentenced by a court-martial to death, the Act shall apply to him till the sentence is carried out.

Any person subject to the Act who commits any offence against it may be tried and punished for such offence in any place whatever. When a criminal court and a court-martial have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the Chief of the Air Staff, the officer commanding any group, wing or station in which the accused prisoner is serving of such other officer as may be prescribed to decide before which court the proceedings shall be instituted, and, if that officer decides that they should be instituted before a court-martial, to direct that the accused person shall be detained in Air force custody.

Challenges to members of a court-martial are allowed, and if the objection is allowed by one-half or more of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the objection shall be allowed and the member objected to shall retire. An oath or affirmation in the prescribed manner shall be administered to every member of every court-martial and to the Judge advocate before the commencement of the trial. Every person giving evidence before a court-martial shall be examined after being duly sworn or affirmed in the prescribed form.
Summary:

This document outlines various legal provisions and procedures related to court-martials in the Indian Air Force. Key points include:

1. Sentences of death require a high level of consensus among court-martial members.
2. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 applies to court-martial proceedings, with some exceptions.
3. Courts-martial may take judicial notice of matters within general air force knowledge.
4. Witnesses can be summoned by various officers, and the summons must be served appropriately depending on the witness's status.
5. Certain documents are exempt from production, but courts-martial may request their delivery or detention in some cases.
6. Commissions for examination of witnesses can be issued when necessary, and the examination may take place in the same manner as in warrant-case trials under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.
7. A person charged with one offense may be found guilty of a related offense with a less severe punishment.
8. Certain documents, such as enrolment papers and service records, are presumed to be genuine and provide evidence of the facts stated therein.

These provisions ensure a fair and orderly process for court-martials in the Indian Air Force, while also providing safeguards to protect the rights of those accused.
Summary:
The document outlines various legal procedures related to the Indian Air Force Act. Under this Act, if a person is being tried for desertion or absence without leave, and has surrendered or been apprehended, a certificate from the officer or commanding officer stating the details of the surrender or apprehension is admissible as evidence. A similar certificate from a police officer not below the rank of an officer-in-charge of a police station is also admissible.

Section 142 outlines the procedure for reference by the accused to a Government officer. If the accused states a sufficient or reasonable excuse for their unauthorized absence and refers to an officer in their defense, the court must address the officer and adjourn the proceedings until a reply is received. The officer's written reply, if signed, is received as evidence and has the same effect as if made on oath before the court.

Section 143 allows a court-martial to inquire into and receive evidence of any previous convictions, awards of punishment, or the general character of the person charged. Evidence may be either oral or in the shape of entries in or certified extracts from court-martial books or other official records.

Section 144 outlines the procedure for dealing with the lunacy of the accused. If it appears that the accused is incapable of making their defense due to unsoundness of mind, the court must record a finding accordingly. The presiding officer must report the case to the confirming officer, who may order the accused to be kept in custody or take steps to have the accused tried by the same or another court-martial.

Section 145 outlines the subsequent fitness of a lunatic accused for trial. If such a person is in custody or under detention, the officer commanding a unit or detachment within the area of whose command the accused is in custody or is detained, or any other officer prescribed in this behalf, may take steps to have such person tried by the same or another court-martial for the offence with which he was originally charged.

Section 146 requires a copy of every order made by an officer under section 145 for the trial of the accused to be sent to the Central Government.

Section 147 outlines the release of a lunatic accused. If such a person is capable of making their defense, they may be released, detained in custody, or transferred to a public lunatic asylum.

Section 148 allows for the delivery of a lunatic accused to relatives, provided they give security to the satisfaction of the Central Government that the person delivered shall be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to themselves or any other person.

Section 149 outlines the order for custody and disposal of property pending trial. The court may make such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial.

Section 150 outlines the order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed. After the conclusion of a trial, the court or the officer confirming the finding or sentence of such court-martial or any authority superior to such officer may make such order as it or he thinks fit for the disposal of any property or document produced before the Court or in its custody.

Section 151 outlines the powers of courts-martial when certain offences are committed by persons not subject to this Act. Any trial by a court-martial under the provisions of this Act is deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
In the Indian military justice system, courts-martial are established to try and punish offenses committed by military personnel. The court-martial is considered a court within the meaning of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898). The findings and sentences of general courts-martial may be confirmed by the Central Government or any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Central Government. The findings and sentences of district court-martial may be confirmed by any officer having power to convene a general court-martial or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of such officer. The findings and sentences of summary general courts-martial may be confirmed by the convening officer or if he so directs, by an authority superior to him. Confirming authorities have the power to mitigate, remit or commute sentences. A finding or sentence of a court-martial may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the court, if so directed by the confirming authority, may take additional evidence. Any finding or sentence of a court-martial may be presented to the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such court-martial, and the confirming authority may take such steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceeding to which the order relates. Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of a court-martial which has been confirmed, may present a petition to the Central Government, the Chief of the Air Staff or any prescribed officer superior in command to the one who confirmed such finding or sentence, and the Central Government, the Chief of the Air Staff or other officer, as the case may be, may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit. The Central Government, the Chief of the Air Staff or any prescribed officer may annul the proceedings of any court-martial on the ground that they are illegal or unjust. In awarding a sentence of death, a court-martial shall, in its discretion, direct that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead or shall suffer death by being shot to death. Whenever any sentence of transportation is passed under this Act or whenever any sentence of death be commuted to transportation, the commanding officer of the person under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form to the officer-in-charge of the civil prison in which such person is to be confined and shall arrange for his dispatch to such prison with the warrant. Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is passed under this Act or whenever any sentence of death or transportation is commuted to imprisonment, the confirming officer or such other officer as may be prescribed, shall, save as otherwise provided in sub-sections (3) and (4), direct either that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a military or air force prison or that it shall be carried out by confinement in a civil prison. In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months, the officers referred to in sub-section (1) may direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in air force custody instead of in a civil or military or air force prison. On active service, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in such place as the officer commanding the forces in the field may from time to time, appoint. Where a sentence of transportation or imprisonment is directed to be undergone in a civil prison, the offender may be kept in military or air force custody or in any other fit place, till such time as it is possible to send him to a civil prison. Whenever, in the opinion of an air or other officer commanding a group, any sentence or portion of a sentence of imprisonment cannot for special reasons, conveniently be carried out in a military or air force prison or in air force custody in accordance with the provisions of section 166 such officer may direct that such sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil prison or other fit place. A person under sentence of transportation or imprisonment may, during his conveyance from place to place, be kept in military or air force custody or in any other fit place.
Summary:

The Indian Air Force Act of 1932 outlines the laws and regulations for the Indian Air Force. This document summarizes sections related to the execution of sentences, communication of orders, establishment and regulation of air force prisons, informality or error in orders or warrants, power to make rules in respect of prisons and prisoners, and pardons, remissions, and suspensions.

Section 170 details the execution of sentences of detention, stating that the sentence must be carried out by detaining the offender in military or air force detention barracks, cells, or other custody. The officer-in-charge of the detention barracks must be provided with a warrant in the prescribed form and the person under sentence.

Section 171 explains the communication of certain orders to prison officers, specifying that whenever an order is made setting aside or varying any sentence, order, or warrant under which a person is confined in a civil, military, or air force prison or detained in a military or air force detention barracks, a warrant in accordance with such order must be forwarded by the officer making the order to the officer in charge of the prison or detention barracks.

Section 172 outlines the execution of sentences of fine, stating that when a sentence of fine is imposed by a court-martial, a copy of such sentence, signed and certified by the confirming officer, may be sent to any magistrate in India. The magistrate shall then cause the fine to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure or any corresponding law in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Section 173 establishes and regulates air force prisons, stating that the Central Government may set apart any building or part of a building, or any place under its control, as an air force prison or detention barracks for the confinement of persons sentenced to imprisonment or detention under this Act.

Section 174 allows for informality or error in orders or warrants, stating that the confinement of a person sentenced to transportation, imprisonment, or detention shall not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of any informality or error in or as respects the order, warrant, or other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was brought into or is confined in any such place.

Section 175 provides for the power to make rules in respect of prisons and prisoners, outlining the government, management, and regulation of air force prisons and detention barracks, appointment, removal, and power of inspectors, visitors, governors, and officers, labor of prisoners, safe custody, maintenance of discipline, punishment of offences, application of provisions of the Prisons Act, and admission into any prison of persons with whom prisoners may desire to communicate and consultation by prisoners under trial with their legal advisers.

Section 176 restricts rule-making power in respect to corporal punishment, stating that rules made under section 175 shall not authorise corporal punishment to be inflicted for any offence, nor render the imprisonment more severe than it is under any law for the time being in force relating to civil prisons in India.

Chapter XIV of the Act focuses on pardons, remissions, and suspensions. Section 177 states that the Central Government, the Chief of the Air Staff, an air or other officer commanding a group, or the prescribed officer may pardon a person or remit the whole or any part of the punishment awarded, mitigate the punishment awarded, or commute such punishment for any less punishment or punishments mentioned in this Act. The section also provides for the release of a person on parole.

Section 178 allows for the cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole, or remission if any condition on which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been remitted is not fulfilled. The sentence of the court shall then be carried into effect as if such pardon, release, or remission had not been granted.

Section 179 states that when under the provisions of section 79 a warrant officer or a non-commissioned officer is deemed to be reduced to the ranks, such reduction shall, for the purpose of section 177, be treated as a punishment awarded by a sentence of a court-martial.

Section 180 allows for the suspension of sentence of transportation, imprisonment, or detention by the Central Government, the Chief of the Air Staff, or any officer empowered to convene a general or a summary general court-martial. The section also allows for the authority or officer to direct that the offender shall not be committed to prison or to air force custody until the orders of such authority or officer have been obtained.

Section 181 allows for the confirming officer to direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to air force custody until the orders of the authority or officer specified in section 180 have been obtained.

Section 182 states that where a sentence is suspended under section 180, the offender shall forthwith be released from custody.

Section 183 states that any period during which the sentence is under suspension shall be reckoned as part of the term of such sentence.

Section 184 allows for the authority or officer specified in section 180 to order that the offender be committed to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence, or that the sentence be remitted.

Section 185 allows for the reconsideration of the case by the authority or officer specified in section 180 or by any air or other officer not below the rank of squadron leader duly authorized by the authority or officer specified in section 180. If the conduct of the offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of the sentence, the matter shall be referred to the authority or officer specified in section 180.

Section 186 states that where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended under this Act, is sentenced for any other offence, the two sentences shall run concurrently if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, or the offender shall also be committed to undergo the further sentence if the further sentence is for a period of three months or more and is not suspended under this Act.
Summary:

This document is a part of the Air Force Act, 1950, which governs the Indian Air Force. It includes Chapters XV and XVI, which cover rules and transitory provisions, respectively.

Chapter XV, titled "Rules," explains the power to make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. The rules may cover various aspects, including the removal, retirement, release, or discharge from service of persons subject to this Act, the specification of the punishment that may be awarded as field punishments, the assembly and procedure of courts of inquiry, the recording of summaries of evidence and the administration of oaths or affirmations by such courts, the convening and constituting of court-martial and the appointment of prosecutors at trials by court-martial, the adjournment, dissolution and sitting of court-martial, the procedure to be observed in trials by court-martial and the appearance of legal practitioners thereat, the confirmation, revision and annulment of, and petitions against the findings and sentences of court-martial, the carrying into effect of sentences of court-martial, the forms of orders to be made under the provisions of this Act relating to court-martial, transportation, imprisonment and detention, the constitution of authorities, to decide for what persons, to what amounts and in what manner, provision should be made for dependents under section 100 and the due carrying out of such decisions, the relative rank of the officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers, petty officers and non-commissioned officers of the regular Army, Navy and Air Force when acting together, and any other matter directed by this Act to be prescribed.

Chapter XVI, titled "Transitory Provisions," includes definitions and powers of British officers. A British officer is defined as a person of non-Indian domicile holding a commission in His Majesty's Air Force and serving in the Air Force. The expression "superior officer" in this Act shall be deemed to include a British officer. A British officer shall have all the powers conferred by this Act on an officer of corresponding rank or holding a corresponding appointment.

The document also contains various amendments and notifications related to the Air Force Act, 1950. These amendments and notifications are not summarized here as they are not directly related to the content of Chapters XV and XVI. However, they provide important context for understanding the evolution of the Act over time.

In summary, this document outlines the rules and transitory provisions related to the Indian Air Force. It includes provisions for making rules to carry out the provisions of the Act, as well as definitions and powers of British officers.