Summary:

THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS CERTIFICATES ACT, 1959 (ACT NO. 46 OF 1959) is a law related to the issuance, transfer, and payment of Government Savings Certificates. The Act defines terms like "holder," "minor," "prescribed," "savings certificate," and "transfer."

Section 1 of the Act deals with the short title, commencement, and application of the Act. It states that the Act may be called the Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959, and it shall come into force on a date appointed by the Central Government. The Act applies to such class of savings certificates as the Central Government may specify.

Section 2 defines various terms used in the Act. It includes definitions for "holder," "minor," "prescribed," "savings certificate," and "transfer."

Section 3 of the Act restricts the transfer of savings certificates. It states that no transfer of a savings certificate shall be valid unless it has been made with the previous consent in writing of the prescribed authority.

Section 4 deals with holdings by or on behalf of minors. It states that a minor may apply for and hold savings certificates, and any other person may apply for and hold savings certificates on behalf of a minor. Where any savings certificate is held by or on behalf of a minor, the minor shall be bound by the provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder applicable to such savings certificate.

Section 5 deals with payment where a certificate is held by or on behalf of a minor. It states that payment of the sum for the time being due on a savings certificate held by or on behalf of a minor may be made to him personally or for the use of the minor.

Section 6 deals with nomination by holders of savings certificates. It states that where a nomination made in the prescribed manner purports to confer on any person the right to receive payment of the sum for the time being due on the savings certificate on the death of the holder thereof, the nominee shall become entitled to the savings certificate and to be paid the sum due thereon to the exclusion of all other persons.

Section 7 deals with payment on death of the holder. It states that if the holder of a savings certificate dies and there is in force at the time of his death a nomination in favour of any person, payment of the sum due thereon shall be made to the nominee.

Section 8 deals with payment to be a full discharge. It states that any payment made in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Act to a minor or to his parent or guardian or to a nominee or to any other person shall be a full discharge from all further liability in respect of the sum so paid.

Section 9 deals with security for due administration. It states that the prescribed authority may take such security as it thinks necessary from any person to whom any money is paid under sub-section (4) of section 7 for the due administration of the money so paid and may assign the said security to any person interested in such administration.

Section 10 deals with the power to administer oath. It states that for the purpose of ascertaining the right of a person claiming to be entitled to payment under sub-section (4) of section 7, the prescribed authority may take evidence on oath or affirmation according to the law for the time being in force relating to oaths and affirmations.

Section 11 deals with protection of action taken in good faith. It states that no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer of the Government or any prescribed authority in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

Section 12 deals with the power to make rules. It states that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

Section 13 deals with the repeal and savings. It states that the Post Office National Savings Certificates Ordinance, 1944 (42 of 1944), is hereby repealed. Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, any rules made or deemed to have been made or anything done or any action taken in exercise of any of the powers conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been made, done or taken in exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act.