Summary:
The Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954 is an Act that aims to provide for the delivery of books and newspapers to public libraries in India. The Act applies to the whole of India, except for the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Act defines "book" as every volume, part or division of a volume, pamphlet, sheet of music, map, chart, or plan, separately printed or lithographed, but does not include a newspaper published in conformity with the provisions of section 5 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867. "Newspaper" is defined as any printed periodical work containing public news or comments on public news, published in conformity with the provisions of section 5 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867. "Public libraries" are defined as the National Library at Calcutta and any three other libraries specified by the Central Government.

Under Section 3 of the Act, the publisher of every book published in the territories to which this Act extends after the commencement of this act, shall deliver at his own expense a copy of the book to the National Library at Calcutta and one such copy to each of the other three public libraries within thirty days from the date of its publication. The copy delivered to the National Library shall be a copy of the whole book with all maps and illustrations belonging thereto, finished and coloured in the same manner as the best copies of the same. The copy delivered to any other public library shall be on the paper on which the largest number of copies of the books is printed for sale, and shall be in the like condition as the book prepared for sale.

Under Section 3A, the publisher of every newspaper, published in the territories to which this Act extends, shall deliver at his own expense one copy of each issue of such newspaper as soon as it is published to each such public library as may be notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.

Under Section 4, the person in charge of a public library or any other person authorized by him shall give a receipt in writing to the publisher for the copy of the book delivered.

Under Section 5, any publisher who contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and, if the contravention is in respect of a book, shall also be punishable with fine which shall be equivalent to the value of the book. The court trying the offence may direct that the whole or any part of the fine realized from him shall be paid, by way of compensation, to the public library to which the book or newspaper, as the case may be, ought to have been delivered.

Under Section 6, no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act save on complaint made by an officer empowered in this behalf by the Central Government by a General or special order. No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.

Under Section 7, this Act shall also apply to books and newspapers published by or under the authority of the Government but shall not apply to books meant for official use only.

The Central Government has the power to make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.