Summary:
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF OFFICERS OF PARLIAMENT ACT, 1953 (ACT NO. 20 OF 1953) is a law that provides for the salaries and allowances of certain officers of Parliament, including the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.

The Act defines "officer of Parliament" as any of the following officers: the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.

The Act specifies the salaries, allowances, and other benefits that these officers are entitled to receive. For example, the Chairman of the Council of States is entitled to a salary of four lakh rupees per mensem, while other officers of Parliament are entitled to receive a salary and allowance at the same rates as specified in the Salaries, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954. These officers are also entitled to a constituency allowance at the same rate as specified under section 8 of the said Act with respect to members of Parliament.

In addition to their salaries and allowances, officers of Parliament are entitled to use a furnished residence throughout their term of office and for a period of one month immediately thereafter, without payment of rent and with no charge for maintenance. If an officer of Parliament dies while in office, his family is entitled to the use of the furnished residence occupied by the officer for a period of one month without payment of rent, and for a further period of one month on payment of rent at such rates as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf under section 11.

The Act also provides for a sumptuary allowance for certain officers of Parliament, as well as travelling and daily allowances for officers of Parliament for journeys to Delhi and back, and for tours undertaken in the discharge of their official duties. Medical facilities are also provided to officers of Parliament and their families.

The Act also includes provisions for family pension, the use of an unfurnished residence, and medical attendance and treatment for the spouse of the Speaker of the House of the People who dies while holding office.

The Act also allows for the payment of a repayable advance to any officer of Parliament for the purchase of a motor-car.

Finally, the Act specifies that no officer of Parliament in receipt of a salary or allowance under this Act shall be entitled to receive any sum out of funds provided by Parliament by way of salary or allowance in respect of his membership of either House of Parliament. The Act also specifies that the date on which any person became or ceased to be an officer of Parliament shall be published in the Official Gazette and any such notification shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that he became, or ceased to be, an officer of Parliament on that date for all the purposes of this Act.

This Act is supplemented by rules made by the Central Government in consultation with the Chairman and the Speaker, and any rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and laid before each House of Parliament for a total period of thirty days. If both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be. The Act also includes provisions for the exemption of the Chairman and certain perquisites received by an officer of Parliament from liability to pay income-tax.