Summary:

THE MARKING OF HEAVY PACKAGES ACT, 1951 is an Act to give effect to the International Convention drawn up in Geneva on the 30th day of May, 1929, for the marking of weight on heavy packages transported by sea or inland waterways. The Act extends to the whole of India and came into force on the 1st of November, 1951.

The Act defines "heavy package" as a package or other object weighing not less than one metric ton, which is equal to one thousand kilogrammes or 2204.6 standard pounds or 26.8 standard maunds. An "inland water-way" is defined as any canal, river, lake or other navigable water in India.

The Act mandates that every person consigning a heavy package for transport by sea or inland water-way from any place in India shall have marked thereon plainly, durably and conspicuously the gross weight of the packages. The approximate weight may be marked in cases or circumstances specified by rules made under this Act where it is difficult to determine the correct weight.

The Central Government may appoint inspectors for the purposes of this Act and assign them specific areas. Every inspector is deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). Inspectors have the power to enter, inspect any place or vessel, and examine any packages found therein. If any heavy package is found not to have been marked in accordance with the provisions of section 3, the inspector may direct that the package shall not be transported until it has been marked in accordance with those provisions.

If any person contravenes the provisions of section 3 or any direction given by an inspector under clause (b) of section 5, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. If any person wilfully obstructs an inspector in the exercise of his powers under this Act, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.

Where the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a complaint in writing made by an inspector within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.

No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. The Central Government may make rules providing for the conditions as to the manner of marking of heavy packages, the manner of their packing and the type of covering to be used, the cases or circumstances in which the approximate weight of heavy packages instead of their correct weight may be marked, and any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided for by rules.