Summary:

THE PRISONERS (ATTENDANCE IN COURTS) ACT, 1955, provides for the attendance in courts of persons confined in prisons for obtaining their evidence or for answering a criminal charge. The Act extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and came into force on the date appointed by the Central Government.

The Act defines "confinement in a prison" as confinement or detention in a prison under any law providing for preventive detention and "prison" as any place declared by the State Government to be a subsidiary jail or any reformatory, Borstal institution or other institution of a like nature.

Under the Act, any civil or criminal court may require the attendance of a person confined in a prison if it thinks that the evidence of such person is material in any matter pending before it. However, no civil court shall make an order under this Act in respect of a person confined in a prison situated outside the State in which the court is held. The officer in charge of the prison shall cause the person to be taken to the court in which his attendance is required and shall cause him to be detained in custody in or near the court until he has been examined or until the judge or presiding officer of the court authorizes him to be taken back to the prison in which he was confined.

The officer in charge of the prison may abstain from carrying out the order if the person is declared unfit to be removed from the prison by reason of sickness or other infirmity, is under committal for trial, is under remand pending trial or pending a preliminary investigation, or is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the time required for removing him under this Act and for taking him back to the prison in which he is confined.

In case the attendance of the person confined in a prison cannot be secured, the court may issue a commission under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure for the examination of the person in the prison in which he is confined. The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, as the case may be, shall apply in relation to the examination on commission or otherwise of any person confined in a prison as they apply in relation to the examination on commission of any other person.

The State Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act, including the procedure for obtaining the countersignature of an order made under section 3, the authority by whom and the manner in which a declaration that a person confined in prison is unfit to be removed therefrom may be made, the conditions subject to which an order made under section 3 by a civil court may be executed, the manner in which a process directed against any person confined in a prison issued from any court may be served upon him, the escort of persons confined in a prison to and from courts in which their attendance is required and for their custody during the period of such attendance, the amount to be allowed for the costs and charges of such escort, and the guidance of officers in all other matters connected with the enforcement of this Act.

Part IX of the Prisoners Act, 1900, and the First and Second Schedules to the said Act are hereby repealed. If immediately before the commencement of this Act, there is in force in any Part B State to which this Act extends any law corresponding to the provisions of this Act, that law shall, in so far as it relates to matters dealt within this Act, stand repealed on such commencement. Anything done or any action taken under any such law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue to have effect accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.