Summary:

THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MINISTERS ACT, 1952, is an act that provides for the salaries and allowances of Ministers. The act defines a Minister as a member of the Council of Ministers, by whatever name called, and includes a Deputy Minister.

Under this act, each Minister is entitled to receive a salary per mensem and an allowance for each day during the whole of his term as such Minister at the same rates as are specified in section 3 of the Salaries, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954. Each Minister is also entitled to receive a constituency allowance at the same rate as is specified under section 8 of the said Act with respect to members of Parliament.

Additionally, each Minister is entitled to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and for a period of one month immediately thereafter, without payment of rent and no charge shall fall on the Minister personally in respect of the maintenance of such residence. In the event of death of the Minister, his family shall be entitled to the use of the furnished residence occupied by the Minister for a period of one month immediately after his death, without payment of rent and no charge shall fall on the family of the Minister in respect of the maintenance of such residence, and for a further period of one month, on payment of rent at such rates as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf by the Central Government and also charges in respect of electricity and water consumed in that residence during such further period.

There is also a provision for payment of sumptuary allowances to Ministers at the following rates: the Prime Minister Rs. 3,000 per mensem, every other Minister who is a member of the Cabinet Rs. 2,000 per mensem, a Minister of State Rs. 1,000 per mensem, and a Deputy Minister Rs. 600 per mensem.

Ministers are also entitled to travelling and daily allowances for journeys to Delhi from their usual place of residence outside Delhi for assuming office, and from Delhi to their usual place of residence outside Delhi on relinquishing office, and also for tours undertaken by them in the discharge of their official duties, whether by sea, land or air.

Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Central Government, a Minister shall be entitled to an amount equal to the fare for a single journey performed by him, during each year, within India, either alone or along with spouse or legitimate or step children, residing with and wholly dependent on him, or any number of companions or relatives, at the same rates at which travelling allowance is payable to such Minister under clause (b) of sub-section (1) in respect of tours referred to in that clause, subject to a maximum of forty-eight such fares per year.

Under this act, a Minister and the members of his family shall be entitled free of charge to accommodation in hospitals maintained by the Government and also to medical treatment.

There may be paid to any Minister by way of a repayable advance such sum of money as may be determined by rules made in this behalf for the purchase of a motor-car in order that he may be able to discharge conveniently and efficiently the duties of his office.

No person in receipt of a salary or allowance under this Act shall be entitled to receive any sum out of funds provided by Parliament by way of salary or allowance in respect of his membership of either House of Parliament.

The date on which any person became or ceased to be a Minister shall be published in the Official Gazette, and any such notification shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that he became, or ceased to be, a Minister on that date for all the purposes of this Act.

Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961, the value of rent free furnished residence (including maintenance thereof) provided to a Minister under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computation of his income chargeable under the head “Salaries” under section 15 of the Income-tax Act, 1961.

The Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this Act after the commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1977 shall be laid before each House of Parliament and no such rule shall come into force until it has been approved, whether with or without modifications, by each House of Parliament and published by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.

All salaries paid or payable for the period commencing on the 14th day of May, 1952, and ending with the commencement of this Act to Ministers described as Ministers of Cabinet rank (but not Members of the Cabinet), all charges incurred before the commencement of this Act in respect of the accommodation provided in any hospital maintained by the Central Government for or on the medical treatment of any Minister or any member of his family and all payments made before such commencement by way of travelling or daily allowances to any Deputy Minister; shall be deemed to have been properly paid, payable or incurred or made.