Summary:

THE LOK SAHAYAK SENA ACT, 1956 (ACT NO. 53 OF 1956) was enacted on 15th September, 1956, with the purpose of providing for the constitution of Lok Sahayak Sena for imparting military training to citizens of India. The Act extends to the whole of India.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "camp," "Force," "prescribed," "superior officer," "volunteer," and also refers to the definitions of words and expressions used in the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or in the Territorial Army Act, 1948 (56 of 1948).

The Act provides for the constitution of the Lok Sahayak Sena by the enrolment of volunteers in the manner prescribed. The Central Government may establish such number of camps for the purposes of the Force as it thinks fit and may close down or re-establish any such camps.

Any citizen of India not below the age of eighteen years and not above the age of forty years may offer himself for enrolment as a volunteer and may, if he satisfies the prescribed conditions, be enrolled in the prescribed manner by the prescribed authority for such period and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

A volunteer may be called upon to undergo such training as may be prescribed, and while undergoing such training shall perform such duties and discharge such obligations as the prescribed authority may, by general or special order, direct. Every volunteer shall be entitled to receive his discharge from the Force on the expiration of the period for which he was enrolled, but may, prior to the expiration of that period, be discharged from the Force by such authority and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

The Act also defines certain offences and penalties for volunteers who commit offences such as failing to attend at any place when duly required to do so, absconding from the camp without leave, using criminal force or using threatening or insubordinate language to a superior officer or assaulting a superior officer, disobeying any lawful command of a superior officer, neglecting to obey any standing, general or other orders by the officer commanding the camp, using criminal force to, or assaulting, any volunteer or any person subject to the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or the Territorial Army Act, 1948 (56 of 1948), knowingly doing any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of good order or military discipline in camp.

The Act also provides for the recovery of any fine imposed by order of the prescribed authority under sub-section (1) of section 8, and for the liability of volunteers for causing loss of, or damage to, any property of the Government.

The Act also provides for the presumption as to certain documents and for the power to make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.