Summary:
The Travancore-Cochin Vehicles Taxation (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1959, is an Act further to amend the Travancore-Cochin Vehicles Taxation Act, 1950. The Act has four sections.

Section 1 of the Act states that it can be called the Travancore-Cochin Vehicles Taxation (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1959.

Section 2 of the Act amends Schedule I of the principal Act, the Travancore-Cochin Vehicles Taxation Act, 1950. It makes four substitutions in the Schedule I. The first substitution is in the headings to the second and third columns, replacing the abbreviations “Rs. As. Ps.” with “Rs. np.”. The second substitution is in Item No. 2, replacing the entry in the second column under the heading “For vehicles fitted with pneumatic tyres” with “7 50”. The third substitution is in Item No. 3, substituting the entries in the second column under the heading “For vehicles fitted with pneumatic tyres” with new entries. The fourth substitution is in Item No. 4, substituting the entry in the second column under the heading “For vehicles fitted with pneumatic tyres” with “40 0”. The amendments made by sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day of September, 1957.

Section 3 of the Act validates the levy, collection, etc., of taxes on certain types of vehicles. Notification II, No. TB2-14667/57/P.W., dated the 24th September, 1957, enhancing the rates of tax on certain vehicles, is deemed to have been issued under the principal Act, as amended by this Act, and to have come into force on the 1st day of October, 1957. All taxes levied or collected or purporting to have been levied or collected in pursuance of the notification shall for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been, validly levied or collected. All acts, proceedings or things done or taken by the Government or by any officer of Government or by any other authority in connection with the levy or collection of such taxes shall for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been, done or taken in accordance with law. No suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court against the Government or any person or authority whatsoever for the refund of any taxes so paid. No court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any taxes so paid.

Section 4 of the Act repeals the Travancore-Cochin Vehicles Taxation (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1959 (Kerala Ordinance 4 of 1959).