Summary:

The Inflammable Substances Act, 1952, is a law that declares certain substances to be dangerously inflammable and provides for their regulation. The Act is meant to apply the Petroleum Act, 1934, and the rules made thereunder to these substances.

The Act defines "dangerously inflammable substance" as any liquid or other substance declared to be dangerously inflammable by this Act. It also defines "Petroleum Act" as the Petroleum Act, 1934.

The Act declares acetone, calcium phosphide, carbide of calcium, cinematograph films having a nitro-cellulose base, ethyl alcohol, methyl alcohol, and wood naphtha to be dangerously inflammable.

The Central Government has the power to apply any or all of the provisions of the Petroleum Act and the rules made thereunder to any dangerously inflammable substance, with modifications as it may specify. The Central Government may also make rules providing specially for the testing of any dangerously inflammable substance to which any of the provisions of the Petroleum Act have been applied.

Notifications or rules issued or purporting to have been issued under section 30 of the Petroleum Act between the 1st day of April, 1937, and the date of commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been issued or made under this Act and continue in force accordingly.

All acts of executive authority, proceedings and sentences which have been done, taken or passed with respect to, or on account of, any inflammable substance since the 1st day of April, 1937, and before the commencement of this Act by any officer of Government or by any person acting under his authority or otherwise in pursuance of an order of the Government in the belief or purported belief that the acts, proceedings or sentences were being done, taken or passed under the Petroleum Act shall be as valid and operative as if they had been done, taken or passed in accordance with law.

This Act has repealed section 30 of the Petroleum Act, 1934, with effect from 17-9-1957.