Summary:
The Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950, is an Act that provides for the disposal of the private property of persons subject to the Army Act, 1950 or the Air Force Act, 1950, who die or desert or are ascertained to be of unsound mind or while on active service are officially reported to be missing. The Act is divided into 11 sections and 1 schedule. The first section deals with the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. The second section defines various terms used in the Act. The third section outlines the property of deceased persons and deserters other than officers. The fourth section deals with the property of officers who die or desert. The fifth section provides for the decision of questions as to regimental and other debts in camp or quarters. The sixth section provides for representative powers of commanding officer or Committee. The seventh section deals with the power of the Central Government to hand over the estate of a deceased person to the Administrator General. The eighth section deals with the disposal of surplus by prescribed persons. The ninth section deals with the disposal of effects, not money. The tenth section deals with the disposal of certain property without production of probate, etc. The eleventh section deals with the discharge of commanding officer, Committee, prescribed person, and the Central Government. The twelfth section deals with property in the hands of commanding officer, Committee or prescribed person not to be assets where commanding officer, Committee or prescribed person is stationed. The thirteenth section deals with the saving of rights of representative. The fourteenth section applies the provisions of sections 3 to 13 to persons of unsound mind or to persons reported missing on active service. The fifteenth section deals with the appointment of standing Committee of Adjustment in certain cases. The sixteenth section deals with the power to make rules. The seventeenth section has been repealed. The schedule deals with the form of notice.