Summary:

THE ARMED FORCES (SPECIAL POWERS) ACT, 1958, is an Act that enables certain special powers to be conferred upon members of the armed forces in disturbed areas in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, and Tripura.

The Act has the following key provisions:

1. Short title and extent: This Act may be called the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958, and extends to the whole of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, and Tripura.

2. Definitions: The Act defines "armed forces" as the military forces and the air forces operating as land forces, and includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating. "Disturbed area" means an area which is for the time being declared by notification under section 3 to be a disturbed area.

3. Power to declare areas to be disturbed areas: If, in relation to any State or Union territory to which this Act extends, the Governor of that State or the Administrator of that Union territory or the Central Government, in either case, is of the opinion that the whole or any part of such State or Union territory, as the case may be, is in such a disturbed or dangerous condition that the use of armed forces in aid of the civil power is necessary, the Governor of that State or the Administrator of that Union territory or the Central Government, as the case may be, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare the whole or such part of such State or Union territory to be a disturbed area.

4. Special powers of the armed forces: Any commissioned officer, warrant officer, non-commissioned officer, or any other person of equivalent rank in the armed forces may, in a disturbed area, if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for the maintenance of public order, after giving such due warning as he may consider necessary, fire upon or otherwise use force, even to the causing of death, against any person who is acting in contravention of any law or order for the time being in force in the disturbed area prohibiting the assembly of five or more persons or the carrying of weapons or of things capable of being used as weapons or of fire-arms, ammunition, or explosive substances.

5. Arrested persons to be made over to the police: Any person arrested and taken into custody under this Act shall be made over to the officer in charge of the nearest police station with the least possible delay, together with a report of the circumstances occasioning the arrest.

6. Protection to persons acting under Act: No prosecution, suit, or other legal proceeding shall be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government, against any person in respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act.

7. Repealed: The Repealing and Amending Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First Schedule, repealed and saved the Act with effect from 26-12-1960.