Summary:

THE INTER-STATE RIVER WATER DISPUTES ACT, 1956 (ACT NO. 33 OF 1956) is a law enacted to provide for the adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers and river valleys. The Act applies to the whole of India. The Act defines key terms such as "prescribed," "Tribunal," and "water dispute." A water dispute is defined as any dispute or difference between two or more State Governments with respect to the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley, or the interpretation of the terms of any agreement relating to the use, distribution or control of such waters or the implementation of such agreement, or the levy of any water rate in contravention of the prohibition contained in section 7.

Under the Act, if it appears to the Government of any State that a water dispute with the Government of another State has arisen or is likely to arise, the State Government may request the Central Government to refer the water dispute to a Tribunal for adjudication. The Central Government, upon receiving such a request, may constitute a Water Disputes Tribunal for the adjudication of the water dispute if it is of the opinion that the water dispute cannot be settled by negotiations. The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and two other members nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India from among persons who at the time of such nomination are Judges of the Supreme Court or of a High Court.

The Tribunal shall investigate the matters referred to it and forward to the Central Government a report setting out the facts as found by it and giving its decision on the matters referred to it within a period of three years. If the decision cannot be given for unavoidable reasons, within a period of three years, the Central Government may extend the period for a further period not exceeding two years. If, upon consideration of the decision of the Tribunal, the Central Government or any State Government is of opinion that anything therein contained requires explanation or that guidance is needed upon any point not originally referred to the Tribunal, the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may refer the matter to the Tribunal for further consideration.

The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute and shall be given effect to by them. The decision of the Tribunal, after its publication in the Official Gazette by the Central Government under sub-section (1), shall have the same force as an order or decree of the Supreme Court. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scheme or schemes whereby provision may be made for all matters necessary to give effect to the decision of a Tribunal. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, amend, or vary, any scheme framed under sub-section (1).

No State Government shall, by reason only of the fact that any works for the conservation, regulation or utilisation of water resources of an inter-State river have been constructed within the limits of the State, impose, or authorise the imposition of, any seigniorage or additional rate or fee (by whatever name called) in respect of the use of such water by any other State or the inhabitants thereof. Any dispute or difference between two or more State Governments with respect to the levy of any water rate in contravention of the prohibition contained in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a water dispute.

The Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath, requiring the discovery and production of documents and material objects, issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or for local investigation, and any other matter which may be prescribed. The Tribunal may require any State Government to carry out, or permit to be carried out, such surveys and investigation as may be considered necessary for the adjudication of any water dispute pending before it.

The Central Government shall maintain a data bank and information system at the national level for each river basin which shall include data regarding water resources, land, agriculture, and matters relation thereto, as the Central Government may prescribe form time to time. The State Government shall supply the date to the Central Government or to an agency appointed by the Central Government for the purposes, as and when required. The Central Government shall have powers to verify the data supplied by the State Government, and appoint any person or persons for the purpose and take such measures as it may consider necessary. The person or persons so appointed shall have the powers to summon such records and information from the concerned State Government as are considered necessary to discharge their functions under this section.

The Chairman and other members of a Tribunal and the assessors shall be entitled to receive such remuneration, allowances or fees as may be prescribed. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, neither the Supreme Court nor any other Court shall have or exercise jurisdiction in respect of any water dispute which may be referred to a Tribunal under this Act. The Central Government shall dissolve the Tribunal after it has forwarded its report and as soon as the Central Government is satisfied that no further reference to the Tribunal in the matter would be necessary.

The Central Government, after consultation with the State Governments, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in the modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

In conclusion, THE INTER-STATE RIVER WATER DISPUTES ACT, 1956 provides a legal framework for the adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers and river valleys. The Act establishes a Water Disputes Tribunal to investigate and decide on water disputes between State Governments. The decision of the Tribunal is final and binding on the parties to the dispute and shall be given effect to by them. The Act also empowers the Central Government to frame schemes for the implementation of the decision of a Tribunal. The Act also provides for the maintenance of a data bank and information system at the national level for each river basin. The Act also lays down the powers and jurisdiction of the Tribunal, the remuneration and fees payable to the Chairman and other members of the Tribunal, and the bar of jurisdiction of Supreme Court and other courts. The Act also empowers the Central Government to make rules for the implementation of the Act.