Summary:

THE CANTONMENTS (EXTENSION OF RENT CONTROL LAWS) ACT, 1957, is an Act to extend to cantonments laws relating to the control of rent and regulation of house accommodation. The Act was enacted on December 18, 1957, and came into force on January 26, 1950.

The Act defines "cantonment" as any place declared to be a cantonment under section 3 of the Cantonments Act, 1924 (2 of 1924).

The Central Government has the power to extend to any cantonment with restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, any enactment relating to the control of rent and regulation of house accommodation which is in force in the State in which the cantonment is situated. However, such extension shall not apply to any premises within the cantonment belonging to the Government, any tenancy or other like relationship created by a grant from the Government in respect of premises within the cantonment taken on lease or requisitioned by the Government, or any house within the cantonment which is, or may be, appropriated by the Central Government on lease under the Cantonments (House Accommodation) Act, 1923 (6 of 1923).

The extension of any enactment under this Act may be made from such earlier or future date as the Central Government may think fit. However, no such extension shall be made from a date earlier than the commencement of such enactment, the establishment of the cantonment, or the commencement of this Act, whichever is later.

Where any enactment in force in any State relating to the control of rent and regulation of house accommodation is extended to a cantonment from a date earlier than the date on which such extension is made, such enactment, as in force on such earlier date, shall apply to such cantonment, and where any such enactment has been amended at any time after the earlier date but before the commencement of the Cantonments (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Amendment Act, 1972 (22 of 1972), such enactment as amended, shall apply to the cantonment on and from the date on which the enactment by which such amendment was made came into force.

The Act also extends the Madhya Bharat Accommodation Control Act, 1955 (Madhya Bharat Act 23 of 1955) to the cantonment of Mhow with modifications.

Any law relating to the control of rent and regulation of house accommodation in force in the cantonment of Mhow immediately before the commencement therein of the Madhya Bharat Accommodation Control Act, 1955 (Madhya Bharat Act 23 of 1955) shall be extended to that cantonment under section 3 of this Act with effect from the commencement of such law in that cantonment or from the commencement of this Act, whichever is later. However, no such law shall continue in force in the cantonment of Mhow on and from the commencement therein of the Madhya Bharat Accommodation Control Act, 1955 (Madhya Bharat Act 23 of 1955).

Where, before the extension under sub-section (2) of any law to the cantonment of Mhow, any decree or order for the regulation of, or for eviction from, any house accommodation in that cantonment was made by any court, tribunal or other authority in accordance with any law for the control of rent and regulation of house accommodation for the time being in force in that cantonment, such decree or order shall, on and from the commencement of such law in that cantonment, be deemed to have been made under the corresponding provisions of the first-mentioned Act as if the said Act were in force in that cantonment on the date on which such decree or order was made.