Summary:

THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES ACT, 1963 (ACT NO. 19 OF 1963) is an Act that provides for the languages which may be used for official purposes of the Union, for transaction of business in Parliament, for Central and State Acts and for certain purposes in High Courts. The Act defines "appointed day" as the 26th day of January, 1965, and "Hindi" as Hindi in Devanagari Script.

Section 3 of the Act states that the English language may continue to be used in addition to Hindi for all official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before the appointed day, and for the transaction of business in Parliament. The English language shall be used for communication between the Union and a State which has not adopted Hindi as its official language. Hindi or the English language shall be used for communication between one State which has adopted Hindi as its official language and another State which has not adopted Hindi as its official language, accompanied by a translation of the same in the English language.

Section 4 of the Act states that after the expiration of ten years from the date on which section 3 comes into force, there shall be constituted a Committee on Official Language on a resolution passed by both Houses of Parliament with the previous sanction of the President. The Committee shall review the progress made in the use of Hindi for the official purposes of the Union and submit a report to the President making recommendations thereon, which shall be laid before each House of Parliament and sent to all the State Governments. The President may issue directions in accordance with the whole or any part of that report.

Section 5 of the Act states that a translation in Hindi published under the authority of the President in the Official Gazette on and after the appointed day shall be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in Hindi. The authoritative text in the English language of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either House of Parliament shall be accompanied by a translation of the same in Hindi authorized in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Section 6 of the Act states that where the Legislature of a State has prescribed any language other than Hindi for use in Acts passed by the Legislature of the State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor of the State, a translation of the same in Hindi, in addition to a translation thereof in the English language, may be published under the authority of the Governor of the State in the Official Gazette of that State.

Section 7 of the Act states that as from the appointed day or any day thereafter, the Governor of a State may authorize the use of Hindi or the official language of the State, in addition to the English language, for the purposes of any judgment, decree or order passed or made by the High Court for that State.

Section 8 of the Act states that the Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

The Act was enacted on the 10th May, 1963, and came into force on the appointed day. Certain provisions of the Act were omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020.