Summary:

The State-Associated Banks (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1962, is an Act that further amends the State Bank of India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, and the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891. It also provides for the winding up of certain minor State-associated banks and related matters.

The Act consists of six sections, with the first section specifying the short title and commencement of the Act. Section 2, which has been repealed, was previously an amendment to the Act 23 of 1955. Similarly, Sections 3 and 4, which have also been repealed, were previously amendments to the Act 38 of 1959 and the Act 18 of 1891, respectively.

Section 5 of the Act deals with provisions in respect of the State Bank Dholpur. This section outlines the powers of the Central Government to take over the management of the Dholpur bank or to wind up its affairs and distribute its assets. The principal civil court of original jurisdiction in the district in which the Dholpur bank’s head office is situated has exclusive jurisdiction to entertain and decide any claim made by or against the Dholpur bank or any question relating to the winding up of the bank. The law relating to the winding up of banking companies applies to the Dholpur bank, and the period of limitation for any suit or application relating to any payment due to the bank is twelve years from the date of the accrual of the claim or five years from the date of the first appointment of the officer in charge of winding up the bank, whichever ends later. After the repayment of all the deposit liabilities and any other amounts due to be paid by the bank, the remaining assets, if any, of the bank shall be utilized for the purposes and objects specified in the State Bank, Dholpur Act, 1915, and other relevant documents.

Section 6, which has also been repealed, was previously an amendment to the State Bank of Kurundwad (Junior) Act, 1933.

The Act was enacted on the 14th of December, 1962.