Summary:

The Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966, is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to unlawful possession of railway property. The Act extends to the whole of India and came into force on a date appointed by the Central Government. The Act defines various terms such as Force, member of the Force, officer of the Force, railway property, superior officer, and also refers to the Indian Railways Act, 1890 for any words and expressions used but not defined in this Act.

The Act penalizes theft, dishonest misappropriation or unlawful possession of railway property with imprisonment, fine, or both. The punishment for the first offence is imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both, and in the absence of special and adequate reasons, such imprisonment shall not be less than one year and such fine shall not be less than one thousand rupees. The punishment for the second or a subsequent offence is imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine, and in the absence of special and adequate reasons, such imprisonment shall not be less than two years and such fine shall not be less than two thousand rupees. The Act defines theft and dishonest misappropriation with the same meanings as assigned to them respectively in section 378 and section 403 of the Indian Penal Code.

The Act also punishes abetment, conspiracy or connivance at offences with imprisonment, fine, or both. Any owner or occupier of land or building, or any agent of such owner or occupier in charge of the management of that land or building, who wilfully connives at an offence against the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. The Act defines the words “abet” and “conspire” with the same meanings as assigned to them respectively in sections 107 and 120A of the Indian Penal Code.

The Act provides that an offence under this Act shall not be cognizable. Any superior officer or member of the Force may, without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person who has been concerned in an offence punishable under this Act or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned. Every person arrested for an offence punishable under this Act shall be forwarded without delay to the nearest officer of the Force. The officer of the Force may exercise the same powers and shall be subject to the same provisions as the officer incharge of a police-station may exercise and is subject to under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 when investigating a cognizable case.

The Act empowers an officer of the Force to summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary either to give evidence or to produce a document, or any other thing in any inquiry which such officer in making for any of the purposes of this Act. The Act also provides for the issue of search warrant by a Magistrate, having jurisdiction over the area in which that place is situate, for entry, search, taking possession of any railway property, and conveyance of such railway property before a Magistrate. All searches and arrests made under this Act shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 relating respectively to searches and arrests made under that Code.

The Act empowers and requires all officers of Government and all village officers to assist the superior officers and members of the Force in the enforcement of this Act. The Act also empowers any court trying an offence punishable under this Act to order the forfeiture to Government of any property in respect of which the Court is satisfied that an offence under this Act has been committed and may also order the forfeiture of any receptacles, packages or coverings in which such property is contained, and the animals, vehicles, or other conveyances used in carrying the property.

The Act provides that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. The Act repeals the Railway Stores (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1955, and provides that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to offences punishable under the Act hereby repealed and such offences may be investigated and tried as if this Act had not been passed. The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeals.