Summary:

THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 (ACT NO. 53 OF 1961) is a law in India that regulates the employment of women in certain establishments for certain periods before and after child-birth and provides for maternity benefit and other benefits. The Act applies to factories, mines, plantations, shops or establishments with ten or more employees, and other establishments declared by the State Government. The Act prohibits the employment of women during the six weeks immediately following the day of their delivery, miscarriage, or medical termination of pregnancy. It also prohibits pregnant women from doing work that is of an arduous nature or involves long hours of standing during the period specified in the Act. Every woman is entitled to payment of maternity benefit at the rate of the average daily wage for the period of her actual absence. A woman is entitled to maternity benefit only if she has actually worked in an establishment for a period of not less than 80 days in the 12 months immediately preceding the date of her expected delivery. The maximum period for which any woman is entitled to maternity benefit is 26 weeks, out of which not more than 8 weeks can precede the date of her expected delivery. In case of miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy, a woman is entitled to leave with wages at the rate of maternity benefit for a period of six weeks immediately following the day of her miscarriage or, as the case may be, her medical termination of pregnancy. In case of tubectomy operation, a woman is entitled to leave with wages at the rate of maternity benefit for a period of two weeks immediately following the day of her tubectomy operation. A woman suffering from illness arising out of pregnancy, delivery, premature birth of child, miscarriage, medical termination of pregnancy or tubectomy operation is entitled to leave with wages at the rate of maternity benefit for a maximum period of one month. Every woman delivered of a child who returns to duty after such delivery is allowed in the course of her daily work two breaks of the prescribed duration for nursing the child until the child attains the age of fifteen months. Every establishment having fifty or more employees shall have the facility of crèche within such distance as may be prescribed. It is unlawful for an employer to discharge or dismiss a woman during or on account of her absence from work in accordance with the provisions of this Act. No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages of a woman entitled to maternity benefit under the provisions of this Act shall be made by reason only of the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of the provisions contained in sub-section (3) of section 4 or breaks for nursing the child allowed to her under the provisions of section 11. An Inspector may, subject to such restrictions or conditions as may be prescribed, exercise all or any of the following powers, namely: enter any premises or place where women are employed or work is given to them in an establishment, examine any registers, records and notices required to be kept or exhibited by or under this Act and required their production for inspection, examine any person whom he finds in any premises or place and who, he has reasonable cause to believe, is employed in the establishment, require the employer to give information regarding the names and addresses of women employed, payments made to them, and applications or notices received from them under this Act, and take copies of any registered and records or notices or any portions thereof. Every Inspector appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). Any woman claiming that maternity benefit or any other amount to which she is entitled under this Act and any person claiming that payment due under section 7 has been improperly withheld may make a complaint to the Inspector. The Inspector may, of his own motion or on receipt of a complaint referred to in sub-section (1), make an inquiry or cause an inquiry to be made and if satisfied that payment has been wrongfully withheld, may direct the payment to be made in accordance with his orders. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspector under sub-section (2) may, within thirty days from the date on which such decision is communicated to such persons, appeal to the prescribed authority. The decision of the prescribed authority where an appeal has been preferred to it under sub-section (3) or of the Inspector where no such appeal has been preferred, shall be final. Any amount payable under this section shall be recoverable by the Collector on a certificate issued for that amount by the Inspector as an arrear of land revenue. If a woman works in any establishment after she has been permitted by her employer to absent herself under the provisions of section 6 for any period during such authorized absence, she shall forfeit her claim to the maternity benefit for such period. An abstract of the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder in the language or languages of the locality shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place by the employer in every part of the establishment in which women are employed. Every employer shall prepare and maintain such registers, records and muster-rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed. If any employer fails to pay any amount of maternity benefit to a woman entitled under this Act or discharges or dismisses such woman during or on account of her absence from work in accordance with the provisions of this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees. If any employer contravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, he shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under this Act for such contravention, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. Whoever fails to produce on demand by the Inspector any register or document in his custody kept in pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder or conceals or prevents any person from appearing before or being examined by an Inspector shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. Any aggrieved woman, an office-bearer of a trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) of which such woman is a member or a voluntary organisation registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or an Inspector, may file a complaint regarding the commission of an offence under this Act in any court of competent jurisdiction and no such complaint shall be filed after the expiry of one year from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. The Central Government may give such directions as it may deem necessary to a State Government regarding the carrying into execution of the provisions of this Act and the State Government shall comply with such directions. If the appropriate Government is satisfied that having regard to an establishment or a class of establishments providing for the grant of benefits which are not less favourable than those provided in this Act, it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, the establishment or class of establishments from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or after the coming into force of this Act. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a woman from entering into an agreement with her employer for granting her rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to her than those to which she would be entitled under this Act. The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication and by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. On the application of this Act to mines, the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941 (19 of 1941); and to factories situate in the Union territory of Delhi, the Bombay Maternity Benefit Act, 1929 (Bom. Act VII of 1929), as in force in that territory, shall stand repealed.