Summary:

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1966, with the Act ID ACT NO. 47 OF 1966, was enacted on the 13th of December 1966. The Act aims to further amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

Chapter I of the Act focuses on Preliminary matters. Section 1 of this chapter specifies the short title and commencement of the Act. It states that the Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1966, and it shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may appoint by notification in the Official Gazette. Different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. Furthermore, Section 2 provides for the representation of the States of Jammu and Kashmir, Nagaland, and the Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli in the present House of the People until the dissolution of the present House of the People.

Section 61 of the Act omits Section 137 of the 1951-Act, with a saving provision that such omission shall not affect any inquiry or other proceeding under the said section pending immediately before such omission. Any such inquiry or other proceeding may be continued, and any prosecution may be instituted as a result of such inquiry or other proceeding, and any penalty or punishment may be imposed under and in accordance with the said section as if that section had not been omitted.

Section 63 of the Act states that nothing herein shall apply to any election which has been called before the commencement of this Act or to any election petition arising out of such election. All such elections shall be held and petitions tried, and all matters in connection with such elections or petitions shall be regulated, in accordance with the provisions of the law in force immediately before such commencement.

A notification was issued on the 30th of October 2019, making this Act applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.