Summary:

THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES (ACQUISITION OF RIGHT OF USER IN LAND) ACT, 1962 is an Act to provide for the acquisition of right of user in land for laying pipelines for the transport of petroleum and minerals and for matters connected therewith. The Act applies in the first instance to the whole of the States of West Bengal, Bihar, Uttar-Pradesh and Gujarat and the Union territory of Delhi, and the Central Government may declare that this Act shall also apply to such other State or Union territory and with effect from such date as may be specified in that notification.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, including "competent authority," "corporation," "minerals," and "petroleum." The Act also sets out the procedures for the acquisition of right of user in land, including the publication of a notification of intention to acquire the right of user, the power to enter, survey, and take levels of any land, the hearing of objections, and the declaration of acquisition of right of user.

The Act also sets out the rights and obligations of the owner or occupier of the land with respect to which a declaration has been made, including restrictions on the use of the land and the payment of compensation. The Act also provides for the deposit and payment of compensation and sets out the powers of the competent authority, including the power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person, require the discovery and production of any document, and issue commissions for examination of witnesses.

The Act also provides protection for actions taken in good faith and bars the jurisdiction of civil courts in respect of any matter which the competent authority is empowered to determine. The Act also sets out penalties for certain offences, including wilfully obstructing any person in doing any of the acts authorized by the Act, wilfully filling up, destroying, damaging or displacing any trench or mark made under the Act, and wilfully doing any act prohibited under the Act.

The Act also provides for the seizure and presumption of property, and sets out provisions as to bail and the non-application of section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The Act also empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The Act also states that the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force relating to acquisition of land.