Summary:

THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (ADMINISTRATION) ACT, 1962, is an Act that provides for the administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and related matters. The Act is comprised of 11 sections and was enacted on 27th March, 1962.

Section 1 of the Act specifies the short title and commencement date of the Act.

Section 2 provides definitions for terms used in the Act, such as "Administrator," "appointed day," and "Goa, Daman and Diu."

Section 3 allots two seats to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu in the House of the People and makes necessary amendments to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and 1951.

Section 4 states that all judges, magistrates, and other officers and authorities who were exercising lawful functions in connection with the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu or any part thereof immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to exercise their respective functions in the same manner and to the same extent as before such commencement.

Section 5 provides that all laws in force immediately before the appointed day in Goa, Daman and Diu or any part thereof shall continue to be in force therein until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority. The Central Government may within two years from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications as may be necessary or expedient to facilitate the application of any such law in relation to the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu as a Union territory.

Section 6 empowers the Central Government to extend with restrictions or modifications as it thinks fit to Goa, Daman and Diu any enactment which is in force in a State at the date of the notification.

Section 7, which has been repealed, previously extended the jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court to Goa, Daman and Diu.

Section 8 provides that any court or other authority may construe any law in such manner not affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the court or other authority.

Section 9 validates all things done and actions taken in or with respect to Goa, Daman and Diu on or after the appointed day and before the commencement of this Act, by the Administrator or any other officer, whether civil or military, or by any other person acting under the orders of the Administrator or such officer, which have been done or taken in good faith.

Section 10 empowers the Central Government to make further provisions as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing any difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of this Act or in connection with the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu.

Section 11 repeals the Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Ordinance, 1962 and provides that anything done or any action taken in exercise of any of the powers conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act.