Summary:

THE VOLUNTARY SURRENDER OF SALARIES (EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION) ACT, 1961, is an Act that exempts a portion of the salary or allowances from being taxed for any person who has voluntarily surrendered it in the public interest. The Act is called the Voluntary Surrender of Salaries (Exemption from Taxation) Act, 1961, and its ID is ACT NO. 46 OF 1961. The Act was enacted on the 6th of December, 1961.

The Act has four sections. Section 1 is the Short title, which states that the Act may be called the Voluntary Surrender of Salaries (Exemption from Taxation) Act, 1961.

Section 2 is the Exemption from taxes on income in respect of salaries surrendered in favour of Government. This section explains that no income tax or super-tax shall be payable by any person who has volunteered to forego a part of their salary or allowances due to them for any period after the 31st of March, 1961. The salary or allowances surrendered in favour of the Central Government will not be included in the person's total income for the purposes of any law relating to taxation on income.

Section 3 states that the provisions of section 2 shall apply in relation to any allowances due to any such person as is referred to therein for any period after the 31st day of March, 1961, as they apply in relation to his salary.

Section 4 provides for the Power to make rules. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days.

Section 5 is the Repeal. The Voluntary Surrender of Salaries (Exemption from Taxation) Act, 1950 (61 of 1950), is hereby repealed. Notwithstanding such repeal, any declaration made under the said Act shall be deemed to be a declaration made for the purposes of this Act.

The Act also includes a footnote that states that certain words were substituted by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15-5-1986).