Summary:
The Textiles Committee Act, 1963 establishes a Committee for ensuring the quality of textiles and textile machinery in India. The Act extends to the whole of India and came into force on December 3, 1963. The Committee is a body corporate with perpetual succession and the power to acquire, hold, and dispose of property, and to contract. The Committee consists of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Joint Secretary to the Government of India, and other members appointed by the Central Government who have special knowledge or practical experience in matters relating to the textile industry and trade and the manufacture of textile machinery. The functions of the Committee include ensuring standard qualities of textiles, promoting export of textiles and textile machinery, establishing and recognizing standard specifications for textiles and packing materials used in the packing of textiles or textile machinery, and providing for the inspection and examination of textiles, textile machinery, and packing materials. The Committee may also collect statistics, advise on all matters relating to the development of the textile industry, and provide for such other matters as may be prescribed. The Committee has the power to exercise all such powers as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act. The Act also imposes a cess on all textiles and textile machinery manufactured in India, which is collected by the Committee and used for the purposes of this Act. The proceeds of the duty of excise collected under section 5A, reduced by the cost of collection as determined by the Central Government, shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, pay to the Committee from out of such proceeds, such sums of money as it thinks fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. The Act also provides for the establishment of a Tribunal to exercise the powers and discharge the functions conferred or imposed on the Tribunal by or under this Act. The Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The Act also provides for the recovery of duty of excise and the power to exempt. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt such variety of textiles or such textiles machinery as may be specified in the notification from the whole or any part of the duty of excise leviable under section 5A. The Act also provides for the payment of proceeds of cess to the Committee, grants by the Central Government to the Committee, the constitution of a Fund, standing or ad hoc Committee, officers and other employees of the Committee, transfer of service of existing employees to the Committee, inspection, levy of fees for inspection and examination, accounts and audit, delegation of powers and duties, acts or proceedings of the Committee not to be invalidated, officers and employees of the Committee to be public servants, power to prohibit exports and internal marketing of textiles and textile machinery, offences by companies, procedure for prosecution, jurisdiction of courts, protection of action taken under the Act, power to make rules, and power to make regulations. The Act also repeals the Cotton Textiles Fund Ordinance, 1944 and provides for the transfer of all moneys at the credit of the Cotton Textiles Fund established under the repealed Ordinance immediately before the said date to the Textiles Fund referred to in section 7 of this Act.