Summary:
The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 (Act No. 33 of 1969) was enacted on 31st August, 1969. The Act provides for the solemnization of marriages of citizens of India outside India and for the registration of such marriages. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "degrees of prohibited relationship," "district," "foreign country," "Marriage Officer," and "prescribed."

Chapters I and II of the Act deal with the appointment of Marriage Officers and the solemnization of foreign marriages, respectively. A marriage between parties one of whom at least is a citizen of India may be solemnized under this Act by or before a Marriage Officer in a foreign country if certain conditions are fulfilled, such as neither party having a spouse living, both parties being of a certain age, and the parties not being within the degrees of prohibited relationship. The parties to the marriage are required to give notice of the intended marriage to the Marriage Officer in the district where at least one of the parties has resided for a period of not less than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given. The Marriage Officer is required to keep a Marriage Notice Book and cause the notice to be published in his office and in India and in the country or countries in which the parties are ordinarily resident. Any person may object to the marriage on the ground that it would contravene one or more of the conditions specified in section 4, and the Marriage Officer shall not solemnize the marriage until he has inquired into the matter of the objection and is satisfied that it ought not to prevent the solemnization of the marriage or the objection is withdrawn by the person making it.

Chapter III of the Act deals with the registration of foreign marriages solemnized under other laws. A Marriage Officer may, upon payment of the prescribed fee, register a marriage that has been duly solemnized in a foreign country in accordance with the law of that country between parties of whom one at least was a citizen of India, if a party to the marriage informs the Marriage Officer in writing that he or she desires the marriage to be registered under this section. No marriage shall be registered under this section unless it satisfies the conditions mentioned in section 4.

Chapter IV of the Act deals with matrimonial relief in respect of foreign marriages. The provisions of Chapters IV, V, VI, and VII of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, shall apply in relation to marriages solemnized under this Act and to any other marriage solemnized in a foreign country between parties of whom one at least is a citizen of India as they apply in relation to marriages solemnized under that Act. Every petition for relief under Chapter V or Chapter VI of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, as made applicable to the marriages referred to in sub-section (1) shall be presented to the district court within the local limits of whose ordinary civil jurisdiction the respondent is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition or the husband and wife last resided together or the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, provided that the respondent is at that time residing outside India.

Chapter V of the Act deals with penalties. Any person whose marriage is solemnized or deemed to have been solemnized under this Act and who, during the subsistence of his marriage, contracts any other marriage in India shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 494 and section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the marriage so contracted shall be void. Any citizen of India who procures a marriage of himself or herself be solemnized under this Act in contravention of the condition specified in clause (c) or clause (d) of section 4 shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to fifteen days, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Chapter VI of the Act deals with miscellaneous provisions. The Act does not affect the validity of a marriage solemnized in a foreign country otherwise than under this Act. The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

The Indian Foreign Marriage Act, 1903 (14 of 1903), is repealed by this Act.