Summary:

The Criminal Law Amendment (Amending) Act, 1966, is an Act further amending the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952. The Act has five sections.

Section 1 is the short title of the Act, which can be called the Criminal Law Amendment (Amending) Act, 1966.

Section 2 has been repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974, and it earlier amended section 8 of the principal Act.

Section 3 has also been repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974, and it earlier inserted a new section 11 of the principal Act.

Section 4 provides for validation and indemnity. It states that no trial or other proceeding held or taken before the 30th day of June, 1966, shall be called in question in any court merely on the ground that the court-martial or other authority had no jurisdiction by virtue of the provisions of the principal Act. All such trials, proceedings, and sentences shall be as valid and operative as if they had been held, taken, or passed in accordance with law.

Section 5 deals with pending cases. It states that cases pending immediately before the 30th day of June, 1966, before a special Judge in which one or more persons subject to military, naval or air force law is or are charged with and tried for an offence under the principal Act together with any other person or persons not so subject, and cases pending immediately before the said date before a special Judge in which one or more persons subject to military, naval or air force law is or are alone charged with and tried for an offence under the principal Act and charges have already been framed against such person or persons, shall be tried and disposed of by the special Judge.

Section 6 provides for the repeal and saving. It states that the Criminal Law Amendment (Amendment) Ordinance, 1966, is hereby repealed. However, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance or under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act or under the principal Act as amended by this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 30th day of June, 1966.

There is no schedule, annexure, appendix, or footnotes in the Act.