Summary:

THE DELHI (URBAN AREAS) TENANTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1961 is an Act to provide relief to the tenants of land in the urban areas of the Union territory of Delhi. The Act extends to the areas in the Union territory of Delhi which were included in a municipality or in a notified area under the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 or in a cantonment under the Cantonments Act, 1924, but does not apply to the areas owned by the Central Government or the Delhi Development Authority constituted under the Delhi Development Act, 1957, or any local authority.

The Act defines several terms, including "Chief Commissioner," "family," "land-holder," "person under disability," "tenant," and "tenancy." It sets out the grounds for ejectment of a tenant, which include non-payment of rent, failure to cultivate the land, sub-letting or transferring the tenancy in contravention of law or contract, and using the land in an unfit manner.

The Act also lays out certain protections for tenants, including the requirement that a tenant can only be ejected on one or more of the specified grounds, and the prohibition of ejectment during the pendency of a proceeding for ejectment. Additionally, the Act provides for the restoration of land to a tenant in certain cases, such as where a person under disability or a religious or charitable institution has taken possession of the land but failed to use it for the specified purpose within one year.

The Act sets a limit on the rent payable by a tenant, which cannot exceed one-fifth of the produce of the land or the money equivalent thereof. The Act also overrides any other law, custom, usage, agreement, decree, or order of court to the contrary, except as expressly provided.

The Chief Commissioner may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act, and any rules made under this section must be laid before both Houses of Parliament for a total period of thirty days. The Act repeals certain provisions of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887, the Agra Tenancy Act, 1901, and the Punjab Tenants (Security of Tenure) Act, 1950, as applicable to the areas to which this Act extends, but anything done or any action taken under those provisions that is not inconsistent with this Act shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.