Summary:

THE JAWAHARLAL NEHRU UNIVERSITY ACT, 1966

The Jawaharlal Nehru University Act, 1966 was enacted on 22nd December, 1966 to establish and incorporate a university in Delhi. The University is named 'Jawaharlal Nehru University'. The objects of the University are to disseminate and advance knowledge, wisdom and understanding by teaching and research and by the example and influence of its corporate life and in particular the objects set out in the First Schedule. The University has the power to provide for instruction including the method of correspondence courses in such branches of learning as the University may from time to time determine, and to make provision for research and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge. The University may establish within the Union territory of Delhi or outside that territory such Special Centres and Specialised Laboratories and such other units for research and instruction as are necessary for the furtherance of its objects. The University may hold examinations and grant diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees and other academic distinctions on, persons and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause. The University may create such teaching, administrative and other posts as the University may deem necessary, from time to time, and to make appointments thereto. The University may institute and award Fellowships, Scholarships, Exhibitions and prizes. The University may establish and maintain Colleges and Halls, to recognise, guide, supervise and control Halls not maintained by the University and other accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition. The University may regulate and enforce discipline among students and employees of the University and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed necessary. The University may determine and provide for examinations for admission into the University. The University may recognise for any purpose, either in whole or in part, any institution or members or students thereof on such terms and conditions as may, from time to time, be prescribed and to withdraw such recognition. The University may co-operate with any other University, authority or association or any other public or private body having in view the promotion of purposes and objects similar to those of the University for such purposes as may be agreed upon, on such terms and conditions as may, from time to time, be prescribed. The University may enter into any agreement for the incorporation in the University of any other institution and for taking over its rights, properties and liabilities and for any other purpose not repugnant to this Act. The University may demand and receive payment of such fees and other charges as may be prescribed, from time to time. The University may receive donations and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property movable or immovable, including trust or endowed property within or outside the Union territory of Delhi, for the purposes or objects of the University, and to invest funds in such manner as the University thinks fit. The University may make provision for research and advisory services and to provide for the printing, reproduction and publication of research and other work which may be issued by the University. The University may borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the University property, money for the purposes of the University. The University may do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of the objects of the University. The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to all Colleges and recognised institutions. The Jawaharlal Nehru University shall not grant recognition, either in whole or in part, to any institution which has already been recognised by the University of Delhi unless the Central Government, after consultation with the University of Delhi, authorises the Jawaharlal Nehru University to do so. The first Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor of the University and the first members of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members so long as they continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of “Jawaharlal Nehru University”. The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall sue and be sued by the said name. The Act contains 27 sections and three schedules. The First Schedule sets out the objects of the University. The Second Schedule contains the Statutes of the University. The Third Schedule contains the forms.