Summary:
The Pondicherry (Administration) Act, 1962, is an Act to provide for the administration of Pondicherry and for matters connected therewith. It extends to the whole of Pondicherry and came into force on the 16th day of August, 1962. The Act includes definitions for various terms used throughout the Act, such as "Administrator," "appointed day," "former French Establishments," "High Court," "law," "Pondicherry," and "Treaty of Cession."

The Act states that all courts, tribunals, authorities, and officers in the former French Establishments that were exercising lawful functions in connection with the administration of those Establishments or any part thereof shall continue to exercise their respective powers and jurisdiction and perform their respective duties and functions in the same manner and to the same extent as before the appointed day in connection with the administration of Pondicherry.

All laws in force immediately before the appointed day in the former French Establishments or any part thereof shall continue to be in force in Pondicherry until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority. The Central Government may, within three years from the appointed day, make adaptations and modifications to such laws as may be necessary or expedient.

All property and assets within Pondicherry that, immediately before the appointed day, vested in the Government of the French Republic shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in the Treaty of Cession, vest in the Union. The Central Government shall have all rights, liabilities, and obligations in relation to or arising out of the administration of the former French Establishments.

All taxes, duties, cesses, and fees that were being lawfully levied in the former French Establishments or any part thereof shall continue to be levied in Pondicherry and to be applied to the same purposes until other provision is made by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.

The Central Government may extend with restrictions and modifications to Pondicherry any enactment that is in force in a State at the date of the notification. The jurisdiction of the High Court shall extend to Pondicherry as from the 6th day of November, 1962. The High Court shall have all such jurisdiction as under the law in force immediately before the appointed day was exercisable in respect of the former French Establishments by the Cour de Cassation, the Cour Superieur d’ Arbitrage, and the Counseil d’ Etat of France.

Any person who is entitled to practise before the Tribunal Superieur d’ Appeal at Pondicherry shall be recognized as an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court in relation to cases coming before the High Court from Pondicherry. The High Court may make rules to provide for the translation of any papers filed in the High Court, the preparation of paper books for hearing all appeals, the copying, typing, or printing of any such papers or translations and the recovery from the persons at whose instance or on whose behalf papers are filed of the expenses thereby incurred, the procedure to be followed in the High Court, and the approval, admission, enrolment, removal, and suspension of advocates from Pondicherry.

Every order or decree purported to have been made by the Cour de Cassation, the Cour Superieur d’ Arbitrage, or the Counseil d’ Etat of France during the period commencing on the first day of November, 1954, and ending on the appointed day, in any appeal or other proceeding from, or in respect of any judgment, decree, or order of any court, tribunal, or other authority in the former French Establishments shall be deemed to have been validly made in accordance with law and shall for all purposes have effect as if it were an order or a decree made by the High Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred by this Act.

The periods of limitation for appeals to the High Court are set out in the Act, and the time taken for obtaining a certified copy of the judgment, order, report, and recommendation, appealed against, as the case may be, shall be excluded. In computing the period of limitation, any period during which an appeal could not be filed or a proceeding could not be instituted because the jurisdiction of the High Court did not extend to Pondicherry shall be excluded. References in any law in force in Pondicherry to the Cour de Cassation, the Court Superieur d’ Arbitrage, or the Counsel d’ Etat shall be construed as references to the High Court. For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in relation to Pondicherry, any court or other authority may construe any such law in such manner not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the court or other authority. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law in force in Pondicherry. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make any such provisions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.