Summary:

The Asian Development Bank Act, 1966, is an Act to implement the international agreement for the establishment and operation of the Asian Development Bank and for matters connected therewith. The Act has seven sections and a schedule.

Section 1 of the Act deals with the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. It may be called the Asian Development Bank Act, 1966, and extends to the whole of India. The Act shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Section 2 of the Act deals with the definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, (a) “Agreement” means the Agreement for the establishment and operation of the international body known as the Asian Development Bank; (b) “Bank” means the Asian Development Bank established under the Agreement.

Section 3 of the Act deals with payments to the Bank. There shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, all such sums as may, from time to time, be required for the purpose of paying, (a) the subscriptions payable by the Central Government to the Bank under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of Article 5 of the Agreement; (b) any commission, fees or other charges payable by the Central Government to the Bank under Article 16 of the Agreement; (c) any sums payable by the Central Government to the Bank under paragraph 1 of Article 25 of the Agreement.

Section 4 of the Act deals with the Reserve Bank to be the depository for the Bank. The Reserve Bank of India shall be the depository of the Indian currency holdings of the Bank.

Section 5 of the Act deals with the conferment of status and certain immunities, exemptions, and privileges on the Bank and conferment of certain immunities, exemptions, and privileges on its officers and employees. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, the provisions of the Agreement set out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out therein.

Section 6 of the Act deals with the power to make rules. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Section 7 of the Act deals with notifications issued under section 5 and rules made under section 6 to be laid before Parliament. Every notification issued under sub-section (2) of section 5 and every rule made under section 6 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is issued or made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or, as the case may be, in the rule, or both Houses agree that the notification or rule should not be issued or made, the notification or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or rule.

The Schedule of the Act deals with the provisions of the Agreement which shall have the force of law. It includes Chapter VIII, which deals with the status, immunities, exemptions, and privileges of the Bank. The provisions of this Chapter shall enable the Bank effectively to fulfill its purpose and carry out the functions entrusted to it. The Bank shall possess full juridical personality and, in particular, full capacity to contract, to acquire, and dispose of immovable and movable property and to institute legal proceedings. The Bank shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal process, except in cases arising out of or in connection with the exercise of its powers to borrow money, to guarantee obligations, or to buy and sell or underwrite the sale of securities, in which cases actions may be brought against the Bank in a court of competent jurisdiction in the territory of a country in which the Bank has its principal or a branch office, or has appointed an agent for the purpose of accepting service or notice of process, or has issued or guaranteed securities. Property and assets of the Bank shall, wheresoever located and by whomsoever held, be immune from all forms of seizure, attachment or execution before the delivery of final judgment against the Bank. Property and assets of the Bank, wheresoever located and by whomsoever held, shall be immune from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation or any other form of taking or foreclosure by executive or legislative action. The archives of the Bank and, in general, all documents belonging to it, or held by it, shall be inviolable, wherever located. To the extent necessary to carry out the purpose and functions of the Bank effectively, and subject to the provisions of this Agreement, all property and assets of the Bank shall be free from restrictions, regulations, controls, and moratoria of any nature. Official communications of the Bank shall be accorded by each member treatment not less favorable than that it accords to the official communications of any other member. All Governors, Directors, alternates, officers, and employees of the Bank, including experts performing missions for the Bank, shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts performed by them in their official capacity, except when the Bank waives the immunity. They shall be accorded the same immunities from immigration restrictions, alien registration requirements, and national service obligations, and the same facilities as regards exchange regulations, as are accorded by members to the representatives, officials, and employees of comparable rank of other members. They shall be granted the same treatment in respect of traveling facilities as is accorded by members to representatives, officials, and employees of comparable rank of other members. The Bank, its assets, property, income, and its operations and transactions, shall be exempt from all taxation and from all customs duties. The Bank shall also be exempt from any obligation for the payment, withholding, or collection of any tax or duty. No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emoluments paid by the Bank to Directors, alternates, officers, or employees of the Bank, including experts performing missions for the Bank, except where a member deposits with its instrument of ratification or acceptance a declaration that such member retains for itself and its political sub-divisions the right to tax salaries and emoluments paid by the Bank to citizens or nationals of such member. No tax of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or security issued by the Bank, including any dividend or interest thereon, by whomsoever held, which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is issued by the Bank or if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the place or currency in which it is issued, made payable, or paid, or the location of any office or place of business maintained by the Bank. No tax of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or security guaranteed by the Bank, including any dividend or interest thereon, by whomsoever held, which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is guaranteed by the Bank or if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the location of any office or place of business maintained by the Bank. The Bank, as its discretion, may waive any of the privileges, immunities, and exemptions conferred under this Chapter in any case or instance, in such manner and upon such conditions as it may determine to be appropriate in the best interests of the Bank.