Summary:

THE DELHI URBAN ART COMMISSION ACT, 1973 was enacted on 1st January, 1974 with the purpose of preserving, developing, and maintaining the aesthetic quality of urban and environmental design within Delhi. The Act establishes the Delhi Urban Art Commission (DUAC) as a body corporate with the power to acquire, hold, and dispose of property, and to contract. The Commission consists of a Chairman and up to four other members appointed by the Central Government, who have sensibility and interest in the plastic and visual arts and urban environment, or possess special knowledge or practical experience in architecture or art.

The Commission has the power to advise the Central Government on matters related to the aesthetic quality of urban and environmental design within Delhi, and to provide advice and guidance to local bodies on projects of building operations or engineering operations or any development proposal that affects or is likely to affect the skyline or the aesthetic quality of surroundings or any public amenity provided therein. The Commission is responsible for scrutinizing, approving, rejecting, or modifying proposals related to the development of district centers, civic centers, areas earmarked for Government administrative buildings and for residential complexes, public parks and public gardens, re-development of specific areas, plans, architectural expressions and visual appearance of new buildings, conservation, preservation and beautification of monumental buildings, public parks and public gardens, under passes, over-passes and regulations of street furniture and hoardings, location and plans of power houses, water towers, television and other communication towers and other allied structures, and any other projects or lay-out which is calculated to beautify Delhi or to add to its cultural vitality or to enhance the quality of the surroundings thereof.

The Commission has the same powers as a civil court in respect of summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person, requiring discovery and production of any documents, receiving evidence on affidavits, requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any office, and any other matter which may be prescribed by rules.

The Commission has its own fund and may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act. The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such times and in such manner as he thinks fit.

The Commission may delegate its powers and functions to the Chairman, any other member or any officer of the Commission, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the order. The members and officers of the Commission are deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any member or officer of the Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.

The Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act and the Commission may make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder for regulating the meetings of the Commission and the procedure for conducting business thereat, regulating the manner in which and the purposes for which persons may be associated with the Commission under section 8, determining the terms and conditions of service of persons appointed by the Commission under sub-section (3) of section 9, and any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by regulations. Every rule and regulation made by the Central Government and the Commission shall be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.