Summary:

THE OIL INDUSTRY (DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1974 is an Act to provide for the establishment of a Board for the development of the oil industry in India. The Act extends to the whole of India and establishes the Oil Industry Development Board, which is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal. The Board has the power to acquire, hold, and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and sue and be sued. The Board consists of members appointed by the Central Government, including representatives from the Ministry or Ministries of the Central Government dealing with petroleum and chemicals, the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with finance, Corporations engaged in activities related to the oil industry, and representatives of labor employed in the oil industry. The Central Government also appoints the Chairman of the Board. The term of office of the members and the manner of filling vacancies among them are prescribed. The Board may constitute Standing Committees or ad hoc Committees for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the Board or for inquiring into, reporting, and advising on, any matter which the Board may refer to them. No act or proceeding of the Board or of any Committee constituted under sub-section (6) shall be invalidated merely by reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or such Committee, or any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board or such Committee, or any irregularity in the procedure of the Board or such Committee not affecting the merits of the case. Every person appointed as a whole-time member of the Board is entitled to such salary and allowances and such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund, and other matters as may be fixed by the Central Government. The other members of the Board and such of the members of any ad hoc Committee constituted under sub-section (6) of section 3 as are not members of the Board are entitled to such allowances and such other conditions of service as may be prescribed. The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board, who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Board. The Secretary shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund, and other matters as may be fixed by the Central Government. The Board may appoint such consultants as may be necessary for the performance of its functions on such terms and conditions as it may determine from time to time. The Board may also appoint such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the performance of its functions and pay them such salaries and allowances as it may determine from time to time. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Board shall render, in such manner, to such extent, and on such terms and conditions as it may deem fit, financial and other assistance for the promotion of all such measures as are, in its opinion, conducive to the development of the oil industry. The Board may charge such fees or receive such commission as it may deem appropriate for any services rendered by it in the exercise of its functions. The Board may transfer for consideration any instrument relating to loans or advances granted by it to any oil industrial concern or other person. The Board may do all such things as may be incidental to or consequential upon the discharge of its functions under this Act. Before rendering any assistance to any oil industrial concern or other person, the Board shall have regard to such directions as the Central Government may issue in this behalf and shall satisfy itself that such assistance is not contrary to such directions and is necessary as a matter of priority in the interests of the development of the oil industry. In rendering any assistance to any oil industrial concern or other person, the Board shall impose such conditions as may be prescribed and may also impose such additional conditions as it may think necessary or expedient for protecting the interests of the Board and for securing that the assistance rendered by it is put to the best use by such concern or other person.