Summary:

The Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972, is an Act further to amend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. The Act received the assent of the President on [30th November, 1972.]

The Act consists of 15 sections, with the first section specifying the short title and commencement of the Act. The remaining provisions of the Act, except section 1 and sub-section (1) of section 14, came into force on the date appointed by the Central Government through a notification in the Official Gazette.

The Act repeals certain sections and inserts new sections in the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. However, these amendments have been repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1978, with effect from 26-5-1978.

The Act extends the principal Act to the Kohima and Mokokchung districts in the State of Nagaland. The amendments made to the principal Act by this Act shall come into force in the Kohima and Mokokchung districts in the State of Nagaland on the date on which this sub-section comes into force.

The Act also validates assessments, re-assessments, levies, or collections of any tax made or purporting to have been made before the commencement of this section. Any such assessment, re-assessment, levy, or collection or action or thing taken or done in relation to such assessment, re-assessment, levy, or collection under the provisions of the principal Act before the commencement of this section shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if such assessment, re-assessment, levy, or collection or action or thing had been made, taken, or done under the principal Act as amended by this Act.

The Act also clarifies that nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing any person from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, the assessment, re-assessment, levy, or collection of such tax for any period or from claiming a refund of any tax paid by him in excess of the amount due from him under the principal Act as amended by this Act.