Summary:
The Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971, is a law that aims to prevent insults to national honor, specifically in relation to the Indian National Flag and the Constitution of India. This Act extends to the whole of India.

Section 1 of this Act states the short title and extent of the Act. The title of this Act is the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971, and it applies to the entire country of India.

Section 2 of this Act deals with insults to the Indian National Flag and the Constitution of India. According to this section, any person who burns, mutilates, defaces, defiles, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon, or shows disrespect to the Indian National Flag or the Constitution of India or any part thereof, whether by words or acts in a public place or in any other place within public view, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Explanation 1 to this section clarifies that comments expressing disapprobation or criticism of the Constitution or of the Indian National Flag or of any measures of the Government with a view to obtain an amendment of the Constitution of India or an alteration of the Indian National Flag by lawful means do not constitute an offence under this section.

Explanation 2 defines the term "Indian National Flag" to include any picture, painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible representation of the Indian National Flag, or of any part or parts thereof, made of any substance or represented on any substance.

Explanation 3 defines the term "public place" to mean any place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public and includes any public conveyance.

Explanation 4 further defines the term "disrespect to the Indian National Flag" to include a gross affront or indignity offered to the Indian National Flag, dipping the Indian National Flag in salute to any person or thing, flying the Indian National Flag at half-mast except on occasions on which the Indian National Flag is flown at half-mast on public buildings in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government, using the Indian National Flag as a drapery in any form whatsoever except in State funerals or armed forces or other para-military forces funerals, and other similar acts of disrespect.

Section 3 of this Act deals with the prevention of singing of the Indian National Anthem and causing disturbance to any assembly engaged in such singing. According to this section, any person who intentionally prevents the singing of the Indian National Anthem or causes disturbance to any assembly engaged in such singing shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 3A of this Act deals with enhanced penalty on second and subsequent convictions. According to this section, any person who, having already been convicted of an offence under section 2 or section 3, is again convicted of any such offence shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year.

There are no schedules, annexures, appendices, or forms associated with this Act.

Footnotes 1, 2, and 3 refer to amendments made to this Act by the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 2005; the Prevention of Insults to National Honour (Amendment) Act, 2003; and the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Amendment Act, 2003, respectively.