Summary:

THE NORTH-EASTERN COUNCIL ACT, 1971 is an Act to provide for the setting up of a Council for the north-eastern areas of India to be called the North-Eastern Council. The Act comes into force on a date appointed by the Central Government. The Council consists of the Governors of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura, the Chief Ministers of these States, and three members nominated by the President. The President may also nominate a Union Minister to be a member of the Council and nominate the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Council.

The Council is a regional planning body for the north-eastern area and gives priority to schemes and projects which will benefit two or more States. The Council reviews the implementation of the projects and schemes included in the regional plan and recommends measures for effecting coordination among the Governments of the States concerned in the matter of implementation of such projects and schemes. The Council also recommends the manner in which a project or scheme may be executed or implemented and managed or maintained, the benefits therefrom may be shared, or the expenditure thereon may be incurred. The Council may recommend to the Government of the State concerned or to the Central Government the undertaking of necessary surveys and investigation of projects in any State represented in the Council to facilitate consideration of the feasibility of including new projects in the regional plan.

The Council reviews from time to time the measures taken by the States represented in the Council for the maintenance of security and public order therein and recommends to the Governments of the States concerned further measures necessary in this regard. The Council has such power as may be delegated to it by the Central Government.

The Council shall meet at least twice in a year and observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as it may lay down from time to time. The Chairman or in his absence the Vice-Chairman, if any, or in the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the Council. The proceedings of every meeting of the Council shall be forwarded to the Central Government and also to the Government of each State represented on the Council.

Each of the Ministries of the Central Government dealing with matters relating to Defence, Finance, Home Affairs and the Department of Development of North-Eastern Region shall nominate an officer to attend the meetings of the Council. The Council shall have a secretarial staff consisting of a Secretary, a Planning Adviser, a Financial Adviser and a Security Adviser and such other officers and employees as the Central Government may, by order, determine. The administrative expenses of the said office, including the salaries and allowances payable to, or in respect of, members of the secretarial staff of the Council, shall be borne by the Central Government out of the moneys provided by Parliament for the purpose.

The North-Eastern Council Act, 1970 (26 of 1970) is hereby repealed.