Summary:

THE CONSERVATION OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND PREVENTION OF SMUGGLING ACT, 1974, is an Act to provide for preventive detention in certain cases for the purposes of conservation and augmentation of Foreign Exchange and prevention of smuggling activities and for matters connected therewith. The Act extends to the whole of India and came into force on the 20th day of December, 1974.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "appropriate Government", "detention order", "foreigner", "Indian customs waters", "smuggling", "State Government", and "Jammu and Kashmir".

The Act empowers the Central Government or the State Government or any officer of the Central Government or a State Government, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary or Secretary, respectively, to make an order directing that a person be detained if they are satisfied that it is necessary to prevent the person from acting in any manner prejudicial to the conservation or augmentation of foreign exchange or from smuggling goods, abetting the smuggling of goods, engaging in transporting or concealing or keeping smuggled goods, dealing in smuggled goods, or harboring persons engaged in smuggling goods or in abetting the smuggling of goods.

The Act also lays down the procedure for the execution of detention orders, the power to regulate the place and conditions of detention, and the grounds of detention severability. The Act also specifies that detention orders are not invalid or inoperative on certain grounds and provides powers in relation to absconding persons.

The Act also provides for the constitution of Advisory Boards for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (4), and sub-clause (c) of clause (7), of article 22 of the Constitution. The Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and two other persons possessing the qualifications specified in sub-clause (a) of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution. The appropriate Government shall, within five weeks from the date of detention of a person under a detention order, make a reference in respect thereof to the Advisory Board constituted under clause (a) to enable the Advisory Board to make the report under sub-clause (a) of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution.

The Act also specifies the circumstances under which persons may be detained for periods longer than three months without obtaining the opinion of Advisory Board and the modification of section 8 in such cases.

The Act also specifies the maximum period for which any person may be detained in pursuance of any detention order and the power of the appropriate Government to revoke or modify the detention order at any earlier time.

The Act also provides for the temporary release of persons detained and special provisions for dealing with emergency.

The Act also provides for the protection of action taken in good faith and the repeal of the Maintenance of Internal Security (Amendment) Ordinance, 1974.

The Act also contains a schedule and various footnotes.