Summary:

The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 is an Act to provide for the forfeiture of illegally acquired properties of smugglers and foreign exchange manipulators and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act applies to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Act defines illegally acquired property as any property acquired by a person either before or after the commencement of this Act, wholly or partly out of or by means of any income, earnings or assets derived or obtained from or attributable to any activity prohibited by or under any law for the time being in force relating to any matter in respect of which Parliament has power to make laws, or any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, wholly or partly out of or by means of any income, earning or assets in respect of which any such law has been contravened, or any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, wholly or partly out of or by means of any income, earnings or assets the source of which cannot be proved and which cannot be shown to be attributable to any act or thing done in respect of any matter in relation to which Parliament has no power to make laws, or any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, for a consideration, or by any means, wholly or partly traceable to any property referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (iii) or the income or earnings from such property. The Act prohibits any person to whom this Act applies from holding any illegally acquired property either by himself or through any other person on his behalf. The Act also provides for the appointment of a competent authority, who may serve a notice upon any person to indicate the sources of his income, earnings or assets and to show cause why all or any of such properties, as the case may be, should not be declared to be illegally acquired properties and forfeited to the Central Government under this Act. The Appellate Tribunal is constituted to hear appeals against the orders made by the competent authority. The Act also provides for the powers of a civil court that may be exercised by the competent authority and the Appellate Tribunal, and the information to be furnished to the competent authority by any officer or authority of the Central Government or a State Government or a local authority. Certain officers are empowered and required to assist the competent authority and the Appellate Tribunal. The Act also provides for the power of the competent authority to require certain officers to exercise certain powers, and the power to take possession of the property. The Act also provides for the rectification of mistakes, the burden of proof, fine in lieu of forfeiture, and the protection of action taken in good faith. The Act has overriding effect and does not apply to certain properties held in trust. The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Ordinance, 1975 is repealed.