Summary:
The Marine Products Export Development Authority Act, 1972 (Act No. 13 of 1972) was enacted on 20th April, 1972, with the main objective of providing for the establishment of an Authority for the development of the marine products industry under the control of the Union and for matters connected therewith. The Act has 34 sections divided into six chapters, and one schedule.

Chapter I, Preliminary, consists of three sections. Section 1 deals with the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. Section 2 declares that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the marine products industry. Section 3 provides definitions for various terms used in the Act.

Chapter II, Marine Products Export Development Authority, consists of six sections. Section 4 establishes the Marine Products Export Development Authority and defines its composition, powers, and functions. Section 5 states that the acts or proceedings of the Authority or its Committees shall not be invalidated by reason of any vacancy, defect in appointment, or irregularity in procedure. Section 6 provides for the salary and allowances of the Chairman. Section 7 deals with the appointment of the Director of Marine Products Export Development and other staff. Section 8 provides for the appointment of Committees of the Authority.

Chapter III, Registration, consists of three sections. Section 11 mandates the registration of fishing vessels, processing plants, storage premises for marine products, and conveyances used for the transport of marine products. Section 12 provides for the application, cancellation, fee payable, and other matters relating to registration. Section 13 requires the owners to furnish returns to the Authority.

Chapter IV, Finance, Accounts, and Audit, consists of six sections. Section 14, which has been repealed, dealt with the imposition of a cess on marine products exported. Section 15, also repealed, dealt with the payment of proceeds of cess to the Authority. Section 16 provides for grants and loans by the Central Government. Section 17 constitutes the Marine Products Export Development Fund. Section 18 provides for borrowing powers of the Authority. Section 19 deals with accounts and audit.

Chapter V, Control by Central Government, consists of three sections. Section 20 empowers the Central Government to prohibit or control imports and exports of marine products. Section 21 directs the Authority to carry out the directions issued by the Central Government for the efficient administration of the Act. Section 22 requires the Authority to furnish returns and reports to the Central Government.

Chapter VI, Miscellaneous, consists of nine sections. Section 23 imposes a penalty for making false returns. Section 24 imposes penalties for obstructing a member or officer of the Authority in the discharge of his duties and for failure to produce books and records. Section 25 imposes other penalties. Section 26 deals with offenses by companies. Section 27 provides for the jurisdiction of courts. Section 28 provides for previous sanction of the Central Government for prosecution. Section 29 provides for protection of action taken in good faith. Section 30 empowers the Central Government to delegate its powers. Section 31 provides for the suspension of operation of the Act. Section 32 states that the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. Section 33 empowers the Central Government to make rules. Section 34 empowers the Authority to make regulations.

The Schedule to the Act provides for the transfer of certain assets and liabilities of the Marine Products Export Promotion Council to the Authority.