Summary:

THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972 (ACT NO. 39 OF 1972) is an Act to provide for a scheme for the payment of gratuity to employees engaged in factories, mines, oilfields, plantations, ports, railway companies, shops or other establishments and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act applies to establishments, factories, mines, oilfields, plantations, ports, railway companies, or shops where ten or more persons are employed or were employed in the preceding twelve months. The Act defines various terms such as "appropriate Government," "completed year of service," "continuous service," "controlling authority," "employee," "employer," "factory," "family," "major port," "mine," "notification," "oilfield," "plantation," "port," "prescribed," "railway company," "retirement," "superannuation," and "wages."

The Act provides for the payment of gratuity to an employee who has completed five years of continuous service in the establishment, on his superannuation, retirement, resignation, death, or disablement due to accident or disease. The amount of gratuity payable is calculated based on the rate of wages last drawn by the employee and the length of his continuous service. The maximum amount of gratuity payable is notified by the Central Government from time to time.

The Act also provides for the appointment of a controlling authority by the appropriate Government to administer and enforce the provisions of the Act. The controlling authority is responsible for the administration of the Act and different controlling authorities may be appointed for different areas.

The Act exempts any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company, or shop from the operation of the provisions of this Act if the employees in such establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company, or shop are in receipt of gratuity or pensionary benefits not less favorable than the benefits conferred under this Act. The appropriate Government may also exempt any employee or class of employees employed in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company, or shop from the operation of the provisions of this Act if such employee or class of employees are in receipt of gratuity or pensionary benefits not less favorable than the benefits conferred under this Act.

The Act requires every employee who has completed one year of service to make a nomination for the purpose of the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 4. An employee may, in his nomination, distribute the amount of gratuity payable to him under this Act amongst more than one nominee. If an employee has a family at the time of making a nomination, the nomination shall be made in favor of one or more members of his family. If the employee subsequently acquires a family, such nomination shall forthwith become invalid and the employee shall make a fresh nomination in favor of one or more members of his family. A nomination may be modified by an employee at any time by giving written notice to his employer.

The Act provides for the determination of the amount of gratuity payable to an employee and the procedure for payment of such gratuity. If there is any dispute as to the amount of gratuity payable to an employee or as to the admissibility of any claim of, or in relation to, an employee for payment of gratuity, or as to the person entitled to receive the gratuity, the employer shall deposit with the controlling authority such amount as he admits to be payable by him as gratuity. The controlling authority shall, after due inquiry and after giving the parties to the dispute a reasonable opportunity of being heard, determine the matter or matters in dispute and if, as a result of such inquiry any amount is found to be payable to the employee, the controlling authority shall direct the employer to pay such amount or, as the case may be, such amount as reduced by the amount already deposited by the employer. The controlling authority shall pay the amount deposited, including the excess amount, if any, deposited by the employer, to the person entitled thereto.

The Act empowers the appropriate Government to appoint Inspectors for the purposes of this Act. The Inspectors may exercise various powers for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the provisions of this Act or the conditions, if any, of any exemption granted thereunder, have been complied with. The Act also provides for the recovery of gratuity and penalties for non-compliance with the provisions of the Act. The Act overrides other enactments, instruments, or contracts having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act. The appropriate Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days. If both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be.