Summary:
THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1970, is an Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of certain banking companies to ensure control of the heights of the economy and to meet progressively, and serve better, the needs of development of the economy in conformity with national policy and objectives. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as 'appointed day', 'banking company', 'corresponding new bank', 'Custodian', 'existing bank', 'prescribed', 'Schedule', and words and expressions used in the Act.

Chapter I of the Act deals with preliminary matters, including the short title and commencement of the Act, and definitions of terms used in the Act.

Chapter II of the Act deals with the transfer of the undertakings of existing banks and share capital of the corresponding new banks. Section 3 of the Act establishes corresponding new banks and specifies their business, capital structure, and management. Section 3A of the Act prohibits the entry of any notice of trust on the register, and Section 3B of the Act deems the register of beneficial owners maintained by a depository to be a register of shareholders for the purpose of this Act.

Chapter III of the Act deals with payment of compensation to existing banks for the transfer of their undertakings to corresponding new banks. Section 6 of the Act specifies the amount of compensation payable to each existing bank and the options available to them for receiving the compensation.

Chapter IV of the Act deals with the management of corresponding new banks. Section 7 of the Act specifies the head office and management of corresponding new banks, and Section 8 of the Act requires corresponding new banks to be guided by the directions of the Central Government in regard to matters of policy involving public interest. Section 9 of the Act empowers the Central Government to make a scheme for carrying out the provisions of this Act, including the capital structure of the corresponding new bank, the constitution of the Board of Directors, and the reconstitution of any corresponding new bank into two or more corporations or the transfer of the whole or any part of the undertaking of a corresponding new bank to any other corresponding new bank or banking institution.

Chapter V of the Act deals with miscellaneous matters. Section 10 of the Act deals with the closure of accounts and disposal of profits of corresponding new banks. Section 11 of the Act deems every corresponding new bank to be an Indian company and a company in which the public are substantially interested for the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961. Section 12 of the Act deals with the removal of the Chairman from office, and Section 12A of the Act prohibits the payment of bonus to officers or other employees of a corresponding new bank, except in accordance with the provisions of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965. Section 13 of the Act deals with obligations as to fidelity and secrecy, and Section 14 of the Act deems every Custodian of a corresponding new bank to be a public servant for the purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code. Section 15 of the Act deals with certain defects not invalidating acts or proceedings, and Section 16 of the Act provides for indemnity to certain officers and employees of corresponding new banks. Section 16A of the Act deals with arrangements with corresponding new banks on appointment of directors, and Section 17 of the Act deals with references to existing banks on and from the commencement of this Act. Section 18 of the Act deals with dissolution, and Section 18A of the Act empowers the Central Government to supersede the Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank in certain cases. Section 19 of the Act empowers the Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank to make regulations, and Section 20 of the Act amends certain enactments. Section 21 of the Act deals with repeal and savings.

The First Schedule to the Act lists the existing banks and their corresponding new banks, and the Second Schedule to the Act specifies the amount of compensation payable to each existing bank. The Third Schedule to the Act contains a declaration of fidelity and secrecy to be made by every Custodian, Director, member of a Local Board, member of a Local Committee, auditor, adviser, officer, or other employee of a corresponding new bank.