The Election Laws (Extension to Sikkim) Act, 1976, extends the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to the State of Sikkim. The Acts will come into force on the 9th day of September, 1975.

The Act specifies that any reference in the extended Acts to a law not in force or to a functionary not in existence in the State of Sikkim shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force or to the corresponding functionary in existence in that State. If any question arises as to who such corresponding functionary is, the Central Government shall decide and its decision shall be final.

The Election Laws (Extension to Sikkim) Ordinance, 1975 is repealed, but anything done or any action taken under or by virtue of the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under or by virtue of this Act.

The Schedule to the Act contains the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 as amended.

The Representation of the People Act, 1950 is amended to provide for the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Sikkim and Assembly constituencies. The total number of seats to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from Assembly constituencies shall be 32. Every Assembly constituency referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a single member constituency. In the Legislative Assembly so deemed to be duly constituted, the extent of each constituency and the reservation of seats shall be as provided for immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975.

The Representation of the People Act, 1950 is also amended to provide for conditions of registration as elector in Sangha constituency in Sikkim. Only the Sanghas belonging to monasteries, recognized for the purpose of the elections held in Sikkim in April, 1974, for forming the Assembly for Sikkim, shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll, and the said electoral roll shall, subject to the provisions of sections 21 to 25, be prepared or revised in such manner as may be directed by the Election Commission, in consultation with the Government of Sikkim.

The First Schedule of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 is amended to include Sikkim under the heading “I. STATES”.

The Representation of the People Act, 1951 is amended to provide for qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly of Sikkim. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of Sikkim (deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of that State duly constituted under the Constitution) unless he is an elector for any Assembly constituency in the State other than the constituency reserved for the Sanghas, in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Bhutia-Lepcha origin or a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Nepali origin, and is a member of any of the castes specified in the Representation of Sikkim Subjects Act, 1974 and is an elector for any Assembly constituency in the State, in the case of a seat reserved for Scheduled Castes, and is an elector of the Sangha constituency, in the case of a seat reserved for Sanghas.

The Representation of the People Act, 1951 is also amended to provide for the notification for election to fill the seat allotted to the State of Sikkim in the Council of States. The President shall, by a notification published in the Gazette of India, on such date as may be recommended by Election Commission, call upon the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim to elect a member in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder and the election so held shall for all purposes and intent be deemed to have been held under section 12.

The Representation of the People Act, 1951 is further amended to provide for the notification for electing the representative of the State of Sikkim to the existing House of the People. The Election Commission shall call upon the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim to elect the representative in accordance with such of the provisions of this Act, and the rules and orders made thereunder, as are applicable to the election of the members of the Council of States.

The Representation of the People Act, 1951 is also amended to provide for the nomination paper to be delivered to the returning officer for election to the Legislative Assembly of Sikkim. The nomination paper shall be in such form and manner as may be prescribed and shall be subscribed by the candidate as assenting to the nomination. In the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Bhutia-Lepcha origin or a seat reserved for Sanghas, the nomination paper shall also be subscribed by at least twenty electors of the constituency as proposers and at least twenty electors of the constituency as seconders. In the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Nepali origin, the nomination paper shall be subscribed by an elector of the constituency as proposer. No nomination paper shall be delivered to the returning officer on a day which is a public holiday.

Section 34 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 is amended to provide that the scrutiny of the nomination papers shall be conducted by the returning officer on the date appointed for the purpose under sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, sub-section (1A) of section 33.

Section 35 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 is amended to provide that the drawing of lots for determining the serial numbers of the candidates shall be conducted by the returning officer on the date appointed for the purpose under sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, sub-section (1A) of section 33.