Summary:

THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976 is an Act to regulate certain conditions of service of sales promotion employees in certain establishments. The Act extends to the whole of India and came into force on different dates for different States. It applies to establishments engaged in pharmaceutical industry and notified industries. The Act defines sales promotion employees as any person employed or engaged in any establishment for hire or reward to do any work relating to promotion of sales or business, but does not include any such person employed or engaged mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity.

The Act provides for leave, including earned leave on full wages for not less than one-eleventh of the period spent on duty and leave on medical certificate on one-half of the wages for not less than one-eighteenth of the period of service. The maximum limit up to which a sales promotion employee may accumulate earned leave and the limit up to which the earned leave may be availed of at a time by a sales promotion employee are prescribed. A sales promotion employee is entitled to cash compensation, subject to conditions and restrictions, in respect of the earned leave earned by him and not availed of.

Every employer in relation to a sales promotion employee shall furnish to such employee a letter of appointment in such form as may be prescribed. The provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, and the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, workmen or employees within the meaning of those Acts.

Every employer in relation to an establishment shall keep and maintain such registers and other documents and in such manner as may be prescribed. The State Government may appoint Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and such Inspectors may exercise certain powers for ascertaining whether any of the provisions of this Act have been complied with in respect of an establishment. If any employer contravenes the provisions of section 4 or section 5 or section 7 or any rules made under this Act, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty. The provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement, settlement or contract of service.