Summary:
THE FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE SERVICE OFFICERS (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1972, is an Act to provide for the variation or revocation of the conditions of service of former Secretary of State Service officers in respect of certain matters and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act defines "appointed day" as the date on which this Act comes into force, and "former Secretary of State Service officer" as a person referred to in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of article 312A of the Constitution. The Act also defines "I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service," "I.P. member of the Indian Police Service," and "pension."

Section 3 of the Act provides that the conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, pension, disciplinary matters, and all other matters of the I.C.S. members of the Indian Administrative Service shall be the same as those of the other members of that Service. Similarly, Section 4 provides that the conditions of service of the I.P. members of the Indian Police Service shall be the same as those of the other members of that Service.

Section 5 of the Act provides that an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service or an I.P. member of the Indian Police Service, as the case may be, holding a post specified in the Schedule or a post declared by the Central Government to be equivalent to such post shall, for so long as he holds that post, be entitled to draw pay as indicated against the post in the Schedule.

Section 6 of the Act provides for the retirement of I.C.S. members of the Indian Administrative Service and I.P. members of the Indian Police Service. It provides that an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service, unless his service has been extended before the appointed day in accordance with the rules and regulations then applicable or is extended on or after that day in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable to the other members of the Indian Administrative Service, shall retire compulsorily on the date of expiry of the said period of six months or on the date on which he shall retire compulsorily in accordance with the rules applicable to him immediately before the appointed day, whichever date is earlier. It also provides that the Central Government shall have the power to require an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service or an I.P. member of the Indian Police Service, in consultation with the Government of the State on whose cadre he is borne, to retire in public interest from service on a specified date.

Section 7 of the Act provides for the pension of I.C.S. members of the Indian Administrative Service. It provides that an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service shall be entitled to receive by way of annuity rupees thirteen thousand three hundred and thirty-three and one-third on his retirement from service in accordance with the provisions of Section 6. It also provides that no death-cum-retirement gratuity benefits or family pension benefits shall be admissible in relation to an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service unless such member has exercised his option for such benefits before the appointed day in accordance with the orders of the Central Government.

Section 8 of the Act provides that no former Secretary of State Service officer shall be entitled to claim pension in sterling, that his pension shall be paid outside India, or that his pension shall be computed in the rupee equivalent of the amount fixed in sterling at a rate of exchange exceeding the rate of rupees thirteen and one-third to the pound sterling.

Section 9 of the Act provides that the Central Government may, before the expiry of two years from the appointed day, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such adaptations and modifications of any rules, regulations or orders applicable immediately before the appointed day to or in relation to former Secretary of State Service officers as may be necessary to bring them into accord with the provisions of this Act.

Section 10 of the Act provides that any court, tribunal or authority, required or empowered to enforce any rule, regulation or order in force immediately before the appointed day may construe it with such modifications as may be necessary to bring it into accord with the provisions of this Act.

Section 10A of the Act provides that if the Central Government is satisfied that the conditions of service as respects any matter applicable to, or in relation to, any class or category of former Secretary of State Service officers under Section 6, 7 or 8 or as respects any benefits by way of compensation for the increase in cost of living or any other reason, have become less favorable than those applicable to or in relation to any corresponding class or category of other officers of the Indian Administrative Service or the Indian Police Service or, as the case may be, any comparable service, it may, notwithstanding anything contained in those sections, by general or special order and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as may be specified therein, make such provisions as it may deem fit for securing, so far as may be, parity in such cases.

Section 11 of the Act provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of removing the difficulty, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient.

Section 12 of the Act provides that the provisions of this Act or of any order made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law other than this Act or in any rule, regulation or order or other instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.

Section 13 of the Act provides that any order in respect of disciplinary matters in relation to any I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service or any I.P. member of the Indian Police Service in force immediately before the appointed day shall continue in force as from the appointed day.

The Schedule to the Act specifies the pay or scale of pay for I.C.S. Members of the Indian Administrative Service and I.P. Members of the Indian Police Service.