Summary:
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 is an Act to provide for the prevention and control of water pollution and the maintaining or restoring of wholesomeness of water, for the establishment, with a view to carrying out the purposes aforesaid, of Boards for the prevention and control of water pollution, and for conferring on and assigning to such Boards powers and functions relating thereto. The Act applies to the whole of the States of Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tripura and West Bengal and the Union territories. It shall apply to such other State which adopts this Act by resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution. The Act defines various terms such as 'Board', 'member', 'occupier', 'outlet', 'pollution', 'prescribed', 'sewage effluent', 'sewer', 'stream', and 'trade effluent'. The Act consists of 62 sections divided into 8 chapters. Chapter I deals with preliminary provisions, Chapter II with the Central and State Boards for Prevention and Control of Water Pollution, Chapter III with Joint Boards, Chapter IV with powers and functions of Boards, Chapter V with prevention and control of water pollution, Chapter VI with funds, accounts and audit, Chapter VII with penalties and procedure, and Chapter VIII with miscellaneous provisions. The Act provides for the establishment of Central and State Boards for Prevention and Control of Water Pollution, their powers, functions, and composition. It also lays down the procedures for the prevention and control of water pollution, including the prohibition of the use of streams or wells for the disposal of polluting matter, restrictions on new outlets and new discharges, and the power of the Boards to carry out certain works. The Act also provides for the punishment of offences committed under the Act, including the failure to comply with directions under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 20, or orders issued under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 32. The Act also provides for the protection of action taken in good faith, the bar of jurisdiction, and the overriding effect of the Act. The Act also empowers the Central Government to supersede the Central Board and Joint Boards, and the State Government to supersede the State Board under certain circumstances. The Act also provides for the power of the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act.