Summary:
The High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Act, 1978, demonetized certain high denomination bank notes to prevent illicit transfer of money for financing transactions that are harmful to the national economy or for illegal purposes.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, including bank, bank notes, distinctive number, high denomination bank note, public sector bank, Reserve Bank, scheduled bank, and State Bank.

The Act provides that high denomination bank notes shall cease to be legal tender in payment or on account at any place on the expiry of the 16th day of January, 1978. It also prohibits the transfer and receipt of high denomination bank notes after the 16th day of January, 1978.

Every bank and Government treasury is required to prepare and send to the Reserve Bank a return showing separately under each denominational value the total value of high denomination bank notes of that value held by it at the close of business on the 16th day of January, 1978, and distinctive numbers of high denomination bank notes of that value.

A bank other than a public sector bank may obtain from the Reserve Bank or a public sector bank an equivalent amount in exchange for the high denomination bank notes declared by it in the return referred to in section 5 by credit to an account maintained with the Reserve Bank or a public sector bank or in bank notes. A public sector bank may obtain from the Reserve Bank an equivalent amount in exchange for the high denomination bank notes declared by it in the return referred to in section 5 or the high denomination bank notes received by it in exchange under sub-section (1) by credit to an account with the Reserve Bank or in bank notes. A Government treasury may obtain from the Reserve Bank an equivalent amount in exchange for the high denomination bank notes declared by it in the return referred to in section 5 in bank notes or by credit to Government account.

Any high denomination bank note owned by a person other than a bank or Government treasury may be exchanged after the 16th day of January, 1978, only on tender of the note in the manner provided in the Act.

The Act provides for penalties for failure to prepare and present returns, presenting false returns, making false statements in declarations, and contravening the provisions of the Act or the rules made thereunder. The Act also provides for the protection of action taken in good faith and the removal of difficulties.

The Central Government may make rules for giving effect to the provisions of the Act. Every rule made by the Central Government under the Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

The Act repeals the High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Ordinance, 1978, and provides that anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. The Schedule to the Act contains the form of declaration to be filled in triplicate by a person desiring to tender high denomination bank notes for exchange.