Summary:

THE UNION DUTIES OF EXCISE (DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1979, is an Act that provides for the payment out of the Consolidated Fund of India of sums equivalent to a part of the net proceeds of certain Union duties of excise to the States to which the law imposing the duty extends. The Act defines "distributable Union duties of excise" as 47.5% of the net proceeds of Union duties of excise, levied and collected under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and any other law for the levy and collection of such duty.

The Act specifies that during the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1995, and each of the four succeeding financial years, there shall be paid, out of the Consolidated Fund of India, to the States, sums equivalent to the distributable Union duties of excise levied and collected in that year. The sums so payable shall be distributed to each of the States specified in Table I and Table II of the Act.

Table I lists the States and the percentage of the sums payable to each of them. Table II lists the States, the financial year, and the percentage of the sums payable to each of them. The percentages differ for each financial year.

The expenditure on the payments in pursuance of section 3 shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. The Central Government may make rules providing for the time at which and the manner in which, any payments under this Act are to be made, for the making of adjustments between one financial year and another, and for any other incidental or ancillary matters.

The Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1962, shall stand repealed as from the 1st day of April, 1979. Every rule made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be.