Summary:

The Departmental Inquiries (Enforcement of Attendance of Witnesses and Production of Documents) Act, 1972, is a law in India that aims to enforce the attendance of witnesses and production of documents in certain departmental inquiries. The Act applies to all departmental inquiries held in relation to persons appointed to public services or posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, as well as those who have been appointed to such positions but are in service or pay of specific local authorities, corporations, government companies, or societies.

The Act defines a "departmental inquiry" as an inquiry held under and in accordance with any law made by Parliament, any rule made under the proviso to article 309, or any rule made under the Constitution of India, into any allegation of lack of integrity against any person to whom this Act applies. The term "lack of integrity" includes bribery or corruption.

The Central Government has the power to authorize the inquiring authority to exercise the power specified in section 5 in relation to any person within a specific class or category for the purposes of any departmental inquiry. The inquiring authority has the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness, requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material, and requisitioning any public record from any court or office.

However, the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India, any subsidiary bank, or any corresponding new bank is not compelled to produce any books of account or other documents which the bank claims to be of a confidential nature, or to make any such books or documents a part of the record of the proceedings of the departmental inquiry, or to give inspection of any such books or documents, if produced, to any party before it or to any other person.

Every process issued by an authorized inquiring authority for the attendance of any witness or for the production of any document shall be served and executed through the District Judge within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the witness or other person, on whom the process is to be served or executed, voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.

The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act, which shall be laid before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days.

The Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. However, vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.