Summary:
THE STATE BANK OF SIKKIM (ACQUISITION OF SHARES) AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1982, is an Act that aims to provide for the acquisition of certain shares of the State Bank of Sikkim for the purpose of better consolidation and extension of banking facilities in the State of Sikkim. The Act has 20 sections divided into 7 chapters.

Chapter I, titled "Preliminary," defines the short title and commencement of the Act, and also provides definitions for terms used throughout the Act.

Chapter II, titled "Acquisition and Transfer of Certain Shares of SIKKIM BANK," deals with the acquisition and transfer of certain shares of the State Bank of Sikkim to the Central Government. The Central Government is required to pay an amount of rupees eight lakhs twelve thousand two hundred and ninety-five to the holders of such shares in cash and in the manner specified in the Schedule.

Chapter III, titled "Vesting of Undertakings of SIKKIM BANK in the Central Government," deals with the vesting of undertakings of the State Bank of Sikkim in the Central Government. The undertakings of the Sikkim Bank shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the Sikkim Bank in relation to its undertakings.

Chapter IV, titled "Payment of Amounts," deals with the payment of amounts to the holders of shares in the State Bank of Sikkim. The Central Government shall pay to every holder thereof in the manner specified in the Schedule an amount calculated at the rate of rupees fifty-five per share.

Chapter V, titled "Management, Etc., of the Undertakings of SIKKIM BANK," deals with the management, etc., of the undertakings of the State Bank of Sikkim. The State Government in which the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank have vested under section 6 shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as the Sikkim Bank is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its undertakings.

Chapter VI, titled "Provisions Relating to the Employees of the SIKKIM BANK," deals with the provisions relating to the employees of the State Bank of Sikkim. Every officer or other employee of the Sikkim Bank in the employment of the Sikkim Bank immediately before the appointed day shall become,—

* an officer or other employee of the State Government on any from the appointed day, and
* where the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank are directed, under sub-section (1) of section 7, to vest in the co-operative bank, an officer or other employee of the co-operative bank on and from the date of such vesting.

Chapter VII, titled "Miscellaneous," contains provisions related to the overriding effect of the Act, protection of action taken in good faith, penalties, offences by companies, delegation of powers, power of Central Government to make rules, power to remove difficulties, references to Sikkim Bank in other laws, dissolution of Sikkim Bank, and the Schedule, which specifies the manner of payment of amount for the transfer of shares of the State Bank of Sikkim to the Central Government.