Summary:
The Chaparmukh-Silghat Railway Line and the Katakhal-Lalabazar Railway Line (Nationalisation) Act, 1982 is a law that was enacted on 17th August, 1982 to acquire the undertakings of the Chaparmukh-Silghat Railway Company Limited in relation to the Chaparmukh-Silghat Railway Line and the undertakings of the Katakhal-Lalabazar Railway Company Limited in relation to the Katakhal-Lalabazar Railway Line. The Act aims to secure the efficient operation of the said railway lines and protect the links of communication between the north-eastern areas of India and the rest of the country.

The Act has five chapters, each dealing with a specific aspect of the acquisition and management of the undertakings of the two specified companies. Chapter I defines the terms used in the Act, while Chapter II deals with the acquisition of the undertakings of the two specified companies. Chapter III lays down the payment of amounts to the specified companies, and Chapter IV deals with the duty of persons in charge of the management of the undertakings of the two specified companies to deliver all assets, books of account, registers, or other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings. Finally, Chapter V contains miscellaneous provisions.

Under Chapter II, the undertakings of each of the two specified companies and the right, title, and interest of each of the two specified companies in relation to such undertakings stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government on the appointed day. The undertakings include all assets, rights, lease-holds, powers, authorities, and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery, and equipment, cash balances, cash on hand, cheques, demand drafts, reserve funds, investments, book debts, and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power, or control of the specified company, whether within or outside India.

Under Chapter III, the Central Government shall pay in cash to the Chaparmukh-Silghat Railway Company Limited an aggregate amount of rupees ten lakhs and fifty thousand, and to the Katakhal-Lalabazar Railway Company Limited, an aggregate amount of rupees nine lakhs. The amount shall be paid before the expiry of a period of three months from the appointed day.

Under Chapter IV, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to the Central Government all assets, books of account, registers, or other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings. Any person who has, on the appointed day, in his possession or under his control any assets, books, documents, or other papers relating to any undertaking owned by a specified company which have vested in the Central Government and which belong to the specified company, or would have so belonged, if the undertakings owned by the specified company had not vested in the Central Government, shall be liable to account for the said assets, books, documents, and other papers to the Central Government and shall deliver them up to the Central Government or to such person or persons as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.

Under Chapter V, the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal, or other authority. Any person who commits an offense under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. If an offense under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time of the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offense and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

The Act also provides for protection of action taken in good faith, delegation of powers, power to make rules, and power to remove difficulties.