Summary:
The Cine-workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981, is a law in India that regulates the employment of cine-workers and cinema theatre workers. The Act aims to provide for the regulation of the conditions of employment of certain cine-workers and cinema theatre workers and for matters connected therewith.

The Act defines key terms such as "cinema theatre," "cinematograph film," "cine-worker," "competent authority," "contractor," "feature film," "producer," "production," "Tribunal," and "wages."

The Act prohibits the employment of a cine-worker in or in connection with the production of any feature film unless an agreement in writing is entered into with such person by the producer of such film or, where such person is employed through a contractor or other person, by the producer of such film and such contractor or other person. Such agreement must be registered with the competent authority by the producer of such film.

The Act also provides for the appointment of conciliation officers who are charged with the duty of mediating and promoting the settlement of any dispute between a cine-worker and the producer of the film in, or in connection with, which he has been employed or the contractor or other person through whom he has been so employed, with respect to the terms and conditions or termination, of employment of such cine-worker.

The Act constitutes one or more Tribunals, to be called the Cine-workers Tribunals, for the adjudication of disputes relating to any matter specified in any agreement of the nature referred to in section 3. A Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the Central Government.

The Act also provides for the powers and duties of conciliation officers and Tribunals, the duties of Tribunals, the publication of awards of Tribunals, revision, application of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, to cine-workers, penalties, offences by companies, cognizance of offences, magistrate's power to impose enhanced penalties, effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Chapter, protection of action taken under this Chapter, delegation of powers, and power to make rules.

The Act applies the provisions of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, and the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, to cine-workers and cinema theatre workers.