Summary:

THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT AND ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF EXCISE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1980 was enacted on 12th February, 1980, to further amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957.

Section 1 of the Act specifies its short title and commencement date. The Act is deemed to have come into force on 24th November, 1979.

Section 2 repeals the amendment of section 2 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, as amended by the Repealing and Amending Act (19 of 1988).

Section 3 repeals the amendment of the First Schedule of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, as amended by the Repealing and Amending Act (19 of 1988).

Section 4 repeals the amendment of the First Schedule of the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, as amended by the Repealing and Amending Act (19 of 1988).

Section 5 contains special provisions regarding duties of excise on cotton fabrics, woollen fabrics, man-made fabrics, etc., during a certain past period and validation. It provides that every Central Act as in force at any time during the period commencing with the appointed day and ending with the day immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, and providing for or relating to the levy of duties of excise on "cloth", "cotton cloth" or, as the case may be, "cotton fabrics", "woollen fabrics", "rayon or artificial silk fabrics" or, as the case may be, "man-made fabrics", shall have and shall be deemed to have always had effect during the said period as if such "cloth", "cotton cloth" or, as the case may be, "cotton fabrics" comprised for the purposes of the duty leviable under that Act - a sub-item covering such "cloth", "cotton cloth" or "cotton fabrics" not subjected to any process mentioned in sub-clause (v) of clause (f) of section 2 of the Central Excises Act, as amended by this Act; and a sub-item covering such "cloth", "cotton cloth" or "cotton fabrics" subjected to any such process or any two or more such processes.

Section 6 repeals the Repeal and saving provision as amended by the Repealing and Amending Act (19 of 1988).

The document does not contain any Schedule, Annexure, Appendix, or Forms. There are no Footnotes.