Summary:

The Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987, is an Act to provide for the more effective prevention of the commission of sati and its glorification in India. The Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and came into force on different dates for different States.

The Act defines "sati" as the act of burning or burying alive of any widow along with the body of her deceased husband or any other relative or with any article, object or thing associated with the husband or such relative, or any woman along with the body of any of her relatives. "Glorification" includes the observance of any ceremony or the taking out of a procession in connection with the commission of sati, supporting, justifying or propagating the practice of sati in any manner, arranging of any function to eulogise the person who has committed sati, creating a trust, or the collection of funds, or the construction of a temple or other structure or the carrying on of any form of worship or for the performance of any ceremony thereat, with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to preserve the memory of, a person who has committed sati.

The Act punishes attempts to commit sati with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. Abetment of sati is punishable with death or imprisonment for life and also with fine. Punishment for glorification of sati is imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty thousand rupees.

The Act empowers the Collector or District Magistrate to prohibit the doing of any act towards the commission of sati or its glorification by any person in any area or areas specified in the order. The Act also empowers the State Government or the Collector or the District Magistrate to remove any temple or other structure used for the glorification of sati. The Act also empowers the Collector or District Magistrate to seize any funds or property collected or acquired for the purpose of glorification of the commission of any sati or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence under this Act.

The Act constitutes Special Courts for the trial of offences under this Act. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special Court unless he is, immediately before such appointment, a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge in any State. The Act also appoints a Special Public Prosecutor for every Special Court. Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of the Code shall have effect accordingly.

The Act also provides for protection of action taken under this Act, burden of proof, obligation of certain persons to report about the commission of offence under this Act, person convicted of an offence under section 4 to be disqualified from inheriting certain properties, repeal of existing laws and power to make rules.