Summary:

THE HANDLOOMS (RESERVATION OF ARTICLES FOR PRODUCTION) ACT, 1985 is an Act to provide for reservation of certain articles for exclusive production by handlooms. The Act consists of 19 sections and no schedules.

Section 1 is about the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. It may be called the Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985, and extends to the whole of India. It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may appoint.

Section 2 provides definitions for various terms used in the Act. For example, handloom means any loom, other than power loom; manufacturer includes the producer and processor, and the expression "manufacture" shall be construed accordingly; power loom means a loom which is worked by power as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948); processor means a person engaged in any ancillary process subsequent to the production of cloth, such as dyeing, bleaching, mercerising, calendering, embroidering, printing, raising, cloth embossing or any other finishing process, but does not include a producer, and the expression "process" shall be construed accordingly; producer means a person engaged in the production of cloth on any loom, other than handloom, and shall include a person who owns, works or operates on, a loom for the production of cloth, and the expression "produce" shall be construed accordingly.

Section 3 provides the power to specify articles for exclusive production by handlooms. The Central Government may, if it is satisfied, after considering the recommendations made to it by the Advisory Committee, that it is necessary so to do for the protection and development of the handloom industry, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct, from time to time, that any article or class of articles shall, on and from such date as may be specified in the order (hereinafter referred to as the date of reservation), be reserved for exclusive production by handlooms.

Section 4 provides for the constitution of an Advisory Committee. The Central Government shall, with a view to determining the nature of any article or class of articles that may be reserved for exclusive production by handlooms, constitute an Advisory Committee consisting of such persons as have, in the opinion of that Government, the necessary expertise to give advice on the matter.

Section 5 provides for the prohibition of production of articles exclusively reserved for handlooms. Where an order has been made under section 3 reserving any article or class of articles for exclusive production by handlooms, such article or class of articles shall not, on and from the date of reservation, be produced by any loom, other than handloom.

Section 6 provides for the power to call for information or to furnish samples. The Central Government may, by order, require any manufacturer to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such information in his possession with respect to any manufacturing activity or business carried on by him or by any other person to any officer or authority specified by it in such form and within such period as may be specified by that Government in the order. Every order published under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.

Section 7 provides for the power to enter and inspect. Any officer authorized by the Central Government (hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer) may enter, at all reasonable times, any place or premises of any manufacturer in which any textile articles are stored, kept or exposed for sale and may require the production for inspection of any books of account, registers, records or other documents kept therein and ask for such information relating to the manufacture, storage or keeping for sale of any such articles or to any power looms that may be found in such place as he may think fit for the purposes of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.

Section 8 provides for the power to search and seize. If the authorised officer has any reason to believe that any article or class of articles specified in any order made under section 3 is being produced in any place in contravention of such order or any article or class of articles produced in contravention of such order are secreted in any place or any article or class of articles is liable to forfeiture under this Act, he may enter into and search such place or premises for such article, or class of articles or any power loom which in the opinion of the authorised officer may have been used for the production of such article or class of articles.

Section 9 provides that the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to searches and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this Act.

Section 10 provides for the penalty for contravention of orders made under section 3. Whoever produces any article or class of articles in contravention of an order made under section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees per loom by which the said article or class of articles is produced, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees per loom for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.

Section 11 provides for the penalty for false statements. If any person, when required by any order made under section 6 to furnish any information or sample, makes any statement or furnishes any information which is false in any material particular and which he knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, to be false or does not believe it to be true, or fails to furnish such sample or damages or destroys any article from which such sample was required, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 12 provides for the penalty for attempts and abetment. Any person who attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of any order made under section 3 shall be deemed to have contravened that order.

Section 13 provides for the penalty for offences by companies. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Section 14 provides that every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.

Section 15 provides for the power to delegate. The Central Government may, by order, direct that the powers exercisable by it under any provision of this Act, other than the power to make orders under section 3 or under section 18 or to make rules under section 19, shall in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercisable also by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to a State Government as may be specified in the direction.

Section 16 provides for the power of the Central Government to give directions to a State Government as to the carrying into execution of the provisions of this Act.

Section 17 provides for the protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, State Government or any officer or employee of the Central Government or of any State Government or any authorized officer for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or an order made under section 3.

Section 18 provides for the power to exempt. If the Central Government is satisfied that the demand for any article or class of articles reserved by an order under section 3 outside India is such that it is not possible for the handloom industry to meet such demand or any such article or class of articles is required to be produced for purposes of research or for the development of markets for such article or class of articles or of the handloom industry generally, it may, by order published in the Official Gazette, exempt such article or class of articles from the operation of such order, and permit such article or class of articles to be produced by any power loom solely for the purposes of export or for research by such institutions as may be specified in the order.

Section 19 provides for the power to make rules. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

The Act provides for the reservation of certain articles for exclusive production by handlooms. The Central Government may, after considering the recommendations of an Advisory Committee, direct that any article or class of articles shall be reserved for exclusive production by handlooms. The Act also provides for the prohibition of production of articles exclusively reserved for handlooms by any loom other than a handloom. The Act also provides for the power to call for information or to furnish samples, the power to enter and inspect, the power to search and seize, and the power to exempt. The Act also provides for the penalty for contravention of orders made under section 3, the penalty for false statements, the penalty for attempts and abetment, the penalty for offences by companies, and the power to make rules.