Summary:

The Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity and Secrecy) Act, 1983, is an Act that provides for the obligation of public financial institutions as to fidelity and secrecy. The Act defines a public financial institution as the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited, the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited, or any other institution specified by the Central Government that is a company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956.

The Act states that a public financial institution shall not divulge any information relating to its constituents, except in circumstances necessary or appropriate for the institution to divulge such information, in accordance with the law or practice and usage, customary among bankers. However, a public financial institution may collect or furnish credit information or other information to the Central Government, the State Bank of India, any subsidiary bank, any corresponding new bank, any other scheduled bank, or any other public financial institution, for the purpose of efficiently discharging its functions.

Every director, member of any committee, auditor, officer, or any other employee of a public financial institution shall, before entering upon his duties or within thirty days from the date on which this Act became applicable to such institution, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule to this Act.

The Schedule to the Act contains a declaration of fidelity and secrecy, which requires the person making the declaration to faithfully, truly, and to the best of their skill and ability, execute and perform the duties required of them as a director, member of any committee, auditor, officer, or other employee of the public financial institution. The person making the declaration also promises not to communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the public financial institution or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the public financial institution. The person making the declaration further promises not to allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to, or in the possession of, the public financial institution and relating to the business of the public financial institution or the business of any person having any dealing with the public financial institution.

The Act also repealed certain provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1951, which were related to the obligation of fidelity and secrecy. These provisions were repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1988.