Summary:

The Armed Forces (Punjab and Chandigarh) Special Powers Act, 1983 is an Act that enables certain special powers to be conferred upon members of the armed forces in the disturbed areas in the State of Punjab and the Union territory of Chandigarh. The Act extends to the whole of the State of Punjab and the Union territory of Chandigarh and came into force on the 15th day of October, 1983.

The Act defines "armed forces" as the military forces and the air forces operating as land forces, and includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating. A "disturbed area" is defined as an area which is for the time being declared by notification under section 3 to be a disturbed area.

Under section 3, the Governor of the State of Punjab, the Administrator of the Union territory of Chandigarh or the Central Government can declare an area to be a disturbed area if they are of the opinion that the area is in a disturbed or dangerous condition that the use of armed forces in aid of the civil power is necessary.

Under section 4, any commissioned officer, warrant officer, non-commissioned officer or any other person of equivalent rank in the armed forces may, in a disturbed area, use force, even to the causing of death, against any person who is acting in contravention of any law or order for the time being in force in the disturbed area. They may also destroy any arms dump, prepared or fortified position or shelter from which armed attacks are made or likely to be made or are attempted to be made, or any structure used as a training camp for armed volunteers or utilised as a hide-out by armed gangs or absconders wanted for any offence. They may arrest, without warrant, any person who has committed a cognizable offence or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed or is about to commit a cognizable offence and may use such force as may be necessary to effect the arrest. They may enter and search, without warrant, any premises to make any such arrest as aforesaid or to recover any person believed to be wrongfully restrained or confined or any property reasonably suspected to be stolen property or any arms, ammunition or explosive substances believed to be unlawfully kept in such premises. They may stop, search and seize any vehicle or vessel reasonably suspected to be carrying any person who is a proclaimed offender, or any person who has committed a non-cognizable offence, or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed or is about to commit a non-cognizable offence, or any person who is carrying any arms, ammunition or explosive substance believed to be unlawfully held by him.

Under section 5, every person making a search under this Act shall have the power to break open the lock of any door, almirah, safe, box, cupboard, drawer, package or other thing, if the key thereof is withheld.

Under section 6, any person arrested and taken into custody under this Act and every property, arm, ammunition or explosive substance or any vehicle or vessel seized under this Act, shall be made over to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station with the least possible delay, together with a report of the circumstances occasioning the arrest, or, as the case may be, occasioning the seizure of such property, arm, ammunition or explosive substance or any vehicle or vessel, as the case may be.

Under section 7, no prosecution, suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government, against any person in respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act.

Under section 8, the Armed Forces (Punjab and Chandigarh) Special Powers Ordinance, 1983 (9 of 1983), is hereby repealed and anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.