Summary:

THE INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1985

This Act was enacted on 30th December 1985, with the main objective of providing for the constitution of an Authority for the regulation and development of inland waterways for purposes of shipping and navigation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act establishes the Inland Waterways Authority of India, which is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal. The Authority has the power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.

The Act defines various terms used throughout the Act, including "appurtenant land", "Authority", "channel", "conservancy", "conservancy measures", "infrastructure", "member", "national waterway", "navigable channel", "prescribed", "regulations", and "rules".

Chapter II of the Act deals with the constitution and incorporation of the Inland Waterways Authority of India. The Authority consists of a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, not more than three full-time members, and not more than three part-time members. The Authority may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the provisions of this Act.

Chapter III of the Act deals with property and contracts. The Authority is empowered to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act. The mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority is also specified in this Chapter.

Chapter IV of the Act deals with the functions and powers of the Authority. The Authority may carry out surveys and investigations for the development, maintenance and better utilization of the national waterways and the appurtenant land for shipping and navigation and prepare schemes in this behalf. The Authority may also provide or permit setting up of infrastructural facilities for national waterways, carry out conservancy measures and training works, regulate the construction or alteration of structures on, across or under the national waterways, and establish and maintain pilotage on national waterways.

Chapter V of the Act deals with finance, accounts and audit. The Authority may levy fees and charges for services or benefits rendered in relation to the use of the national waterways for the purposes of shipping, navigation, infrastructural facilities, including facilities for passengers and facilities relating to the berthing of vessels, handling of cargoes and storage of cargoes. The Authority may also borrow money from any source by the issue of bonds, debentures or other instruments as it may think fit for discharge of all or any of its functions under the Act.

Chapter VI of the Act deals with miscellaneous provisions. The Authority is empowered to delegate its powers and functions to the Chairman or any other member or any officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the order. The Authority may also make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. Any regulation made under any of the clauses (c) to (j) of sub-section (2) may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.