Summary:
The Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987, aims to promote the use of jute packaging material in the supply and distribution of certain commodities. The Act applies to the entire country and came into force on May 14, 1987. The Act defines "commodity" as any essential commodity or any article manufactured or produced by any scheduled industry. "Jute packaging material" refers to jute, jute yarn, jute twine, jute sacking cloth, hessian cloth, jute bags, or any other packaging material containing not less than seventy-five percent, by weight, of jute.
The Central Government has the power to specify commodities that must be packed in jute packaging material for their supply and distribution. The Standing Advisory Committee, consisting of experts in the field, recommends to the Central Government the commodities or classes of commodities or percentages thereof that should be packed in jute packaging material. The Central Government must consider the committee's recommendations before making any order under this provision.
Any commodity, class of commodities, or percentage thereof that is required to be packed in jute packaging material must be packed accordingly for their supply or distribution. Failure to do so will result in a fine equal to double the cost of the jute packaging material that should have been used.
The Central Government may require any person who is required to use jute packaging material for packing to furnish information and samples for the purposes of this Act. The Central Government may also authorize an officer to enter, inspect, search, and seize any place, premises, or vehicle where any commodity packed in jute packaging material is stored or kept for supply or distribution.
Penalties for contravention of section 5 or making false statements or furnishing false information include fines. Offences under the Act are cognizable. The Central Government may delegate its powers to any officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or to any State Government or its officers or authorities.
The Central Government may exempt any person or class of persons from the operation of an order made under section 3 in the public interest. The Central Government may also make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.