Summary:

The Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (Determination of Conditions of Service of Employees) Act, 1988, empowers the Central Government to determine the conditions of service of the officers and employees of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited. This Act aims to make the conditions of service of the Corporation's officers and employees comparable to those of other public sector companies.

The Act comprises three sections and two definitions.

Section 1: This section deals with the short title and commencement of the Act. The Act is called the Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (Determination of Conditions of Service of Employees) Act, 1988, and it came into force on July 2, 1988.

Section 2: This section provides definitions for various terms used in the Act. The term "Burmah Shell" refers to the Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Company of India Limited, a foreign company as it existed immediately before the appointed day under the Burmah Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings in India) Act, 1976. "Burmah Shell Refineries" means the Burmah Shell Refineries Limited, a company registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1913, as it existed immediately before it became a Government company. "Corporation" means the Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956. "Officers and employees of the Corporation" includes the officers and employees who were in the service of the Burmah Shell Refineries and who continued to be in the service of the said company after it became a Government company.

Section 3: This section empowers the Central Government to frame one or more schemes for the purpose of determination of the conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Corporation. The Central Government may provide for the continuance of such of the emoluments or other benefits as were payable to, or entitled to be received by, the officers and employees of the Corporation referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of section 2 immediately before the Burmah Shell Refineries became a Government company, or as the case may be, immediately before the appointed day under the Burmah Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings in India) Act, 1976. The Central Government may make a scheme to amend or vary any scheme made under sub-section (1). The power to make any scheme under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) includes the power to give retrospective effect to any such scheme or any provision thereof and the power to amend, by way of addition, variation, or repeal, any existing provisions determining the conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Corporation in force immediately before the commencement of this Act.

Section 4: This section deals with the repeal and saving. The Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (Determination of Conditions of Service of Employees) Ordinance, 1988, is hereby repealed. Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

Overall, this Act empowers the Central Government to determine the conditions of service of the officers and employees of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited to make them comparable with those of other public sector companies. The Act provides for framing schemes by the Central Government to determine the conditions of service, continuance of certain emoluments and benefits, and the power to give retrospective effect to any such scheme or any provision thereof. The Act also repeals the Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (Determination of Conditions of Service of Employees) Ordinance, 1988, and anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.