Summary:
The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, is an Act to provide for the adjudication or trial by Administrative Tribunals of disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of 1[any corporation or society owned or controlled by the Government in pursuance of article 323A of the Constitution] and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Chapter I of the Act deals with preliminary provisions and defines terms used in the Act. The Act establishes Administrative Tribunals for the Union and for each State, and also provides for the appointment of Chairmen, Vice-Chairmen, and Members of the Tribunals. The Act also sets out the qualifications, terms, and conditions of service of the Chairman and other Members of the Tribunals.

Chapter II of the Act deals with the establishment of Tribunals and Benches thereof. The Central Government may establish a Central Administrative Tribunal, an Administrative Tribunal for a State, or a Joint Administrative Tribunal for two or more States. The Act also sets out the composition of the Tribunals and Benches thereof, and the powers and functions of the Chairman and other Members.

Chapter III of the Act deals with the jurisdiction, powers, and authority of the Tribunals. The Central Administrative Tribunal has jurisdiction over recruitment and service matters concerning members of All-India Services, persons appointed to civil services of the Union or civil posts under the Union, and civilians appointed to defense services or posts connected with defense. The Act also applies to local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India, and to corporations or societies owned or controlled by the Government.

Chapter IV of the Act deals with the procedure for making applications to the Tribunals. An application may be made by any person aggrieved by an order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal. The Act sets out the form and contents of the application, the documents and other evidence required, and the fees payable. The Tribunal may admit or reject the application, and may decide the application as expeditiously as possible.

Chapter V of the Act deals with miscellaneous provisions. The Act excludes the jurisdiction of courts except the Supreme Court under article 136 of the Constitution in relation to recruitment and service matters within the jurisdiction of the Tribunals. The Act also provides for the transfer of pending cases from courts or other authorities to the Tribunals, and for the execution of orders of the Tribunals.

The Act also contains provisions for the protection of action taken in good faith, the power to remove difficulties, and the power of the Central Government to make rules. The Act applies to the whole of India, and came into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.