Summary:
The Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act, 1985 is an Act that aims to provide a legal framework for processing claims arising out of the Bhopal gas leak disaster. The Act came into force on February 20, 1985, and defines the Bhopal gas leak disaster as the release of hazardous gas from a plant in Bhopal, India, which resulted in extensive loss of life and property.

The Act grants the Central Government the power to represent and act on behalf of any person entitled to make a claim for compensation or damages arising out of the disaster. This includes the power to institute or withdraw suits or proceedings, and to enter into compromises. The Act also allows the claimant to be represented by a legal practitioner of their choice, at the claimant's expense.

The Central Government has the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of certain matters such as summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person, requiring the discovery and production of any document, and issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.

The Central Government may appoint a Commissioner for the welfare of the victims of the Bhopal gas leak disaster, and such other officers and employees as it may deem fit. The Commissioner shall discharge such functions as may be assigned to him by the Scheme. The Commissioner and officers subordinate to him may exercise all or any of the powers which the Central Government may exercise under section 5.

The Central Government may delegate its powers under this Act to the Government of Madhya Pradesh or an officer of the Central Government or the State Government not below the rank of a Joint Secretary or a Secretary, or the Commissioner.

The Act provides for the registration of claims under the Scheme and the processing of the claims for securing their enforcement. The Act also provides for the creation of a fund for meeting expenses in connection with the administration of the Scheme and the provisions of this Act.

The Act states that any sums paid by the Government to a claimant, otherwise than by way of disbursal of the compensation or damages received as a result of the adjudication or settlement of his claim by a court or other authority, shall be deemed to be without prejudice to the adjudication or settlement by such court or other authority of his claim.

The provisions of this Act and of any Scheme framed thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.

The Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Ordinance, 1985, is hereby repealed, and anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.