Summary:

THE ILLEGAL MIGRANTS (DETERMINATION BY TRIBUNALS) ACT, 1983

Act Title: THE ILLEGAL MIGRANTS (DETERMINATION BY TRIBUNALS) ACT, 1983
Act ID: ACT NO. 39 OF 1983
Enactment Date: [25th December, 1983.]

This Act provides for the establishment of Tribunals for the determination, in a fair manner, of the question whether a person is an illegal migrant to enable the Central Government to expel illegal migrants from India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

The Act applies to the whole of India and came into force in Assam on 15th October, 1983 and in other States on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

The Act does not apply to any person who was in any State and who had been expelled from that State or India before the commencement of this Act in that State or in relation to whose expulsion from such State or India any order made before such commencement under any other law is in force, any person detected as a foreigner at the time of his entry across any border of India, or any foreigner who, having entered into India under a valid passport or travel document, continued to remain therein after the expiry of the period for which he was authorized to remain in India under such passport or travel document.

An illegal migrant is defined as a person in respect of whom each of the following conditions is satisfied: (i) he has entered into India on or after the 25th day of March, 1971, (ii) he is a foreigner, and (iii) he has entered into India without being in possession of a valid passport or other travel document or any other lawful authority in that behalf.

The Central Government may establish as many Illegal Migrants (Determination) Tribunals as it may deem necessary and specify the principal place of sitting of, and the territorial limits within which, each such Tribunal shall exercise its jurisdiction. No person shall be appointed as a member of any such Tribunal unless he is or has been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge in any State. Each Tribunal shall consist of two members and on the establishment of a Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint one of the members thereof as the Chairman of such Tribunal.

If, for any reason, any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman or a member of a Tribunal, the Central Government may fill the vacancy by appointing any person who fulfils the qualifications specified in sub-section (2) of section 5, as the Chairman, or, as the case may be, member of such Tribunal.

The Central Government shall make available to every Tribunal such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act.

If any question arises as to whether any person is or is not an illegal migrant, the Central Government may refer such question to a Tribunal for decision. Any person may make an application to the Tribunal, for its decision, as to whether the person whose name and other particulars are given in the application, is or is not an illegal migrant.

Every Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters: summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, discovery and production of any document, reception of evidence on affidavits, requisitioning of public records from any court or office, and issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.

On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1) of section 8, the Tribunal shall serve on the person named in such reference, a notice, accompanied by a copy of such reference, calling upon him to make, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such notice, such representation with regard to the averments made in the reference, and to produce such evidence as he may think fit in support of his defence.

The Central Government, or any person, named in a reference or an application under section 8, or any applicant under sub-section (2) of that section or any person named in a reference under section 8A may, if it or he is not satisfied with any order made by a Tribunal under section 12, prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order.

The Central Government may, by notification, establish for each State in which this Act is in force, an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Illegal Migrants (Determination) Appellate Tribunal for deciding appeals preferred under section 14 against orders made by Tribunals in the State and specify the principal place of sitting of such Appellate Tribunal. No person shall be appointed as a member of an Appellate Tribunal unless he is or has been a Judge of a High Court.

The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it may think fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the order appealed against or may remand the case to the Tribunal which had passed such order with such directions to that Tribunal as the Appellate Tribunal may think fit, for fresh determination after taking additional evidence, if necessary.

Every Appellate Tribunal shall have superintendence over all the Tribunals in the State. Every proceeding before a Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code, and every such Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Where a person has been determined by a Tribunal, or, as the case may be, by the Appellate Tribunal, to be an illegal migrant, the Central Government shall, by order served on such person, direct such person to remove himself from India within such time and by such route as may be specified in the order and may give such further directions in regard to his removal from India as it may consider necessary or expedient.

Any person who contravenes or attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of, any order made under section 20 or fails to comply with any direction given by any such order or harbours any person who has contravened any order made under section 20 or has failed to comply with any direction given by any such order shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees.

No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.

If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order to be published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.

The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Ordinance, 1983 is hereby repealed. Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.