Summary:

The Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 is an Act to regulate veterinary practice and to provide, for that purpose, for the establishment of a Veterinary Council of India and State Veterinary Councils and the maintenance of registers of the veterinary practitioners and for matters connected therewith. The Act extends to the whole of the States of Haryana, Bihar, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan and to all Union territories. The Act establishes a Council to be called the Veterinary Council of India, which shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue or be sued. The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:— (a) five members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst Directors of Animal Husbandry (by whatever name called) of those States to which this Act extends; (b) four members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the heads of veterinary institutions in the States to which this Act extends; (c) one member to be nominated by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research; (d) the Animal Husbandry Commissioner, Government of India, ex officio; (e) one member to be nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with animal husbandry; (f) one member to be nominated by the Indian Veterinary Association; (g) eleven members to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled in the Indian veterinary practitioners register; (h) one member to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the Presidents of the State Veterinary Councils of those States to which this Act extends; (i) one member to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the Presidents of the State Veterinary Associations of those States to which this Act extends; (j) Secretary, Veterinary Council of India, ex officio. The President and Vice-President shall be elected by the members from amongst themselves in such manner as may be provided by regulations. The President when present shall preside at every meeting of the Council and in his absence the Vice-President and in the absence of both any other member elected by the members present from amongst themselves shall preside at such meeting. All questions which come up before any meeting of the Council shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting. In the case of an equality of votes, the President shall have a casting vote. The Council shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided by regulations. No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of a vacancy in the council or on account of any defect or irregularity in its constitution. The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, appoint a Secretary (who shall also act as Treasurer unless the Council appoints any other person as Treasurer) and may appoint such other officers and employees as it may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act. The Secretary, officers and other employees of the Council shall be deemed to the public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). The Council may, subject to regulations, if any, made by the Council, appoint such number of veterinary inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any veterinary institution or any college or other institution where veterinary education is given or to attend any examination held by any veterinary institution for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of veterinary qualification granted by that veterinary institution. The veterinary inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to the Committee on the adequacy of the standards of veterinary education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed by regulations for giving veterinary education or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend. The Committee shall forward a copy of any such report to the veterinary institution concerned and shall also forward a copy with remarks, if any, of the said institution thereon, to the Central Government. The Council may appoint such number of visitors as it may deem requisite to inspect any veterinary institution or any college or other institution where veterinary education is given or to attend any examination held by any veterinary institution for the purpose of granting any recognised veterinary qualification. Any person, whether he is a member or not, may be appointed as a visitor under this section, but a person who is appointed as an inspector under section 19 for any inspection or examination shall not be appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or examination. The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to the President on the adequacy of the standards of veterinary education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed by regulations for giving veterinary education or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend. The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the President otherwise directs: Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of the visitor, the Council shall furnish the same. The Council may, by regulations, specify the minimum standards of veterinary education required for granting recognised veterinary qualifications by veterinary institutions in those States to which this Act extends. Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the Council to the State Government concerned and the Council shall, before submitting such regulations or any amendments thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for approval, take into consideration the comments of the State Government received within three months from the furnishing of the copies as aforesaid. The Central Government may, before approving such regulations or any amendments thereof, consult the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. The Committee constituted under section 12 shall from time to time report to the Council on the efficacy of the regulations and may recommend to the Council such amendments thereof as it may think fit. The Council shall maintain a register of veterinary practitioners to be known as the Indian veterinary practitioners register which shall contain the names of all persons who possess the recognised veterinary qualifications and who are for the time being enrolled on a State veterinary register of the State to which this Act extends. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Council to keep the Indian veterinary practitioners register in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the Council, and from time to time to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India or in such other manner as may be provided by regulations. Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India. Each State Veterinary Council shall furnish to the Council six printed copies of the State veterinary register as soon as may be after the 1st day of April of each year and each State Veterinary Council shall inform the Council without delay of all additions to, and other amendments in, the State veterinary register made from time to time.