Summary:

THE SPECIAL PROTECTION GROUP ACT, 1988 is an Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for providing proximate security to the Prime Minister of India and the former Prime Ministers of India and members of their immediate families. The Act is divided into 18 sections and 1 schedule.

Section 1 of the Act deals with the short title and commencement of the Act. The Act may be called the Special Protection Group Act, 1988 and it shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Section 2 of the Act deals with the definitions of various terms used in the Act. The terms defined include "active duty", "Director", "Group", "member of the Group", "members of immediate family", "prescribed", "proximate security" and words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code.

Section 3 of the Act states that every member of the Group shall be subject to this Act, wherever he may be.

Section 4 of the Act deals with the constitution of the Group. The Group shall be constituted in such manner as may be prescribed and the terms and conditions of service of the members of the Group shall be such as may be prescribed. The Group shall be an armed force of the Union for providing proximate security to the Prime Minister of India and the former Prime Ministers of India and members of their immediate families.

Section 5 of the Act deals with the control, direction, etc. of the Group. The general superintendence, direction and control of the Group shall vest in, and be exercised by, the Central Government and subject thereto and to the provisions of this Act and the rules, the command and supervision of the Group shall vest in an officer to be appointed by the Central Government as the Director of the Group.

Section 6 of the Act states that every member of the Group shall be liable to serve in any part of India as well as outside India.

Section 7 of the Act states that every member of the Group, not on leave or under suspension, shall, for all purposes of this Act, be always on active duty and may at any time be employed or deployed in any manner which is consistent with the duties and responsibilities of the Group under this Act.

Section 8 of the Act deals with resignation and withdrawal from the post. No member of the Group shall be at liberty to resign his appointment during the terms of his engagement or to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment, except with the previous permission in writing of the prescribed authority.

Section 9 of the Act states that every member of the Group shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

Section 10 of the Act deals with restrictions respecting right to form associations, freedom of speech, etc. No member of the Group shall, without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or of the prescribed authority, be a member of or be associated in any way with any trade union, labour union, political association or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political associations or be a member of or be associated in any way with any society, institution, association or organisation that is not of a purely social, recreational or religious nature or communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other document except where such communication or publication is in the bona fide discharge of his duties or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed nature.

Section 11 of the Act deals with termination of service. The prescribed authority may, by order in writing, terminate the appointment of any member of the Group in the public interest and such termination shall be deemed to be discharged simpliciter and shall not amount to dismissal or removal.

Section 12 of the Act deals with appeal. Any member of the Group aggrieved by an order under section 11 may, within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to a Board to be constituted by the Central Government.

Section 13 of the Act deals with powers and duties conferable on members of the Group. The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in that order, any member of the Group may exercise or discharge such powers or duties as may be specified in the said order for giving effect to the provisions of this Act or any order issued or any rule made thereunder.

Section 14 of the Act deals with assistance to Group. It shall be the duty of every Ministry and Department of the Central Government or the State Government or the Union territory Administration, every Indian Mission, every local or other authority or every civil or military authority to act in aid of the Director or any member of the Group whenever called upon to do so in furtherance of the duties and responsibilities assigned to such Director or member.

Section 15 of the Act deals with protection of action taken under this Act. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Group or any member thereof on whom powers have been conferred or duties have been imposed under this Act, or any order issued or any rule made thereunder for anything which is in good faith done or purported to be done or omitted to be done in pursuance of this Act or any order issued or any rule made thereunder or any order issued under any such rule.

Section 16 of the Act deals with power to make rules. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Section 17 of the Act deals with laying of orders and rules. Every order issued under section 13 and every rule made under section 16 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or the rule or both Houses agree that the order or rule should not be made, the order or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order or rule.

Section 18 of the Act deals with provision as to existing Special Protection Group. The Special Protection Group in existence at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Group constituted under this Act. The members of the Special Protection Group in existence at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been appointed as such under this Act. Anything done or any action taken before the commencement of this Act in relation to the constitution of the Special Protection Group referred to in sub-section (1) and in relation to any person appointed, shall be as valid and as effective in law as if such thing or action was done or taken under this Act.

The Schedule to the Act contains the oath or affirmation to be made by the members of the Group. The Schedule provides that every member of the Group shall, before entering upon his duties, make and subscribe before the prescribed authority a declaration in the form set out in the Schedule.

In conclusion, THE SPECIAL PROTECTION GROUP ACT, 1988 provides for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for providing proximate security to the Prime Minister of India and the former Prime Ministers of India and members of their immediate families. The Act lays down the powers and duties of the Group, the terms and conditions of service of its members, and the restrictions on the right to form associations, freedom of speech, etc. of the members of the Group. The Act also provides for the protection of action taken under this Act and the laying of orders and rules before Parliament. The Schedule to the Act contains the oath or affirmation to be made by the members of the Group.