Summary:

The Anti-Apartheid (United Nations Convention) Act, 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981) is an Act of the Indian Parliament that gives effect to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid. The Act extends to the whole of India and makes certain provisions of the Convention have the force of law in India.

The Act defines the crime of apartheid as inhuman acts committed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining domination by one racial group of persons over any other racial group of persons and systematically oppressing them. Specifically, it includes acts such as denial of life and liberty, imposition of living conditions calculated to cause physical destruction, and exploitation of labor. The Act also holds individuals, members of organizations and institutions, and representatives of the State responsible for committing, participating in, directly inciting or conspiring in the commission of the acts mentioned in article II of the Convention.

Under the Act, every person to whom international criminal responsibility applies under article III of the Convention shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. The Act also provides provisions for the punishment of offences committed by companies, organizations or institutions and for the trial of offences in any place in which the offender may be found.

The Act also provides that no person shall be arrested or prosecuted in respect of any offence under section 3 except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or such officer or authority as may be authorized by that Government by order in writing in this behalf. The Act also states that for the purposes of the Extradition Act, 1962, the offence under section 3 shall not be considered to be an offence of a political character.

In the schedule of the act, it contains the provisions of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid which shall have force of law in India. The Convention was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on the Thirtieth day of November, 1973 and India, having acceded to the said Convention, should make provisions for giving effect to it.