Summary:

The Child and Adolescent (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (Act No. 61 of 1986) was enacted on 23rd December, 1986, with the primary objective of prohibiting the engagement of children in all occupations and hazardous occupations and processes for adolescents. The Act is divided into four parts, namely, Preliminary, Prohibition of Employment of Children in Certain Occupations and Processes, Regulation of Conditions of Work of Children, and Miscellaneous.

Part I, Preliminary, defines the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. It also includes definitions of various terms used throughout the Act.

Part II, Prohibition of Employment of Children in Certain Occupations and Processes, prohibits the employment of children in any occupation or process. However, there are certain exceptions to this rule. Children can help their family or family enterprise, which is not a hazardous occupation or process, after their school hours or during vacations. Children can also work as artists in the audio-visual entertainment industry, including advertisements, films, television serials, or any other entertainment or sports activities, except for circuses, subject to certain conditions and safety measures.

Part III, Regulation of Conditions of Work of Children, applies to an establishment or a class of establishments in which none of the occupations or processes referred to in section 3A is carried on. The provisions of this Part regulate the hours and period of work, weekly holidays, notice to Inspector, disputes as to age, maintenance of register, display of notice containing abstract of sections 3 and 14, and health and safety of the adolescent employed or permitted to work in any establishment or class of establishments.

Part IV, Miscellaneous, includes provisions related to penalties, offences to be cognizable, Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund, rehabilitation of rescued child or adolescent, compounding of offences, modified application of certain laws in relation to penalties, procedure relating to offences, appointment of Inspectors, District Magistrate to implement the provisions, inspection and monitoring, power to make rules, rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament or State legislature, and certain other provisions of law not barred.

The Act also includes a Schedule that lists hazardous occupations or processes in which adolescents are prohibited from being employed or permitted to work. The Schedule includes mines, inflammable substances or explosives, and hazardous processes.