Summary:
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is an Act of the Parliament of India that consolidates and amends the law relating to domestic arbitration, international commercial arbitration, and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards. It also defines the law relating to conciliation and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act is based on the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (1985) and the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules (1980). The Act applies to the whole of India and came into force on a date appointed by the Central Government. The Act is divided into two parts: Part I - Arbitration and Part II - Conciliation. Part I of the Act contains general provisions, arbitration agreement, composition and jurisdiction of arbitral tribunal, conduct of arbitral proceedings, making of arbitral award and terms of settlement, recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards, and appeals. Part II of the Act deals with conciliation, including provisions for the commencement of conciliation proceedings, the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the termination of conciliation proceedings, and the effects of conciliation agreements. The Act provides for extensive judicial intervention in arbitration proceedings, but also allows for parties to agree to derogate from certain provisions of the Act. The Act applies to every arbitration under any other enactment for the time being in force, as if the arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration agreement and as if that other enactment were an arbitration agreement. However, the provisions of this Part are inconsistent with that other enactment or with any rules made thereunder. The Act also provides for administrative assistance in the conduct of arbitral proceedings.
Summary:

The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is a law in India that governs domestic and international commercial arbitration and conciliation. The Act applies to any arbitration agreement, whether it is in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or a separate agreement.

Section 7 defines an arbitration agreement as a written agreement between two or more parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes that have arisen or may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not.

Section 8 empowers a judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement, provided that a party to the agreement or any person claiming through or under him applies for it not later than the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute.

Section 9 allows a party to apply to a court for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral proceedings, or for an interim measure of protection in respect of certain matters, such as the preservation, interim custody or sale of goods, securing the amount in dispute, and interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver.

Section 10 provides that the parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators, provided that such number shall not be an even number. Failing the determination, the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole arbitrator.

Section 11 states that a person of any nationality may be an arbitrator, unless otherwise agreed by the parties. The parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators. If there is no agreement, in an arbitration with three arbitrators, each party shall appoint one arbitrator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who shall act as the presiding arbitrator.
Summary:

The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 governs the appointment procedure for arbitrators in India. Section 11 of the Act outlines the procedure for appointing arbitrators in the event of a failure by the parties to do so. If a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within 30 days of receiving a request from the other party or if the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator within 30 days, the appointment shall be made by the Supreme Court or High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court. In an arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the parties fail to agree on the arbitrator within 30 days from receipt of a request by one party from the other party, the appointment shall be made by the Supreme Court or High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court. The Chief Justice of the High Court or their designate is competent to decide on the request if multiple requests have been made to different High Courts or their designates. In the case of international commercial arbitration, the reference to the Supreme Court or High Court shall be construed as a reference to the Supreme Court. The High Court may frame rules for determination of the fees of the arbitral tribunal and the manner of its payment to the arbitral tribunal. A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament for a total period of thirty days. A person approached for appointment as an arbitrator shall disclose in writing any circumstances that are likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality or that are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to the arbitration. An arbitrator may be challenged only if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality or if he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties. A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him or in whose appointment he has participated only for reasons of which he becomes aware after the appointment has been made. Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person whose relationship with the parties or counsel or the subject-matter of the dispute falls under any of the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. The parties are free to agree on a procedure for challenging an arbitrator, failing which, a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator shall send a written statement of the reasons for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal within 15 days after becoming aware of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after becoming aware of any circumstances referred to in sub-section (3) of section 12. Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub-section (2) withdraws from his office or the other party agrees to the challenge, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge. If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure under sub-section (2) is not successful, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award.
Summary:

The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 governs arbitration proceedings in India. The Act provides for the appointment, powers, and duties of arbitrators, as well as the conduct of arbitral proceedings.

Chapter II of the Act deals with the appointment of arbitrators. Section 11 outlines the circumstances under which the Chief Justice or his designate may appoint an arbitrator. Section 12 provides for the disclosure of interest by an arbitrator, and Section 13 outlines the grounds for challenging an arbitrator. Section 14 deals with the failure or impossibility to act, and Section 15 outlines the termination of the mandate and substitution of an arbitrator.

Chapter III of the Act deals with the jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals. Section 16 provides for the competence of the arbitral tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction, and Section 17 outlines the interim measures ordered by the arbitral tribunal.

Chapter IV deals with the conduct of arbitral proceedings. Section 18 provides for the equal treatment of parties, and Section 19 outlines the determination of rules of procedure. Section 20 deals with the place of arbitration, and Section 21 outlines the commencement of arbitral proceedings. Section 22 deals with the language of the arbitration proceedings, and Section 23 outlines the statements of claim and defence.

Overall, the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 provides a comprehensive framework for the conduct of arbitration proceedings in India, ensuring fairness, efficiency, and finality in the resolution of disputes.
Summary:

The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 governs the arbitration process in India. This summary focuses on certain sections of the Act related to the making of an arbitral award and termination of proceedings.

Under Section 28, the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute submitted to arbitration in accordance with the substantive law for the time being in force in India in an arbitration other than an international commercial arbitration. In international commercial arbitration, the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the rules of law designated by the parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute. The arbitral tribunal shall decide ex aequo et bono or as amiable compositeur only if the parties have expressly authorized it to do so.

Under Section 29, in arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator, any decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a majority of all its members. Questions of procedure may be decided by the presiding arbitrator if authorized by the parties or all the members of the arbitral tribunal.

Under Section 29A, the award in matters other than international commercial arbitration shall be made by the arbitral tribunal within a period of twelve months from the date of completion of pleadings under sub-section (4) of section 23. The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified for making the award for a further period not exceeding six months. If the award is not made within the period specified or the extended period, the mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall terminate unless the Court has extended the period. The extension of period may be on the application of any of the parties and may be granted only for sufficient cause and on such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Court.

Under Section 30, the arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the arbitrator or arbitrators. The award shall state the reasons upon which it is based, unless the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given or the award is an arbitral award on agreed terms under Section 30(4). The award shall state its date and the place of arbitration as determined in accordance with Section 20(1). If the arbitral tribunal consists of more than one arbitrator, the signature of the majority of all the members of the arbitral tribunal shall be sufficient for the award, provided that the reason for any omitted signature is stated.

Under Section 31, the arbitral award shall be final and binding on the parties and persons claiming under them respectively. The award shall be enforceable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in the same manner as if it were a decree of the court.

Under Section 32, an application for the setting aside of an arbitral award may be made by any party to the arbitration on any of the following grounds, namely: (a) that the parties to the agreement referred to in Section 7 were under some incapacity, or the agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law for the time being in force; or (b) that the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or (c) that the award contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the agreement or the submission to arbitration, except that the arbitrator may decide a matter not contemplated by the submission or contained outside the submission if such decision is necessary for the fair resolution of the dispute; or (d) that the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this Part from which the parties cannot derogate; or (e) that the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a court of competent jurisdiction within the country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made.

Under Section 33, the arbitral tribunal may, on its own motion or on an application by a party, correct any error in the award or make an additional award on any matter not decided in the award. The application for correction or additional award shall be made within thirty days of the receipt of the award, and the arbitral tribunal may correct any error or make an additional award within thirty days from the date of receipt of the application.

Under Section 34, an application for the setting aside of an arbitral award may be made to the court by a party to the arbitration within three months from the date on which the party making the application received the arbitral award. The court may entertain the application after the expiry of the said period of three months if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application within the said period.

Under Section 35, the court shall, on an application made by any party to the arbitration, order the arbitral tribunal to make an award within a time specified by the court.

Under Section 36, an arbitral award shall be enforced in the same manner as if it were a decree of the court. If the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral award has expired or if such application has been made and rejected, the award shall not be called in question in any other court or tribunal.

These sections provide the legal framework for the making of an arbitral award and termination of proceedings under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 in India.
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, Section 29A, 29B, 30, 31, 31A, and 32, pertains to the time limit for making an arbitral award, fast track procedure, settlement, form and contents of arbitral award, regime for costs, and termination of proceedings.

Under Section 29A, the award shall be made within a period of twelve months from the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference. If the award is not made within the specified period, the parties may apply to the court for termination of the mandate of the arbitrator. The court may impose actual or exemplary costs upon any of the parties. An application filed under this sub-section shall be disposed of by the court as expeditiously as possible and endeavor shall be made to dispose of the matter within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party. In the case of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs), the period for making an arbitral award is six months from the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference.

Under Section 29B, the parties to an arbitration agreement may agree in writing to have their dispute resolved by fast track procedure. The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute on the basis of written pleadings, documents, and submissions filed by the parties without any oral hearing. The arbitral award shall be made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference. If the award is not made within the specified period, the provisions of sub-sections (3) to (9) of Section 29A shall apply to the proceedings.

Under Section 30, it is not incompatible with an arbitration agreement for an arbitral tribunal to encourage settlement of the dispute. If the parties settle the dispute during the arbitral proceedings, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the proceedings and, if requested by the parties and not objected to by the arbitral tribunal, record the settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed terms. The arbitral award on agreed terms shall have the same status and effect as any other arbitral award on the substance of the dispute.

Under Section 31, the arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the members of the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral award shall state the reasons upon which it is based, unless the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given. The arbitral award shall state its date and the place of arbitration. After the arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered to each party. The arbitral tribunal may make an interim arbitral award on any matter with respect to which it may make a final arbitral award.

Under Section 31A, the Court or arbitral tribunal shall have the discretion to determine the costs of the arbitration proceedings. The general rule is that the unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay the costs of the successful party. The Court or arbitral tribunal may make a different order for reasons to be recorded in writing.

Under Section 32, the arbitral proceedings shall be terminated by the final arbitral award or by an order of the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (2). The arbitral tribunal shall issue an order for the termination of the arbitral proceedings if the claimant withdraws his claim, if the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings, or if the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason become unnecessary or impossible.
Summary:

The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 governs the process of arbitration and conciliation in India. The Act provides for the appointment of arbitrators, the conduct of arbitral proceedings, and the enforcement of arbitral awards.

Chapter V of the Act deals with the termination of arbitral proceedings. The arbitral proceedings may be terminated in the following circumstances: (a) the claimant withdraws his claim, unless the respondent objects to the order and the arbitral tribunal recognizes a legitimate interest on his part in obtaining a final settlement of the dispute, (b) the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings, or (c) the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason become unnecessary or impossible.

Chapter VII of the Act deals with recourse against arbitral awards. An arbitral award may be set aside by the court only if the party making the application establishes that a party was under some incapacity, the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law for the time being in force, the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case, the arbitral award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration, the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this Part from which the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with this Part, the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law for the time being in force, or the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India.

Chapter VIII of the Act deals with the finality and enforcement of arbitral awards. Subject to this Part, an arbitral award shall be final and binding on the parties and persons claiming under them respectively. Where the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral award under section 34 has expired, then, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), such award shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in the same manner as if it were a decree of the court. Where an application to set aside the arbitral award has been filed in the Court under section 34, the filing of such an application shall not by itself render that award unenforceable, unless the Court grants an order of stay of the operation of the said arbitral award in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3), on a separate application made for that purpose. Upon filing of an application under sub-section (2) for stay of the operation of the arbitral award, the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, grant stay of the operation of such award for reasons to be recorded in writing.

The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 provides a comprehensive framework for the resolution of disputes through arbitration and conciliation. The Act lays down the rules and procedures for the appointment of arbitrators, the conduct of arbitral proceedings, and the enforcement of arbitral awards. The Act also provides for the termination of arbitral proceedings, recourse against arbitral awards, and the finality and enforcement of arbitral awards. The Act seeks to ensure that the arbitration process is fair, efficient, and effective, and that arbitral awards are enforceable and binding on the parties.
Summary:

Chapter IX of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1996 deals with appeals. An appeal can be made from the following orders: (a) refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under section 8, (b) granting or refusing to grant any measure under section 9, and (c) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under section 34. Additionally, an appeal can also be made to a court from an order of the arbitral tribunal accepting the plea referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 16 or granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under section 17. No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.

Chapter X of the Act deals with miscellaneous provisions. Section 38 states that the arbitral tribunal may fix the amount of the deposit or supplementary deposit as an advance for the costs of the arbitration. Upon termination of the arbitral proceedings, the arbitral tribunal shall render an accounting to the parties of the deposits received and shall return any unexpended balance to the party or parties, as the case may be. Section 39 states that the arbitral tribunal shall have a lien on the arbitral award for any unpaid costs of the arbitration. If the arbitral tribunal refuses to deliver its award except on payment of the costs demanded by it, the Court may order that the arbitral tribunal shall deliver the arbitral award to the applicant on payment into Court by the applicant of the costs demanded. The Court may further order that out of the money so paid into Court there shall be paid to the arbitral tribunal by way of costs such sum as the Court may consider reasonable and that the balance of the money, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant. An application under sub-section (2) may be made by any party unless the fees demanded have been fixed by written agreement between him and the arbitral tribunal, and the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any such application. The Court may make such orders as it thinks fit respecting the costs of the arbitration where any question arises respecting such costs and the arbitral award contains no sufficient provision concerning them.

Section 40 states that an arbitration agreement shall not be discharged by the death of any party thereto either as respects the deceased or as respects any other party, but shall in such event be enforceable by or against the legal representative of the deceased. The mandate of an arbitrator shall not be terminated by the death of any party by whom he was appointed. Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any law by virtue of which any right of action is extinguished by the death of a person.

Section 41 deals with provisions in case of insolvency. Where it is provided by a term in a contract to which an insolvent is a party that any dispute arising there out or in connection therewith shall be submitted to arbitration, the said term shall, if the receiver adopts the contract, be enforceable by or against him so far as it relates to any such dispute. Where a person who has been adjudged an insolvent had, before the commencement of the insolvency proceedings, become a party to an arbitration agreement, and any matter to which the agreement applies is required to be determined in connection with, or for the purposes of, the insolvency proceedings, then, if the case is one to which sub-section (1) does not apply, any other party or the receiver may apply to the judicial authority having jurisdiction in the insolvency proceedings for an order directing that the matter in question shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the arbitration agreement, and the judicial authority may, if it is of opinion that, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the matter ought to be determined by arbitration, make an order accordingly.

Section 42 states that notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part or in any other law for the time being in force, where with respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this Part has been made in a Court, that Court alone shall have jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all subsequent applications arising out of that agreement and the arbitral proceedings shall be made in that Court and in no other Court.

Section 42A states that notwithstanding anything contained by any other law for the time being in force, the arbitrator, the arbitral institution and the parties to the arbitration agreement shall maintain confidentiality of all arbitral proceedings except award where its disclosure is necessary for the purpose of implementation and enforcement of award.

Section 42B states that no suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the arbitrator for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.

Section 43 states that the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to arbitrations as it applies to proceedings in court. For the purposes of this section and the Limitation Act, 1963, an arbitration shall be deemed to have commenced on the date referred to in section 21. Where an arbitration agreement to submit future disputes to arbitration provides that any claim to which the agreement applies shall be barred unless some step to commence arbitral proceedings is taken within a time fixed by the agreement, and a dispute arises to which the agreement applies, the Court, if it is of opinion that in the circumstances of the case undue hardship would otherwise be caused, and notwithstanding that the time so fixed has expired, may on such terms, if any, as the justice of the case may require, extend the time for such period as it thinks proper. Where the Court orders that an arbitral award be set aside, the period between the commencement of the arbitration and the date of the order of the Court shall be excluded in computing the time prescribed by the Limitation Act, 1963 for the commencement of the proceedings (including arbitration) with respect to the dispute so submitted.

Chapter I of Part II of the Act deals with the enforcement of certain foreign awards. Section 44 defines foreign award as an arbitral award on differences between persons arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in force in India, made on or after the 11th day of October, 1960 in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration to which the Convention set forth in the First Schedule applies, in one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions have been made, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be territories to which the said Convention applies. Section 45 states that a judicial authority, when seized of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties have made an agreement referred to in section 44, shall, at the request of one of the parties or any person claiming through or under him, refer the parties to arbitration, unless it prima facie finds that the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed. Section 46 states that any foreign award which would be enforceable under the provisions of Part II shall be deemed to be enforceable under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Summary:

This document summarizes the content of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, specifically focusing on Indian laws related to the enforcement of foreign awards.

Section 44 of the Act defines a foreign award as an arbitral award made in a country that is a party to the New York Convention or the Geneva Convention. Section 45 allows a party to request the court to refer the parties to arbitration if the arbitration agreement is valid and capable of being carried into effect.

Section 46 states that a foreign award shall be enforceable in India in the same manner as a decree of the court. However, enforcement of a foreign award may be refused if the parties to the agreement were under some incapacity, the agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country where the award was made, or if the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration.

Section 47 deals with evidence and requires the party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award to produce the original award or a copy thereof, duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of the country in which it was made, the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified copy thereof, and such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the award is a foreign award.

Section 48 lays down the conditions for enforcement of foreign awards and states that enforcement may be refused if the subject-matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of India or if the enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of India.

Section 49 states that where the court is satisfied that the foreign award is enforceable under this Chapter, the award shall be deemed to be a decree of that court.

Section 50 allows an appeal from the order refusing to enforce a foreign award to the court authorized by law to hear appeals from such order.

Section 51 states that nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of enforcing in India of any award or of availing himself in India of any award if this Chapter had not been enacted.

Section 52 states that Chapter II of this Part shall not apply in relation to foreign awards to which this Chapter applies.

Chapter II of the Act deals with Geneva Convention Awards and defines a foreign award as an arbitral award made in a country that is a party to the Geneva Convention. Section 54 allows a judicial authority to refer the parties to arbitration if the arbitration agreement is valid and capable of being carried into effect.

Section 55 states that any foreign award which would be enforceable under this Chapter shall be treated as binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made and may accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal proceedings in India.

Section 56 deals with evidence and requires the party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award to produce the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of the country in which it was made, evidence proving that the award has become final, and such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the conditions mentioned in clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 57 are satisfied.
Summary:

The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, Part II, governs the enforcement of foreign awards in India. A foreign award can be enforced if it fulfills certain conditions, such as being made in pursuance of a valid submission to arbitration, having a capable subject matter, being made by the arbitral tribunal provided for in the submission or constituted in the agreed manner, having become final in the country of origin, and not being contrary to the public policy or law of India. If these conditions are met, the award shall be deemed to be a decree of the Court. An appeal lies from the order refusing to enforce a foreign award to the court authorized by law to hear appeals from such order. Part III of the Act governs conciliation proceedings. The party initiating conciliation sends a written invitation to the other party to conciliate under this Part, and conciliation proceedings commence when the other party accepts the invitation. The parties may agree on the number of conciliators, and the appointment of conciliators may be made directly by the parties or with the assistance of a suitable institution or person. The conciliator is not bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The conciliator assists the parties in an independent and impartial manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute, and may make proposals for a settlement of the dispute. In order to facilitate the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the parties or the conciliator with the consent of the parties may arrange for administrative assistance by a suitable institution or person.
Summary:

The document summarizes the Indian Conciliation Act of 1996, which provides a legal framework for the resolution of disputes through conciliation. The Act outlines the role and responsibilities of the conciliator, including the ability to invite parties to meet or communicate with them, determine the location of meetings, and disclose factual information to parties. The Act also emphasizes the importance of cooperation between parties and the conciliator, as well as the ability for parties to submit suggestions for settlement.

The Act also details the process for reaching a settlement agreement, which includes the formulation of terms by the conciliator, observation by the parties, and the potential for reformation of the terms. Once an agreement is reached, it is final and binding on the parties and any persons claiming under them. The settlement agreement has the same status and effect as an arbitral award on agreed terms.

Confidentiality is a key aspect of the conciliation process, with all matters relating to the proceedings required to be kept confidential, except where disclosure is necessary for implementation and enforcement. The conciliation proceedings may be terminated by the signing of the settlement agreement, a declaration by the conciliator, a declaration by the parties, or a declaration by one party to the other and the conciliator.

During the conciliation proceedings, parties are prohibited from initiating arbitral or judicial proceedings except in certain circumstances. The conciliator is also prohibited from acting as an arbitrator or representative in any related proceedings. The Act also specifies that views expressed, suggestions made, admissions, proposals, and willingness to accept proposals made by the conciliator cannot be used as evidence in any related proceedings.

The Act includes provisions for the fixing and payment of costs, as well as deposits for anticipated costs. The conciliator may also make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act. The Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937, the Arbitration Act, 1940, and the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961 have been repealed, but their provisions apply to arbitral proceedings that commenced before the Act came into force.
Summary:

The Arbitration and Conciliation (Third) Ordinance, 1996, has been repealed and replaced by the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. However, any orders, rules, notifications, or actions taken under the repealed Ordinance will continue to be valid under the corresponding provisions of the new Act.

The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015, introduced several amendments to the Act, which came into force on 23rd October 2015. However, these amendments do not apply to arbitral proceedings that were commenced before the amendment's commencement date or to court proceedings arising out of such proceedings. The amendments apply only to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after 23rd October 2015 and to court proceedings arising out of or in relation to such arbitral proceedings.

The First Schedule of the Act contains the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards. The Convention applies to the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards made in a State other than the State where recognition and enforcement are sought and arising out of differences between persons, whether physical or legal. The Convention also applies to arbitral awards not considered as domestic awards in the State where recognition and enforcement are sought.

The Convention requires Contracting States to recognize an agreement in writing under which the parties undertake to submit to arbitration all or any differences that have arisen or may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship. The court of a Contracting State, when seized of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties have made an agreement within the meaning of this article, shall refer the parties to arbitration, unless it finds that the agreement is null and void.

Each Contracting State shall recognize arbitral awards as binding and enforce them in accordance with the rules of procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon, under the conditions laid down in the Convention. The party applying for recognition and enforcement of the award shall supply the duly authenticated original award or a duly certified copy thereof and the original agreement referred to in article II or a duly certified copy thereof. If the award or agreement is not made in an official language of the country in which the award is relied upon, the party applying for recognition and enforcement of the award shall produce a translation of these documents into such language.

Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused at the request of the party against whom it is invoked only if that party furnishes proof that the parties to the agreement were, under the law applicable to them, under some incapacity, or the agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it, or if the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment of the arbitrator or of the arbitration proceedings, or if the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties. Recognition and enforcement may also be refused if the competent authority in the country where recognition and enforcement is sought finds that the subject-matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of that country or that the recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of that country.
Summary:

The document consists of articles from a convention on the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards. The convention applies to territories of High Contracting Parties, and an arbitral award made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration covered by the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses is recognized as binding and enforced in accordance with the rules of the procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon. To obtain such recognition or enforcement, it is necessary that the award has been made in a territory of one of the High Contracting Parties to which the present Convention applies and between persons who are subject to the jurisdiction of one of the High Contracting Parties. The award must also meet several conditions, such as being made in pursuance of a valid submission to arbitration, having a subject-matter capable of settlement by arbitration, being made by the Arbitral Tribunal provided for in the submission to arbitration or constituted in the manner agreed upon by the parties, and having become final in the country in which it has been made. Recognition or enforcement of the award cannot be contrary to the public policy or to the principles of the law of the country in which it is sought to be relied upon. The convention also provides for denunciation and the possibility of excluding certain territories.
Summary:
The document outlines the conditions for recognizing and enforcing an arbitral award in India. According to Article 1, an award may be refused recognition and enforcement if it has been annulled in the country of origin, if the party against whom it is sought was not given proper notice or was under a legal incapacity, or if the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms of the submission to arbitration. If the award has not covered all the questions submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the competent authority may postpone recognition or enforcement or grant it subject to guarantee. If the party against whom the award has been made proves that there is a ground, other than those specified in Article 1 and 2, entitling him to contest the validity of the award in a Court of Law, the Court may refuse recognition or enforcement of the award or adjourn the consideration thereof. The party relying upon an award or claiming its enforcement must supply the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated, documentary or other evidence to prove that the award has become final, and when necessary, documentary or other evidence to prove that the conditions laid down in Article 1 have been fulfilled. A translation of the award and of the other documents mentioned in this Article into the official language of the country where the award is sought to be relied upon may be demanded. The provisions of the above Articles shall not deprive any interested party of the right of availing himself of an arbitral award in the manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties of the country where such award is sought to be relied upon. The present Convention applies only to arbitral awards made after the coming into force of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923. The present Convention, which will remain open to the signature of all the signatories of the Protocol of 1923 on Arbitration Clauses, shall have been ratified. Ratification shall be deposited as soon as possible with the Secretary-General of the League of Nations, who will notify such deposit to all the signatories. The present Convention shall come into force three months after it shall have been ratified on behalf of two High Contracting Parties. Thereafter, it shall take effect, in the case of each High Contracting Party, three months after the deposit of the ratification on its behalf with the Secretary-General of the League of Nations. The present Convention may be denounced on behalf of any Member of the League or Non-Member State. Denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations, who will immediately send a copy thereof, certified to be in conformity with the notifications, to all the other Contracting Parties, at the same time informing them of the date on which he received it. The denunciation shall come into force only in respect of the High Contracting Party which shall have notified it and one year after such notification shall have reached the Secretary-General of the League of Nations. The denunciation of the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses shall entail, ipso facto, the denunciation of the present Convention. The present Convention does not apply to the colonies, protectorates or territories under suzerainty or mandate of any High Contracting Party unless they are specially mentioned. The application of this Convention to one or more of such colonies, protectorates or territories to which the Protocol on Arbitration Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923, applies, can be effected at any time by means of a declaration addressed to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations by one of the High Contracting Parties. Such declaration shall take effect three months after the deposit thereof. The High Contracting Parties can at any time denounce the Convention for all or any of the colonies, protectorates or territories referred to above. Article 9 hereof applied to such denunciation. The Fifth Schedule lays down the grounds for justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of arbitrators. These include the arbitrator's relationship with the parties or counsel, relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute, arbitrator's direct or indirect interest in the dispute, and previous services for one of the parties or other involvement in the case.
The document discusses the rules and guidelines for appointing arbitrators in legal disputes under Indian law. The rules are outlined in the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015, and include various circumstances that may give rise to justifiable doubts as to an arbitrator's independence or impartiality.

Some of the circumstances that may affect an arbitrator's independence or impartiality include:

* The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor, or has any other past or present business relationship with a party.
* The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or their affiliate.
* The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one of the parties.
* The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm as one of the parties' lawyers.
* The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties or their management.
* A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or their affiliate.
* The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute to a party or their affiliate.
* The arbitrator has a direct or indirect interest in the dispute.

The document also includes provisions for disclosing any past or present relationships with or interests in any of the parties or the subject matter in dispute, and circumstances that may affect an arbitrator's ability to devote sufficient time to the arbitration.

Additionally, the document includes the Sixth and Seventh Schedules, which set out the information that must be disclosed by an arbitrator, including their prior experience, ongoing arbitrations, and any relationships or interests that may affect their independence or impartiality. The Seventh Schedule also includes a list of relationships and interests that are considered to be automatically disqualifying for an arbitrator.
Summary:

The document summarizes amendments made to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, through various acts. These amendments are significant in Indian arbitration law.

The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015, came into effect on 23rd October 2015, and it made several changes to the original Act. The changes include the appointment of arbitrators by the Supreme Court or High Court, and the Chief Justice or his designate can make such appointments. The amendment also introduced a new sub-section (8A), which states that the mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if he/she refuses or fails to act without any reasonable cause.

The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019, further amended the Act, and it came into effect on 30th August 2019. The amendment introduced a new section 11(13A), which states that the Supreme Court or High Court shall not entertain an application for the appointment of an arbitrator after the execution of the arbitration agreement. The amendment also introduced a new sub-section (6A) in section 17, which states that an arbitral tribunal may grant any interim measures it deems necessary in accordance with the rules of institutional arbitration.

The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2016, also made significant changes to the original Act. The amendment introduced a new section 11(14), which states that the Chief Justice of India or the person or institution designated by him is final in appointing arbitrators. The amendment also introduced a new section 12, which states that an arbitrator may be removed if he/she fails to disclose any circumstances that may give rise to justifiable doubts as to his/her independence or impartiality.

The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019, further amended the Act, and it came into effect on 30th August 2019. The amendment introduced a new section 11(14A), which states that the Supreme Court or High Court shall not entertain an application for the appointment of an arbitrator after the execution of the arbitration agreement. The amendment also introduced a new sub-section (7) in section 28, which states that the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the terms of the contract and trade usages applicable to the transaction.

In conclusion, the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, has undergone several amendments through various acts, and these amendments have significantly changed Indian arbitration law. The amendments aim to make the arbitration process more efficient, transparent, and fair. The changes include the appointment of arbitrators, termination of the mandate of an arbitrator, interim measures, and disclosure of circumstances that may affect an arbitrator's independence or impartiality.