Summary:

The Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal) Act, 1994, was enacted on March 21, 1994, to transfer and vest the undertakings of Indian Airlines and Air India to and in the companies formed and registered as Indian Airlines Limited and Air India Limited. The Act aims to repeal the Air Corporations Act, 1953.

The Act includes several sections, each addressing specific aspects of the transfer and vesting process:

Section 1: This section outlines the short title and commencement date of the Act.

Section 2: This section defines key terms used in the Act.

Section 3: This section specifies that on the appointed day, the undertaking of Indian Airlines will vest in Indian Airlines Limited, and the undertaking of Air India will vest in Air India Limited.

Section 4: This section explains the general effect of vesting the undertakings in the companies, including the transfer of all assets, rights, powers, and privileges, as well as all liabilities and obligations.

Section 5: This section states that all licenses, permits, quotas, and exemptions granted to a corporation will be deemed to have been granted to the company in which the undertaking of that corporation has vested.

Section 6: This section ensures that any tax exemptions or benefits granted to a corporation will continue to have effect in relation to the company in which the undertaking of that corporation has vested.

Section 7: This section confirms that any guarantees for or in favor of a corporation will continue to be operative in relation to the company in which the undertaking of that corporation has vested.

Section 8: This section discusses provisions related to officers and other employees of corporations, including their transfer to the companies and the continuation of their tenure, remuneration, and benefits.

Section 9: This section grants the Central Government the power to give directions to a company regarding the exercise and performance of its functions.

Section 10: This section allows the Central Government to remove any difficulties arising in giving effect to the provisions of the Act.

Section 11: This section repeals the Air Corporations Act, 1953, and states that the corporations will cease to exist on the appointed day.

Section 12: This section repeals the Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal) Ordinance, 1994, and states that anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

In summary, the Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal) Act, 1994, transfers and vests the undertakings of Indian Airlines and Air India in the companies formed and registered as Indian Airlines Limited and Air India Limited, respectively, and repeals the Air Corporations Act, 1953. The Act includes provisions related to the transfer of assets, liabilities, licenses, guarantees, and employees, as well as the power of the Central Government to give directions and remove difficulties.