Summary:

THE TRADE MARKS ACT, 1999 (Act No. 47 of 1999) is an Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to trade marks, to provide for registration and better protection of trade marks for goods and services, and for the prevention of the use of fraudulent marks.

The Act is divided into four chapters. Chapter I, titled "Preliminary," contains the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act and definitions and interpretation of various terms used throughout the Act.

Some of the key definitions in Chapter I include:

* Appellate Board: The Appellate Board established under section 83.
* Assignment: An assignment in writing by act of the parties concerned.
* Associated trade marks: Trade marks deemed to be, or required to be, registered as associated trade marks under this Act.
* Bench: A Bench of the Appellate Board.
* Certification trade mark: A mark capable of distinguishing the goods or services in connection with which it is used in the course of trade which are certified by the proprietor of the mark in respect of origin, material, mode of manufacture of goods or performance of services, quality, accuracy, or other characteristics from goods or services not so certified and registrable as such under Chapter IX in respect of those goods or services in the name, as proprietor of the certification trade mark, of that person.
* Chairperson: The Chairperson of the Appellate Board.
* Collective mark: A trade mark distinguishing the goods or services of members of an association of persons (not being a partnership within the meaning of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) which is the proprietor of the mark from those of others.
* Deceptively similar: A mark shall be deemed to be deceptively similar to another mark if it so nearly resembles that other mark as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
* False trade description: A trade description which is untrue or misleading in a material respect as regards the goods or services to which it is applied or any alteration of a trade description as regards the goods or services to which it is applied, whether by way of addition, effacement, or otherwise, where that alteration makes the description untrue or misleading in a material respect or any marks or arrangement or combination thereof when applied to goods in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to believe that the goods are the manufacture or merchandise of some person other than the person whose merchandise or manufacture they really are or in relation to services in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to believe that the services are provided or rendered by some person other than the person whose services they really are or any false name or initials of a person applied to goods or services in such manner as if such name or initials were a trade description in any case where the name or initials is or are not a trade mark or part of a trade mark and is or are identical with or deceptively similar to the name or initials of a person carrying on business in connection with goods or services of the same description or both and who has not authorized the use of such name or initials and is or are either the name or initials of a fictitious person or some person not bona fide carrying on business in connection with such goods or services.
* Goods: Anything which is the subject of trade or manufacture.
* Judicial Member: A Member of the Appellate Board appointed as such under this Act, and includes the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson.
* Limitations: Any limitation of the exclusive right to the use of a trade mark given by the registration of a person as proprietor thereof, including limitations of that right as to mode or area of use within India or outside India.
* Mark: Includes a device, brand, heading, label, ticket, name, signature, word, letter, numeral, shape of goods, packaging or combination of colours or any combination thereof.
* Member: A Judicial Member or a Technical Member of the Appellate Board and includes the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson.
* Name: Includes any abbreviation of a name.
* Notify: To notify in the Trade Mark Journal published by the Registrar.
* Package: Includes any case, box, container, covering, folder, receptacle, vessel, casket, bottle, wrapper, label, band, ticket, reel, frame, capsule, cap, lid, stopper, and cork.
* Permitted use: The use of trade mark (i) by a registered user of the trade mark in relation to goods or services (a) with which he is connected in the course of trade; and (b) in respect of which the trade mark remains registered for the time being; and (c) for which he is registered as a registered user; and (d) which complies with any conditions or limitations to which the registration of a registered user is subject or (ii) by a person other than the registered proprietor and registered user in relation to goods or services (a) with which he is connected in the course of trade; and (b) in respect of which the trade mark remains registered for the time being; and (c) by consent of such registered proprietor in a written agreement; and (d) which complies with any conditions or limitations to which such user is subject and to which the registration of the trade mark is subject.
* Prescribed: Prescribed by rules made under this Act.
* Register: The Register of Trade Marks referred to in sub-section (1) of section 6.
* Registered: Registered under this Act.
* Registered proprietor: In relation to a trade mark, means the person for the time being entered in the register as proprietor of the trade mark.
* Registered trade mark: A trade mark which is actually on the register and remaining in force.
* Registered user: A person who is for the time being registered as such under section 49.
* Registrar: The Registrar of Trade Marks referred to in section 3.
* Service: Service of any description which is made available to potential users and includes the provision of services in connection with business of any industrial or commercial matters such as banking, communication, education, financing, insurance, chit funds, real estate, transport, storage, material treatment, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, boarding, lodging, entertainment, amusement, construction, repair, conveying of news or information and advertising.
* Trade description: Any description, statement, or other indication, direct or indirect, as to the number, quantity, measure, gauge, or weight of any goods or services, as to the standard of quality of any goods or services according to a classification commonly used or recognized in the trade, as to fitness for the purpose, strength, performance or behavior of any goods, being "drug" as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), or "food" as defined in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954), as to the place or country in which or the time at which any goods or services were made, produced, or provided, as the case may be, as to the name and address or other indication of the identity of the manufacturer or of the person providing the services or of the person for whom the goods are manufactured or services are provided, or as to the mode of manufacture or producing any goods or providing services, or as to the material of which any goods are composed, or as to any goods being the subject of an existing patent, privilege, or copyright.
* Trade mark: A mark capable of being represented graphically and which is capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those of others and may include shape of goods, their packaging, and combination of colors.

Chapter II, titled "Registration of Trade Marks," contains provisions related to the registration of trade marks and the powers and duties of the Registrar.

Chapter III, titled "Rights of Proprietors and Registered Users," contains provisions related to the rights of proprietors and registered users of trade marks.

Chapter IV, titled "Infringement and Penalties," contains provisions related to the infringement of trade marks and the penalties for such infringement.

Overall, THE TRADE MARKS ACT, 1999 provides a legal framework for the registration and protection of trade marks in India, with the aim of preventing the use of fraudulent marks and promoting fair competition in the market.
Summary:

The Trade Marks Act, 1999, governs the registration, protection, and use of trademarks in India. This Act defines a trademark as a mark used or proposed to be used in relation to goods or services for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the course of trade between the goods or services, as the case may be, and some person having the right, either as proprietor or by way of permitted user, to use the mark. The Act includes references to collective marks and certification trade marks in the definition of a trademark. The use of a trademark refers to the use of a printed or other visual representation of the mark, and the registration of a trademark includes the registration of its use upon or in relation to goods, or as part of any statement about the availability, provision, or performance of services. The Registrar of Trade Marks is appointed by the Central Government and is responsible for maintaining the Register of Trade Marks, which includes all registered trademarks with the names, addresses, and descriptions of the proprietors, notifications of assignment and transmissions, and the names, addresses, and descriptions of registered users. The Register of Trade Marks may be maintained electronically, and any reference to entry in the Register shall be construed as a reference to any entry as maintained electronically. The Registrar is responsible for classifying goods and services for the purposes of registration of trademarks in accordance with the International classification of goods and services. The Act prohibits the registration of trademarks that are devoid of any distinctive character, consist exclusively of marks or indications that may serve in trade to designate the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, values, geographical origin, or the time of production of the goods or rendering of the service or other characteristics of the goods or service, or consist exclusively of marks or indications that have become customary in the current language or in the bona fide and established practices of the trade. The Act also prohibits the registration of trademarks that are of such nature as to deceive the public or cause confusion, contain or comprise of any matter likely to hurt the religious susceptibilities of any class or section of the citizens of India, comprise or contain scandalous or obscene matter, or whose use is prohibited under the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. A trademark shall not be registered if it consists exclusively of the shape of goods which results from the nature of the goods themselves, or the shape of goods which is necessary to obtain a technical result, or the shape which gives substantial value to the goods. The limitation as to colour of a trademark is that it may be limited wholly or in part to any combination of colours.
Summary:

The Trade Marks Act, 1999 outlines the registration process for trademarks in India. Section 9 of the Act deals with the absolute grounds for refusal of registration, stating that a trademark cannot be registered if it is devoid of any distinctive character, is merely a laudatory word, or is a common to the trade. Section 11 outlines the relative grounds for refusal of registration, stating that a trademark cannot be registered if it is identical or similar to an earlier trademark, and there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public. Additionally, a trademark cannot be registered if its use would be prevented by law, such as the law of passing off or copyright law. The Act also provides for the registration of well-known trademarks, which are protected even if they are not registered in India. The Registrar may register identical or similar trademarks for the same or similar goods or services in cases of honest concurrent use or other special circumstances. Certain words, such as the commonly used and accepted name of any single chemical element or any single chemical compound, and international non-proprietary names declared by the World Health Organization, cannot be registered as trademarks. The Act also prohibits the registration of trademarks that falsely suggest a connection with any living person or a person whose death took place within twenty years prior to the date of application for registration. The Act also allows for the registration of parts of trademarks and of trademarks as a series. Additionally, the Act allows for the registration of associated trademarks, which are trademarks that are registered in the name of the same proprietor in respect of the same goods or description of goods or services or so related that they are likely to be mistaken for each other.
Summary:

The document discusses various provisions related to Indian laws on trademarks. The key concepts include:

1. Associated trade marks: The Registrar may require that trade marks be entered as associated marks if they are nearly identical and likely to cause confusion. This applies to marks registered or applied for by the same proprietor for the same or associated goods or services.
2. Effect of registration of parts of a mark: Registration of a trade mark consisting of several matters confers exclusive rights to the proprietor for the mark taken as a whole. However, if the mark contains any part that is not separately registered or is common or non-distinctive, there is no exclusive right in the matter forming only a part of the whole of the trade mark so registered.
3. Procedure for and duration of registration:
a. Application for registration: Any person claiming to be the proprietor of a trade mark used or proposed to be used may apply for registration in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner for each class of goods or services.
b. Withdrawal of acceptance: The Registrar may withdraw acceptance of an application if it was accepted in error or if the trade mark should not be registered or should be registered subject to conditions or limitations.
c. Advertisement of application: After acceptance, the Registrar shall advertise the application in the prescribed manner.
d. Opposition to registration: Any person may give notice of opposition to the registration within four months from the date of advertisement.
e. Correction and amendment: The Registrar may permit correction of any error or amendment of the application on such terms as he thinks just.
f. Registration: Subject to the provisions of section 19, when an application for registration of a trade mark has been accepted and either the application has not been opposed or the opposition has been decided in favour of the applicant, the Registrar shall register the trade mark within eighteen months of the filing of the application.

These provisions are part of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, and regulate the registration, use, and enforcement of trademarks in India.
Summary:

The Trade Marks Act, 1999, is a law in India that governs the registration and protection of trademarks. This document outlines several sections of the Act that deal with the registration, renewal, removal, and restoration of trademarks, as well as the rights and protections granted to registered trademark owners.

Section 18 of the Act states that the registration of a trademark is not complete until it has been examined and approved by the Trade Marks Registry. If registration is not completed within twelve months due to the applicant's default, the Registrar may treat the application as abandoned unless it is completed within the specified time frame. The Registrar may also amend the register or a certificate of registration to correct clerical errors or obvious mistakes.

Section 24 of the Act states that two or more people who use a trademark independently or propose to use it may be registered as joint proprietors of the trademark if their relationship is such that no one is entitled to use it except on behalf of all of them or in relation to an article or service with which all of them are connected in the course of trade.

Section 25 of the Act states that the registration of a trademark is valid for a period of ten years and may be renewed from time to time. The Registrar shall renew the registration for a period of ten years from the date of expiration of the original registration or of the last renewal of registration upon receipt of an application and payment of the prescribed fee. If the conditions for renewal are not met, the Registrar may remove the trademark from the register. However, the Registrar may restore the trademark to the register and renew the registration if an application is made within one year of the expiration of the last registration and the prescribed fee and surcharge is paid.

Section 26 of the Act states that a trademark that has been removed from the register for failure to pay the renewal fee shall be deemed to be a trademark already on the register for the purpose of any application for the registration of another trademark during one year after the date of removal, unless the tribunal is satisfied that there has been no bona fide trade use of the trademark during the two years immediately preceding its removal or that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from the use of the trademark that is the subject of the application for registration.

Section 27 of the Act states that no person shall be entitled to institute any proceeding to prevent or to recover damages for the infringement of an unregistered trademark. However, nothing in the Act affects rights of action against any person for passing off goods or services as the goods of another person or as services provided by another person, or the remedies in respect thereof.

Section 28 of the Act states that the registration of a trademark gives the registered proprietor of the trademark the exclusive right to the use of the trademark in relation to the goods or services in respect of which the trademark is registered and to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trademark in the manner provided by this Act. The exclusive right to the use of a trademark is subject to any conditions and limitations to which the registration is subject.

Section 29 of the Act states that a registered trademark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which is identical with or deceptively similar to the trademark in relation to goods or services in respect of which the trademark is registered and in such a manner as to render the use of the mark likely to be taken as being used as a trademark. A registered trademark is also infringed by a person who uses a mark that is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public or have an association with the registered trademark. The court shall presume that it is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public in cases where the mark is identical with the registered trademark and the goods or services covered by it are identical. A registered trademark is also infringed by a person who uses the trademark as his trade name or part of his trade name, or name of his business concern or part of the name, of his business concern dealing in goods or services in respect of which the trademark is registered. A person uses a registered trademark if, among other things, he affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof, offers or exposes goods for sale under the registered trademark, imports or exports goods under the mark, or uses the registered trademark on business papers or in advertising. A registered trademark is also infringed by any advertising of that trademark if such advertising takes unfair advantage of and is contrary to honest practices in industrial or commercial matters, is detrimental to its distinctive character, or is against the reputation of the trademark.
Summary:

The Trade Marks Act, 1999, governs the registration and protection of trademarks in India. Section 29 of the Act outlines the rights of a registered trademark owner, including the exclusive right to use the mark in relation to the goods or services for which it is registered. However, Section 30 of the Act provides certain exceptions to this exclusive right.

Under Section 30(1), the use of a registered trademark by any person for the purpose of identifying goods or services as those of the proprietor is allowed, provided such use is in accordance with honest practices in industrial or commercial matters and is not such as to take unfair advantage of or be detrimental to the distinctive character or repute of the trademark.

Section 30(2) states that a registered trademark is not infringed where the use of the mark indicates the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value, geographical origin, the time of production of goods or of rendering of services or other characteristics of goods or services, or where the mark is registered subject to any conditions or limitations that do not extend to the use in question.

Additionally, Section 30(3) permits the use of a registered trademark by a person in relation to goods connected in the course of trade with the proprietor or a registered user of the trademark, provided the registered proprietor or the registered user has applied the trademark and has not subsequently removed or obliterated it, or has expressly or impliedly consented to the use of the trademark.

Under Section 31, the original registration of a trademark and all subsequent assignments and transmissions of the trademark shall be prima facie evidence of the validity thereof in all legal proceedings relating to the trademark.

Section 32 provides protection for a registered trademark that has acquired a distinctive character in relation to the goods or services for which it is registered, even if it was registered in breach of sub-section (1) of section 9.

Section 33 states that where the proprietor of an earlier trademark has acquiesced for a continuous period of five years in the use of a registered trademark, being aware of that use, he shall no longer be entitled to apply for a declaration that the registration of the later trademark is invalid or to oppose the use of the later trademark in relation to the goods or services in relation to which it has been so used, unless the registration of the later trademark was not applied in good faith.

Section 34 provides that nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user of a registered trademark to interfere with any bona fide use by a person of his own name or that of his place of business, or of the name, or of the name of the place of business, of any of his predecessors in business, or the use by any person of any bona fide description of the character or quality of his goods or services.

Section 36 provides that the registration of a trademark shall not be deemed to have become invalid by reason only of any use after the date of the registration of any word or words which the trademark contains or of which it consists as the name or description of an article or substance or service, provided that such use is well known and established or that the article or substance was formerly manufactured under a patent and the said word is the only practicable name or description of the article or substance.
Summary:
This document discusses special provisions related to the protection of trademarks through international registration under the Madrid Protocol in India. The provisions of this chapter apply to international applications and registrations under the Madrid Protocol. The document defines various terms used in this chapter, including application, basic application, basic registration, Common Regulations, Contracting Organisation, Contracting Party, Contracting State, international application, International Bureau, international registration, Madrid Agreement, Madrid Protocol, and trade mark. The Trade Marks Registry will deal with international applications, and an international application may be made by an applicant or registered proprietor of a trade mark that has been filed or registered under section 18 or section 23, respectively. The Registrar will certify the international application and forward it to the International Bureau for registration. If the application under section 18 or the registration under section 23 has been withdrawn, cancelled, expired, or finally refused in respect of all or some of the goods or services listed in the international registration, the protection resulting from such international registration will cease to have effect. The Registrar will transmit information to the International Bureau every five years from the date of international registration. If India has been designated in an international registration, the Registrar will keep a record of the particulars of that international registration and may refuse grant of protection if necessary. If the protection of an international registration has not been opposed and the time for notice of opposition has expired, the Registrar will notify the International Bureau of its acceptance of extension of protection of the trade mark under such international registration. If a registered proprietor of a trade mark makes an international registration of that trade mark and designates India, the international registration will replace the registration held in India. If a holder of an international registration of a trade mark who designates India has not been extended protection in India, they will have the same remedy available to any person making an application for the registration of a trade mark under section 18. If the related basic application or, as the case may be, the basic registration in a Contracting Party other than India has been withdrawn, cancelled, expired, or finally refused in respect of all or some of the goods or services listed in the international registration, the protection resulting from such international registration in India will cease to have effect.
Summary:

The document to summarize pertains to Indian laws regarding international registration of trademarks, assignment and transmission of registered and unregistered trademarks, and associated and certification trademarks.

Under the International Bureau, an international registration of a trademark in India will have the same protection as if it were registered in India. However, the indication of classes of goods and services given by the applicant will not bind the Registrar with regard to the determination of the scope of the protection of the trademark. The international registration is valid for ten years and can be renewed for another ten years.

In terms of assignment and transmission, a registered trademark is assignable and transmissible, whether with or without the goodwill of the business concerned, and in respect of all or some of the goods or services in respect of which the trademark is registered. An unregistered trademark may also be assigned or transmitted with or without the goodwill of the business concerned. However, there are restrictions on assignment or transmission where multiple exclusive rights would be created, and approval from the Registrar is required in certain cases.

Associated trademarks can only be assigned and transmitted as a whole and not separately, while certification trademarks cannot be assigned or transmitted without the consent of the Registrar.

Where a person becomes entitled by assignment or transmission to a registered trademark, they must apply in the prescribed manner to the Registrar to register their title, and the Registrar shall register them as the proprietor of the trademark in respect of the goods or services in respect of which the assignment or transmission has effect. The Registrar may require the applicant to furnish evidence or further evidence in proof of title only where there is a reasonable doubt about the veracity of any statement or any document furnished. Where the validity of an assignment or transmission is in dispute between the parties, the Registrar may refuse to register the assignment or transmission until the rights of the parties have been determined by a competent court.
Summary:

The document summarizes the Indian Trade Marks Act, specifically focusing on sections related to the use of trade marks and registered users.

Section 46 outlines the conditions under which an application for the registration of a trade mark can be accepted, even if the applicant does not use or propose to use the trade mark. This includes situations where a company is about to be formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956, and the applicant intends to assign the trade mark to that company for use, or where the proprietor intends for the trade mark to be used by a registered user after registration.

Section 47 outlines the grounds for removing a registered trade mark from the register due to non-use. This includes situations where the trade mark was registered without any bona fide intention to use it, or where there has been no bona fide use of the trade mark for a continuous period of five years. However, the tribunal may refuse an application for removal if there has been bona fide use of the trade mark in relation to goods or services of the same description or goods or services associated with those goods or services.

Section 48 outlines the conditions for registering a person as a registered user of a trade mark. This includes an agreement in writing between the registered proprietor and the proposed registered user, and an affidavit made by the registered proprietor stating the goods or services in respect of which registration is proposed, the conditions or restrictions proposed, and the duration of the permitted use.

Section 49 outlines the powers of the Registrar to vary or cancel the registration of a person as a registered user. This includes situations where the registered user has failed to comply with the conditions or restrictions imposed, or where the registration was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation.

Overall, these sections outline the legal framework for the use and registration of trade marks in India, with a focus on ensuring that trade marks are used fairly and honestly in commerce.
Summary:

This document discusses Indian laws related to the cancellation and rectification of registered trademarks. The Trademarks Act of 1999 outlines the grounds for which a registered trademark can be cancelled, including misrepresentation, changes in circumstances, and non-compliance with quality stipulations in agreements with registered users. The Registrar has the power to call for information regarding agreements with registered users and to cancel the registration of a trademark if the agreement is not in force. Registered users have the right to institute proceedings for infringement in their own name, while permitted users do not have this right. Assignable or transmissible rights are not conferred on registered users. The use of one associated or substantially identical trademark is considered equivalent to the use of another. The use of a registered trademark for export trade and for goods or services with a form of connection in the course of trade is deemed to constitute use of the trademark in relation to those goods or services. The Appellate Board or the Registrar may rectify the register on application by any person aggrieved or of its own motion. The Registrar may correct any error in the name, address, or description of the registered proprietor or registered user, enter any change in the name, address, or description of the registered proprietor, cancel the entry of a trademark on the register, strike out any goods or classes of goods or services from those in respect of which a trade mark is registered, and make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registration. The Registrar may also alter a registered trademark on application by the registered proprietor.
Summary:

This document discusses various aspects of Indian laws related to trade marks, specifically focusing on the registration, alteration, and use of collective and certification trade marks.

Under Section 48 of the Act, the proprietor of a trade mark may apply to the Registrar for leave to add to or alter the trade mark in a manner that does not substantially affect its identity. The Registrar may refuse leave or grant it on terms and subject to limitations as they think fit. If leave is granted, the trade mark as altered must be advertised, unless it has already been advertised under sub-section (2).

Section 60 of the Act deals with the adaptation of entries in the register to amended or substituted classifications of goods or services. The Registrar cannot make any amendment of the register that would add any goods or classes of goods or services to those in respect of which a trade mark is registered, unless compliance with this provision would involve undue complexity and would not affect any substantial quantity of goods or services and would not substantially prejudice the rights of any person. A proposal to amend the register must be brought to the notice of the registered proprietor of the trade mark affected and advertised in the prescribed manner, and may be opposed before the Registrar by any person aggrieved on the ground that the proposed amendment contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1).

Chapter VIII of the Act deals with collective marks. The provisions of this Act apply to collective marks subject to the provisions contained in this Chapter. A collective mark shall not be registered if it is likely to deceive or cause confusion on the part of the public, and in such case, the Registrar may require that a mark in respect of which application is made for registration comprise some indication that it is a collective mark. An application for registration of a collective mark shall be accompanied by the regulations governing the use of such collective mark, which shall specify the persons authorized to use the mark, the conditions of membership of the association, and the conditions of use of the mark, including any sanctions against misuse.

Chapter IX of the Act deals with certification trade marks. Certain provisions of this Act do not apply to certification trade marks, including clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 9, Sections 18, 20, and 21, except as expressly applied by this Chapter, Sections 28, 29, 30, 41, 42, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54, and sub-section (2) of section 56, and Chapter XII, except section 107. A mark shall not be registrable as a certification trade mark in the name of a person who carries on a trade in goods of the kind certified or a trade of the provision of services of the kind certified. An application for the registration of a mark as a certification trade mark shall be made to the Registrar in the prescribed manner by the person proposed to be registered as the proprietor thereof, and accompanied by a draft for the regulations to be deposited under section 74. The Registrar shall consider the application with regard to whether the applicant is competent to certify the goods in respect of which the mark is to be registered, whether the draft of the regulations is satisfactory, and whether in all the circumstances the registration applied for would be to the public advantage.
Summary:
The document discusses the regulations and laws related to certification trade marks in India. Section 74 of the Act outlines the regulations that can be included in a certification trade mark license agreement, which can be altered by the registrar upon application by the registered proprietor. Infringement of a certification trade mark occurs when a person, not being the registered proprietor or authorized by him, uses a mark identical to or deceptively similar to the certification trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect of which it is registered. However, certain acts do not constitute infringement, such as the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or services certified by the proprietor, or the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or services adapted to form part of or to be accessory to other goods in relation to which the mark has been used without infringement. The Registrar may cancel or vary the registration of a certification trade mark on certain grounds, such as the proprietor being no longer competent to certify the goods or services, the proprietor failing to observe any provisions of the regulations, or it being no longer to the public advantage that the mark should remain registered. The registration of a person as a proprietor of a certification trade mark gives him the exclusive right to the use of the mark in relation to the goods or services, subject to any conditions and limitations to which the registration is subject. The Intellectual Property Appellate Board is established to exercise jurisdiction, powers, and authority conferred on it by or under this Act and the Copyright Act, 1957. The Appellate Board consists of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and other Members, and its jurisdiction, powers, and authority may be exercised by Benches thereof. A Bench shall consist of one Judicial Member and one Technical Member and shall sit at a place specified by the Central Government. The Chairperson may transfer a Member from one Bench to another Bench and may authorize the Vice-Chairperson, Judicial Member, or Technical Member appointed to one Bench to discharge also the functions of the Judicial Member or the Technical Member, as the case may be, of another Bench. If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and make a reference to the Chairperson who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson unless he is or has been a Judge of a High Court or has, for at least two years, held the office of a Vice-Chairperson. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Vice-Chairperson unless he has, for at least two years, held the office of a Judicial Member or a Technical Member or has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service or any higher post for at least five years. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member unless he has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post in Grade I of that Service for at least three years or has, for at least ten years, held a civil judicial office. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member unless he has, for at least ten years, specialized knowledge or experience in a field of science, technology, or industry related to the subject-matter of the disputes that are likely to come before the Board.
Summary:

The document summarizes provisions related to appointments, terms of office, and powers of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and members of the Intellectual Property Appellate Board (IPAB) in India.

Appointment of Technical Members requires a minimum of ten years of experience as a tribunal member under the current Act or the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, with at least five years in a post not lower than Joint Registrar. Alternatively, a minimum of ten years of experience as an advocate with specialized experience in trade mark law is required. The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and other Members are appointed by the President of India, with the Chairperson's appointment requiring consultation with the Chief Justice of India.

The term of office for the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Members is five years or until they reach the age of sixty-five (Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson) or sixty-two (Members), whichever comes first. In case of vacancy, absence, illness, or any other cause, the Vice-Chairperson or senior-most Member will act as Chairperson or discharge the functions of the Chairperson.

Salaries, allowances, and other terms and conditions of service for the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Members are as prescribed. A person who was in government service before assuming office as Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, or Member is deemed to have retired from service on the date of assuming office.

The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, or any other Member may resign by writing to the President of India, with the provision that they will continue to hold office for three months or until a successor takes over. They can only be removed by the President of India on the grounds of proved misbehavior or incapacity after an inquiry by a Judge of the Supreme Court.

The Central Government determines the nature and categories of officers and employees required to assist the IPAB and provides them as needed. The salaries, allowances, and conditions of service of these officers and employees are prescribed.

Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar under this Act or the rules made thereunder may prefer an appeal to the IPAB within three months from the date of communication of the order or decision. The IPAB has the power to regulate its own procedure and has the same powers as a civil court for certain matters. No court or other authority shall have jurisdiction over matters referred to in section 91.
Summary:

The Trade Marks Act, 1999, outlines the powers and duties of the Registrar in legal proceedings related to trademarks. According to Section 98, the Registrar has the right to appear and be heard in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board that involve alteration or rectification of the register or raise questions about the practice of the Trade Marks Registry. The Registrar also has the right to appear in any appeal to the Board from an order of the Registrar on an application for registration of a trade mark that is not opposed or is opposed but considered necessary in the public interest. The Registrar may submit a statement in writing instead of appearing in person. The costs of the Registrar in proceedings before the Appellate Board are at the discretion of the Board and the Registrar shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any of the parties. All cases of appeals against any order or decision of the Registrar and all cases pertaining to rectification of the register, pending before any High Court, shall be transferred to the Appellate Board.

Section 101 defines applying a trade mark or mark or trade description to goods or services. It includes applying it to the goods themselves or using it in relation to services, applying it to any package in or with which the goods are sold, exposed for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture, placing, enclosing or annexing any goods which are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture, in or with any package or other thing to which a trade mark or mark or trade description has been applied, using a trade mark or mark or trade description in any manner reasonably likely to lead to the belief that the goods or services in connection with which it is used are designated or described by that trade mark or mark or trade description, or using a trade mark or trade description in any sign, advertisement, invoice, catalogue, business letter, business paper, price list or other commercial document and goods are delivered or services are rendered to a person in pursuance of a request or order made by reference to the trade mark or trade description as so used.

Section 102 defines falsifying a trade mark and falsely applying a trade mark to goods or services. It includes making a trade mark or a deceptively similar mark without the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark, falsifying any genuine trade mark, whether by alteration, addition, effacement or otherwise, applying such trade mark or a deceptively similar mark to goods or services or any package containing goods, using any package bearing a mark which is identical with or deceptively similar to the trade mark of such proprietor, for the purpose of packing, filling or wrapping therein any goods other than the genuine goods of the proprietor of the trade mark, and any trade mark falsified as mentioned in sub-section (1) or falsely applied as mentioned in sub-section (2) is in this Act referred to as a false trade mark.

Section 103 outlines the penalty for applying false trade marks, trade descriptions, etc. It includes falsifying any trade mark, falsely applying to goods or services any trade mark, making, disposing of, or having in his possession, any die, block, machine, plate or other instrument for the purpose of falsifying or of being used for falsifying, a trade mark, applying any false trade description to goods or services, applying to any goods to which an indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced or the name and address of the manufacturer or person for whom the goods are manufactured is required to be applied under section 139, a false indication of such country, place, name or address, tampering with, altering or effacing an indication of origin which has been applied to any goods to which it is required to be applied under section 139, or causing any of the things above mentioned in this section to be done. The punishment for this offence is imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees.

Section 104 outlines the penalty for selling goods or providing services to which false trade mark or false trade description is applied. It includes selling, letting for hire or exposing for sale, or hiring or having in his possession for sale, goods or things, or providing or hiring services, to which any false trade mark or false trade description is applied or which, being required under section 139 to have applied to them an indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced or the name and address of the manufacturer or person for whom the goods are manufactured or services provided, are without the indications so required. The punishment for this offence is imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees.

Section 105 enhances the penalty on second or subsequent conviction. Whoever having already been convicted of an offence under section 103 or section 104 is again convicted of any such offence shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees.

Section 106 outlines the penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrary to section 81. If any person removes or attempts to remove or causes or attempts to cause to be removed for sale from any premises referred to in section 81 or sells or exposes for sale or has in his possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture piece goods or cotton yarn or cotton thread which is not marked as required by that section, every such piece and every such bundle of yarn and all such thread and everything used for the packing thereof shall be forfeited to Government and such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

Section 107 outlines the penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as registered. It includes representing that a trade mark is registered when it is not, or that it is registered in respect of any goods or services in respect of which it is not registered, or that the trade mark is registered in the name of a person who is not the proprietor of the trade mark. The punishment for this offence is imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

These sections of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, provide for the powers and duties of the Registrar in legal proceedings related to trademarks, the penalty for applying false trade marks, trade descriptions, etc., the penalty for selling goods or providing services to which false trade mark or false trade description is applied, the enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction, the penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrary to section 81, and the penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as registered. These provisions aim to protect the rights of trademark owners and maintain the integrity of the trademark registration system in India.
Summary:
The Trade Marks Act of India includes several provisions related to the improper use of registered trademarks and other related offenses. Section 107 prohibits the falsification of a registered trademark or the application of a false trade description to goods or services. It also forbids the falsely representing that goods are the product of a particular company, or the use of a false trade mark in relation to goods or services. Violations of this section can result in imprisonment for up to three years, a fine, or both. Section 108 penalizes the improper description of a place of business as connected with the Trade Marks Office, with imprisonment for up to two years, a fine, or both. Section 109 deals with the falsification of entries in the register and provides for punishment with imprisonment for up to two years, a fine, or both. Section 110 provides for certain exceptions to the offenses mentioned in sections 102, 103, 104, and 105, and no act or omission shall be deemed to be an offense if it is permitted under this Act or any other law for the time being in force. Section 111 allows for the forfeiture of goods in certain cases, such as when a person is convicted of an offense under sections 103, 104, 105, or is acquitted of an offense under sections 103 or 104 on proof that he acted without intent to defraud. Section 112 provides for the exemption of certain persons employed in the ordinary course of business, and Section 113 deals with the procedure where the invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused. Section 114 provides for the liability of companies and their officers for offenses committed under this Act, while Section 115 deals with the cognizance of certain offenses and the powers of police officers for search and seizure.
Summary:

The Trade Marks Act, 1999, outlines various offenses related to the misuse of registered trademarks, including the unauthorized representation of a registered trademark as registered for certain goods or services. The Act specifies that only courts with the rank of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class can try these offenses, and that they are cognizable. The police may search and seize goods, dies, blocks, machines, plates, other instruments or things involved in committing the offense without a warrant. In the case of goods imported by sea, evidence of the port of shipment is prima facie evidence of the place or country in which the goods were made or produced. The court may order costs to be paid by the accused to the complainant, or by the complainant to the accused, as it deems reasonable. No prosecution for an offense under this Act can be commenced after the expiration of three years next after the commission of the offense charged, or two years after the discovery thereof by the prosecutor, whichever expires first. An officer of the Government whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this Chapter cannot be compelled in any court to say whence he got any information as to the commission of any offense against this Act. The Central Government may issue instructions for the limits of variation, as regards number, quantity, measure, gauge or weight which are to be recognized by criminal courts as permissible in the case of any goods. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act. Every person appointed under this Act and every Member of the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). Where the validity of the registration of a trade mark is questioned in a suit for infringement, the court shall stay the suit pending the final disposal of any rectification proceedings before the Registrar or the Appellate Board. If the party concerned proves that he has made an application for rectification of the register within the time specified, the trial of the suit shall stand stayed until the final disposal of the rectification proceedings. If no such application has been made within the time so specified, the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the court shall proceed with the suit in regard to the other issues in the case. The final order made in any rectification proceedings shall be binding upon the parties and the court shall dispose of the suit conformably to such order in so far as it relates to the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark. The Registrar has the power to enforce the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery and production of documents, and issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses in all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar. The Registrar may make such orders as to costs as he considers reasonable, and any such order shall be executable as a decree of a civil court. The Registrar shall have no power to award costs to or against any party on an appeal to him against a refusal of the Registrar to rectify the register.
Summary:

The Trade Marks Act of India includes several provisions related to the registration, use, and protection of trademarks. The Registrar of Trade Marks has the power to grant or refuse registration of a trademark, and can also review his own decisions. The Act provides for the use of evidence by affidavit in proceedings before the Registrar, and allows for the substitution of a deceased person's successor in interest in a proceeding. The Registrar may extend the time for doing any act, and may treat an application as abandoned if the applicant is in default in the prosecution of the application. The Registrar may also give advice as to whether a proposed trade mark appears to be distinctive.

In suits for infringement or passing off, the relief that may be granted includes injunction, damages or an account of profits, and delivery-up of the infringing labels and marks for destruction or erasure. The court may also grant ex parte injunctions or interlocutory orders for discovery of documents, preserving of infringing goods, documents or other evidence, and restraining the defendant from disposing of or dealing with his assets. However, the court shall not grant relief by way of damages (other than nominal damages) or on account of profits in certain cases.

Registered users of a trademark using by way of permitted use who are not themselves applicants in respect of any proceeding under Chapter VII or section 91, shall be made a party to the proceeding. A copy of any entry in the register or of any document referred to in sub-section (1) of section 148, purporting to be certified by the Registrar and sealed with the seal of the Trade Marks Registry, shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and in all proceedings without further proof or production of the original. The Registrar or any officer of the Trade Marks Registry shall not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party, be compellable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, or to appear as a witness to prove the matters therein recorded. The Central Government may require that goods of any class specified in the notification which are made or produced beyond the limits of India and imported into India, or which are made or produced within the limits of India, shall have applied to them an indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced, or of the name and address of the manufacturer or the person for whom the goods were manufactured.
Summary:

The Trade Marks Act, 1999, governs the registration and protection of trademarks in India. The Act defines a trademark as a mark capable of being represented graphically and which is capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one person from those of others. The Act provides for the registration of trademarks, and the registration confers exclusive rights to the use of the trademark.

Section 139 of the Act provides for the prohibition of importation of goods bearing false trade marks. The proprietor or a licensee of a registered trademark may give notice in writing to the Collector of Customs to prohibit the importation of any goods if the import of the said goods constitute infringement under the Act. Where goods are imported into India, which are prohibited to be imported into India by notification of the Central Government for the protection of trademarks, and are liable to confiscation on importation, the Commissioner of Customs may require the importer of the goods, or his agent, to produce any documents in his possession relating to the goods and to furnish information as to the name and address of the person by whom the goods were consigned to India and the name and address of the person to whom the goods were sent in India.

Section 140 of the Act provides for the power to require information of imported goods bearing false trade marks. The importer or his agent shall, within fourteen days, comply with the requirement as aforesaid, and if he fails to do so, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

Section 141 of the Act provides for the certificate of validity. If in any legal proceeding for rectification of the register before the Appellate Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor of the trademark on the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trademark, the Appellate Board may grant a certificate to that effect.

Section 142 of the Act provides for groundless threats of legal proceedings. Where a person, by means of circulars, advertisements or otherwise, threatens a person with an action or proceeding for infringement of a trademark which is registered, or alleged by the first-mentioned person to be registered, or with some other like proceeding, a person aggrieved may bring a suit against the first-mentioned person and may obtain a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable, and an injunction against the continuance of the threats and may recover such damages (if any) as he has sustained.

Section 143 of the Act provides for the address for service. An address for service stated in an application or notice of opposition shall for the purposes of the application or notice of opposition be deemed to be the address of the applicant or opponent, as the case may be, and all documents in relation to the application or notice of opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending them by post to the address for service of the applicant or opponent, as the case may be.

Section 144 of the Act provides for trade usages, etc., to be taken into consideration. In any proceeding relating to a trademark, the tribunal shall admit evidence of the usages of the trade concerned and of any relevant trademark or trade name or get up legitimately used by other persons.

Section 145 of the Act provides for agents. Where, by or under this Act, any act, other than the making of an affidavit, is required to be done before the Registrar by any person, the act may, subject to the rules made in this behalf, be done instead of by that person himself, by a person duly authorized in the prescribed manner, who is a legal practitioner, or a person registered in the prescribed manner as a trademarks agent, or a person in the sole and regular employment of the principal.

Section 146 of the Act provides for marks registered by an agent or representative without authority. If an agent or a representative of the proprietor of a registered trademark, without authority uses or attempts to register or registers the mark in his own name, the proprietor shall be entitled to oppose the registration applied for or secure its cancellation or rectification of the register so as to bring him as the registered proprietor of the said mark by assignment in his favour.

Section 147 of the Act provides for indexes. There shall be kept under the direction and supervision of the Registrar an index of registered trademarks; an index of trade marks in respect of which applications for registration are pending; an index of the names of the proprietors of registered trademarks; and an index of the names of registered users.

Section 148 of the Act provides for documents open to public inspection. The register and any document upon which any entry in the register is based, every notice of opposition to the registration of a trademark application for rectification before the Registrar, counter-statement thereto, and any affidavit or document filed by the parties in any proceedings before the Registrar, all regulations deposited under section 63 or section 74, and all applications under section 66 or section 77 for varying such regulations, the indexes mentioned in section 147, and such other documents as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be open to public inspection at the Trade Marks Registry.

Section 149 of the Act provides for reports of the Registrar to be placed before Parliament. The Central Government shall cause to be placed before both Houses of Parliament once a year a report respecting the execution by or under the Registrar of this Act.

Section 150 of the Act provides for fees and surcharge. There shall be paid in respect of applications, international applications and registration and other matters under this Act such fees and surcharge as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

Section 151 of the Act provides for savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter XII.
Summary:

The document outlines several provisions related to Indian laws on trademarks. Chapter XII of the Act states that nothing in it can exempt any person from a suit or other legal proceedings, or entitle them to refuse to make a complete discovery or answer questions in any suit or other proceedings. However, such discovery or answer cannot be used as evidence in a prosecution for an offense under that Chapter or against clause (h) of section 112 of the Customs Act, 1962, relating to confiscation of goods under clause (d) of section 111 of that Act and notified by the Central Government under clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 11 thereof for the protection of trade marks relating to import of goods. Section 152 states that a document declaring ownership or title of a person to a trade mark other than a registered trade mark cannot be registered under the Registration Act, 1908. Section 153 states that the provisions of this Act are binding on the Government. Section 154 provides special provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens of convention countries. Section 155 states that where any country does not accord to citizens of India the same rights in respect of the registration and protection of trade marks as it accords to its own nationals, no national of such country shall be entitled to apply for the registration of, or be registered as the proprietor of, a trade mark, be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a registered trade mark, or apply for registration or be registered as a registered user of a trade mark under section 49. Section 156 provides for the power of the Central Government to remove difficulties, while Section 157 provides for the power to make rules. The rules provide for matters such as the manner of making an application for registration, the manner of advertising an application, the time within which an application is to be made, the form of certificate of registration, the manner of giving notice to the applicant, the manner of submitting statement of cases, the manner of making an application for assignment or transmission of a certification trade mark, and the manner of making an application to register title.
Summary:

The document outlines various sections and rules related to the Trade Marks Act, 1999. It includes provisions related to the appointment and removal of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and other members of the Appellate Board, as well as their salaries and allowances. The document also specifies the procedures for making applications, investigating misbehavior or incapacity, and appealing decisions.

Additionally, the document includes provisions related to the registration and renewal of trade marks, as well as the fees and surcharges payable for making applications and registration. It also specifies the conditions for inspection of documents and the fee payable for obtaining a certified copy of any entry in the register.

The document also includes amendments to the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, as well as provisions for the repeal and savings of that Act. Finally, the document includes a schedule of amendments to various Acts and rules.