Summary:
The Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996, was enacted on August 19, 1996, and it aims to provide resources to the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Boards constituted under the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996. This is achieved by levying and collecting a cess on the cost of construction incurred by employers.

The Act defines certain terms, including "Board," which refers to a Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board constituted by a State Government under the Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996, and "Fund," which refers to the Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund constituted by a Board.

The cess is levied at a rate not exceeding two per cent. but not less than one per cent. of the cost of construction incurred by an employer. The cess is collected from every employer in a specified manner and at a specified time. The proceeds of the cess collected are paid by the local authority or the State Government collecting the cess to the Board after deducting the cost of collection of such cess not exceeding one per cent. of the amount collected.

Employers are required to furnish returns to a specified officer or authority in a specified manner and at a specified time. If any person carrying on the building or other construction work, liable to pay the cess under section 3, fails to furnish any return, the officer or the authority shall give a notice requiring such person to furnish such return before a specified date.

The officer or authority to whom or to which the return has been furnished shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit and after satisfying himself or itself that the particulars stated in the return are correct, by order, assess the amount of cess payable by the employer.

The Central Government may exempt any employer or class of employers in a State from the payment of cess payable under this Act where such cess is already levied and payable under any corresponding law in force in that State.

Any officer or authority of the State Government specially empowered in this behalf by that Government may enter any place where he or it considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act, including verification of the correctness of any particulars furnished by any employer.

If any employer fails to pay any amount of cess payable under section 3 within the time specified in the order of assessment, such employer shall be liable to pay interest on the amount to be paid at the rate of two per cent. for every month or part of a month comprised in the period from the date on which such payment is due till such amount is actually paid.

If any amount of cess payable by any employer under section 3 is not paid within the date specified in the order of assessment made under section 5, it shall be deemed to be in arrears and the authority prescribed in this behalf may impose a penalty not exceeding the amount of cess.

Any amount due under this Act (including any interest or penalty) from an employer may be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.

An employer aggrieved by an order of assessment made under section 5 or by an order imposing penalty made under section 9 may appeal to a specified appellate authority in a specified form and manner within a specified time.

Whoever, being under an obligation to furnish a return under this Act, furnishes any return knowing, or having reason to believe, the same to be false shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.