Summary:

The Central Laws (Extension to Arunachal Pradesh) Act, 1993, is an Act that extends certain Central laws to the State of Arunachal Pradesh. The Act comes into force on a date appointed by the Central Government through a notification in the Official Gazette. The Act mentions the extension of the Acts listed in the Schedule, along with all rules, orders, regulations, and schemes made thereunder, to Arunachal Pradesh.

The Act also provides for the construction of references to laws not in force in Arunachal Pradesh. Any reference in any Act mentioned in the Schedule to a law that is not in force in Arunachal Pradesh shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that state.

Further, the Act provides for the construction of references to authorities where new authorities have been constituted. Any reference by whatever form of words in any law for the time being in force in Arunachal Pradesh to any authority competent at the date of the passing of that law to exercise any powers or discharge any functions in that State shall, where a corresponding new authority has been constituted by or under any law now extended to that State, have effect as if it were a reference to the new authority.

The Act also empowers the Central Government to remove difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of any Act now extended to the State of Arunachal Pradesh. The Central Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions as appear to it necessary for the removal of the difficulty.

The Schedule lists the Acts extended to Arunachal Pradesh, including the Government Seal Act, 1862, the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873, the Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874, the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, the Explosives Act, 1884, the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the Indian Reserve Forces Act, 1888, the Indian Railway Board Act, 1905, the Explosive Substances Act, 1908, the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery Practice Act, 1938, the Railways (Local Authorities’ Taxation) Act, 1941, the National Cadet Corps Act, 1948, the Census Act, 1948, and the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948.

The Act was brought into force on 1st July 1994, as per the notification issued by the Central Government.