Summary:

THE PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE ACT, 1991 is an Act to provide for public liability insurance for the purpose of providing immediate relief to the persons affected by accident occurring while handling any hazardous substance and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act defines various terms related to the handling of hazardous substances, including "accident," "handling," "hazardous substance," "insurance," "notification," "owner," "prescribed," "Relief Fund," "rules," and "vehicle."

The Act imposes a liability on the owner to give relief in certain cases on the principle of no fault in case of death or injury to any person or damage to any property resulting from an accident involving a hazardous substance. The owner is not required to plead and establish that the death, injury, or damage was due to any wrongful act, neglect, or default of any person. The amount of relief is specified in the Schedule and is payable by the insurer, up to a maximum amount of fifty crore rupees, and the insurer is also required to pay a further amount, not exceeding the sum equivalent to the amount of premium, to the Relief Fund established under section 7A.

Every owner is required to take out one or more insurance policies providing for contracts of insurance whereby he is insured against liability to give relief under sub-section (1) of section 3. The insurance policy must be renewed from time to time before the expiry of the period of validity and the liability of the insurer under one assurance policy shall not exceed the amount specified in the terms of the contract of insurance in that insurance policy. The Central Government may exempt certain owners from the operation of sub-section (1) if a fund has been established and is maintained by that owner for meeting any liability under sub-section (1) of section 3.

The Collector is required to verify the occurrence of an accident and cause publicity to be given for inviting applications for claim for relief. An application for claim for relief may be made by the person who has sustained the injury, by the owner of the property to which the damage has been caused, by any legal representatives of the deceased, or by any agent duly authorized by such person or owner of such property or all or any of the legal representatives of the deceased. The Collector is required to hold an inquiry into the claim and make an award determining the amount of relief which appears to him to be just and specifying the person or persons to whom such amount of relief shall be paid. The Collector shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties concerned expeditiously and in any case within a period of fifteen days from the date of the award.

The Central Government may establish a fund to be known as the Environmental Relief Fund for paying, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the scheme made under sub-section (3), relief under the award made by the Collector under section 7. The Central Government may make a scheme specifying the authority in which the Relief Fund shall vest, the manner in which the Relief Fund shall be administered, the form and the manner in which money shall be drawn from the Relief Fund and for all other matters connected with or incidental to the administration of the Relief Fund and the payment of relief therefrom.

The right to claim relief under sub-section (1) of section 3 in respect of death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property shall be in addition to any other right to claim compensation in respect thereof under any other law for the time being in force. The amount of compensation shall be reduced by the amount of relief paid under this Act where the owner is also liable to pay compensation under any other law.