Summary:

The Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990 is a law that empowers the armed forces to maintain public order in disturbed areas in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Act extends to the whole of the State and came into force on the 5th day of July, 1990.

The Act defines "armed forces" as the military forces and the air forces operating as land forces and includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating. A "disturbed area" is an area declared by notification under section 3 to be a disturbed area.

The Governor of the State or the Central Government may declare the whole or any part of the State to be a disturbed area if they are of the opinion that the area is in a disturbed and dangerous condition that requires the use of armed forces in aid of the civil power.

In a disturbed area, armed forces personnel have the power to fire upon or use force, even to the causing of death, against any person who is acting in contravention of any law or order for the time being in force. They can also destroy any arms dump, prepared or fortified position or shelter from which armed attacks are made or are likely to be made, or any structure used as a training camp for armed volunteers or utilised as a hide-out by armed gangs or absconders.

Armed forces personnel can arrest, without warrant, any person who has committed a cognizable offence or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed or is about to commit a cognizable offence. They can also enter and search any premises, seize any property, arms, ammunition or explosive substances, and stop, search and seize any vehicle or vessel.

The Act also provides that any person arrested and taken into custody under this Act and every property, arms, ammunition or explosive substance or any vehicle or vessel seized under this Act shall be made over to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station with the least possible delay.

No prosecution, suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government, against any person in respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act.

The Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Ordinance, 1990 is repealed by this Act, but anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.