Summary:

The Vice-President's Pension Act, 1997, provides for the payment of a pension and other facilities to retiring Vice-Presidents in India. The Act is divided into six sections.

Section 1 is the short title, which simply states that the Act may be called the Vice-President's Pension Act, 1997.

Section 2 outlines the pension and other facilities that are provided to retiring Vice-Presidents. Subsection (1) states that every person who ceases to hold office as Vice-President, either by the expiration of their term or by resignation, is entitled to a pension of fifty per cent of the salary of the Vice-President per month for the remainder of their life. However, they will not be entitled to receive any pension during the period they hold the office of the Prime Minister, a Minister, or any other office, or become a Member of Parliament and are in receipt of salary and allowances which are defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State. Subsection (1A) states that the spouse of a person who dies while holding the office of Vice-President or after ceasing to hold office as Vice-President, either by the expiration of their term or by resignation, is entitled to a family pension at the rate of fifty per cent of pension as is admissible to a retiring Vice-President, for the remainder of her life. Subsection (2) states that subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, every such person shall, for the remainder of his life, be entitled to the use without payment of rent of such furnished residence (including its maintenance), as the Central Government may determine from time to time, to the use of similar telephone facilities at his residence, as a member of Parliament is entitled to under the provisions of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954, to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary, an Additional Private Secretary, a Personal Assistant and two Peons and office expenses not exceeding ninety thousand rupees per annum, to the same facilities for himself as respects medical attendance and treatment and on the same conditions as a retired President is entitled to under the provisions of the President’s Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951, to the same facilities for his spouse and minor children as respects medical attendance and treatment and on the same conditions as the spouse of a retired President is entitled to under the provisions of the President’s Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951, and to travel anywhere in India, accompanied by spouse or a companion or a relative, by the highest class by air, rail or steamer. Subsection (3) states that where any such person is re-elected to the office of Vice-President, he or his spouse shall not be eligible to any benefit under this section for the period during which such person again holds such office. Subsection (4) states that where any person being a Vice-President gets elected to the office of the President of India, he or his spouse shall not be eligible to any benefit under this section.

Section 3 states that subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who dies while holding the office of Vice-President shall, for the remainder of life, be entitled to medical attendance and treatment, free of charge.

Section 3A states that subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who dies while holding the office of Vice-President or after ceasing to hold office as Vice-President, either by the expiration or his term of office or by resignation of his office, is entitled to the use of furnished residence (including its maintenance) without payment of licence fee, for the remainder of her life.

Section 4 states that any sum payable under this Act shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.

Section 5 states that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

Section 6 states that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act as amended by the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty, provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the date on which this Act comes into force. Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

The Act also includes a schedule, annexure, appendix, and forms, but they are not relevant to the summary of the Act. There are also several footnotes that provide information about amendments to the Act, but they are also not relevant to the summary.