Summary:

THE SPECIAL COURT (TRIAL OF OFFENCES RELATING TO TRANSACTIONS IN SECURITIES) ACT, 1992 is an Act to provide for the establishment of a Special Court for the trial of offences relating to transactions in securities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act defines "securities" to include shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture stock, units of the Unit Trust of India or any other mutual fund or other marketable securities of a like nature in or of any incorporated company or other body corporate, Government securities, and rights or interests in securities.

The Act establishes a Special Court for the trial of offences relating to transactions in securities. The Special Court shall consist of one or more sitting Judges of the High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Special Court is situated, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India. When the office of a Judge of the Special Court is vacant by reason of absence or leave, the duties of the office shall be performed by such Judge of the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Special Court is situated as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, nominate for the purpose.

The Act provides that any prosecution in respect of any offence referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 shall be instituted only in the Special Court and any prosecution in respect of such offence pending in any court shall stand transferred to the Special Court. The Special Court shall have jurisdiction to try any person concerned in the offence referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3 either as a principal, conspirator or abettor and all other offences and accused persons as can be jointly tried therewith at one trial in accordance with the Code.

The Act empowers the Special Court to pass upon any person convicted by it any sentence authorized by law for the punishment of the offence of which such person is convicted. While dealing with any other matter brought before it, the Special Court may adopt such procedure as it may deem fit consistent with the principles of natural justice.

The Act also confers jurisdiction, powers, authority and procedure of Special Court in civil matters. On and from the commencement of the Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in Securities) Amendment Act, 1994, the Special Court shall exercise all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as were exercisable, immediately before such commencement, by any civil court in relation to any matter or claim relating to any property standing attached under sub-section(3) of section 3 and arising out of transactions in securities entered into after the 1st day of April, 1991, and on or before the 6th day of June, 1992, in which a person notified under sub-section (2) of section 3 is involved as a party, broker, intermediary or in any other manner.

The Act also empowers the Special Court to decide any question forming subject matter of a reference relating to any matter or claim mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 9A under the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940). Every suit or other proceeding (other than an appeal) in relation to any matter or claim referred to in sub-section (1) of section 9A pending before any Court and governed by the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), immediately before the date of commencement of the Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in Securities) Amendment Act, 1994 (24 of 1994) shall stand transferred on that date to the Special Court.

An appeal shall lie from any judgment, decree, sentence or order, not being interlocutory order, of the Special Court to the Supreme Court both on facts and on law. Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of any judgment, decree, sentence or order of the Special Court. The Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of thirty days.

The Act provides that the Special Court may make such order as it may deem fit directing the Custodian for the disposal of the property under attachment. The following liabilities shall be paid or discharged in full, as far as may be, in the order as under: (a) all revenues, taxes, cesses and rates due from the persons notified by the Custodian under sub-section (2) of section 3 to the Central Government or any State Government or any local authority; (b) all amounts due from the person so notified by the Custodian to any bank or financial institution or mutual fund; (c) any other liability as may be specified by the Special Court from time to time.

The Act provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the Custodian for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. The Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.