Summary:

The Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners and Transaction of Business) Act, 1991, is an Act that determines the conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners and provides for the procedure for transaction of business by the Election Commission. The Act is divided into three chapters.

Chapter I, titled "Preliminary," contains the short title and definitions of various terms used in the Act. The Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners are defined as per the Constitution of India.

Chapter II, titled "Salary and Other Conditions of Service of the Chief Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners," lays down the salary, term of office, leave, pension payable to Election Commissioners, and their right to subscribe to the General Provident Fund. The salary of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners is equal to the salary of a Judge of the Supreme Court. The term of office of the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner is six years from the date on which he assumes his office. A person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner, was in service of Government may be granted leave during his tenure of office in accordance with the rules for the time being applicable to the Service to which he belonged before such date. A person who demits office as the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner shall be entitled to a pension and such pension (including commutation of pension), family pension and gratuity as are admissible to a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Chapter III, titled "Transaction of Business of Election Commission," lays down the procedure for transaction of business of the Election Commission. The Election Commission may regulate the procedure for transaction of its business as also allocation of its business amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. All business of the Election Commission shall, as far as possible, be transacted unanimously. If the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority.

Overall, this Act lays down the conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners and provides for the procedure for transaction of business by the Election Commission.