Summary:

THE REMITTANCES OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND INVESTMENT IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE BONDS (IMMUNITIES AND EXEMPTIONS) ACT, 1991 (Act No. 41 of 1991) was enacted on 18th September, 1991. This Act aims to provide immunities and exemptions to certain persons who receive remittances in foreign exchange and own Foreign Exchange Bonds. The Act has three chapters - Chapter I (Preliminary), Chapter II (Remittances of Foreign Exchange), and Chapter III (Investment in Foreign Exchange Bonds).

Chapter II deals with remittances of foreign exchange. The recipient of such remittances is not required to disclose the nature and source of the remittance. No inquiry or investigation can be initiated against the recipient based on the remittance, and the fact that the recipient has received the remittance cannot be used as evidence in any proceedings relating to offenses or the imposition of penalties. However, these immunities do not apply to foreign exchange that needs to be brought into India under the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, or the Income-tax Act, 1961.

Chapter III deals with investment in Foreign Exchange Bonds. Non-resident Indians or overseas corporate bodies that own the Foreign Exchange Bonds or any person resident in India to whom a gift of such Bonds has been made by such non-resident Indian or overseas corporate body are not required to disclose the nature and source of the investment in such Bonds. The fact that any of these persons owns such Bonds shall not be taken into account and shall be inadmissible as evidence in any proceedings relating to any offence or the imposition of any penalty under any of the said Acts. However, these immunities do not apply to foreign exchange that needs to be brought into India under the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973, or the Income-tax Act, 1961.

The provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, do not apply to any interest accruing in relation to the Foreign Exchange Bonds. The provisions of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, do not apply in relation to the Foreign Exchange Bonds. The provisions of the Gift-tax Act, 1958, do not apply where any non-resident Indian becomes a resident in India and makes a gift of the Foreign Exchange Bonds.

The Central Government shall cause the scheme notified under clause (a) of sub-section (1) to be laid, as soon as may be after it is notified, before each House of Parliament.