Summary:
The SAARC Convention (Suppression of Terrorism) Act, 1993 is an Act of the Indian Parliament that gives effect to the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention on Suppression of Terrorism. This Act is comprised of sections and a schedule. The Act extends to the whole of India and applies to offenses committed outside India by any person. The Act defines "Convention" as the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention on Suppression of Terrorism signed at Kathmandu on the 4th day of November, 1987 and "Convention country" as a country in which the Convention is for the time being in force. The provisions of Articles I to VIII of the Convention have the force of law in India. Hostage-taking is an offense under this Act, punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. For the purposes of the Extradition Act, 1962, an offence under this Act shall not be considered to be an offence of a political character. An offence under this Act committed outside India may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at any place within India at which the offender may be found. No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act. The Schedule of the Act is the SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism. The Convention obliges the parties to prosecute or grant extradition for offences such as unlawful seizure of aircraft, unlawful acts against the safety of civil aviation, crimes against internationally protected persons, including diplomatic agents, and serious offences involving violence. The Convention also applies to attempts or conspiracies to commit such offences, aiding, abetting or counselling the commission of such offences, or participating as an accomplice in the offences.