Summary:
The Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993, is an Act to provide for the constitution of a National Human Rights Commission, State Human Rights Commissions, and Human Rights Courts for better protection of human rights and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act defines human rights as the rights relating to life, liberty, equality, and dignity of the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or embodied in the International Covenants and enforceable by courts in India.

The Act establishes the National Human Rights Commission, which consists of a Chairperson, who has been a Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court, one Member who is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court, one Member who is, or has been, the Chief Justice of a High Court, and three Members out of which at least one shall be a woman, to be appointed from amongst persons having knowledge of, or practical experience in, matters relating to human rights.

The Act also provides for the appointment of the Secretary-General, who is the Chief Executive Officer of the Commission, and other officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Commission.

The Commission has the power to inquire, suo motu or on a petition presented to it by a victim or any person on his behalf or on a direction or order of any court, into complaints of violation of human rights or abetment thereof or negligence in the prevention of such violation by a public servant. The Commission also has the power to intervene in any proceeding involving any allegation of violation of human rights pending before a court with the approval of such court.

The Act also provides for the appointment of State Human Rights Commissions, which shall consist of a Chairperson, who has been a Chief Justice or a Judge of a High Court, one Member who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or District Judge in the State with a minimum of seven years experience as District Judge, and one Member to be appointed from among persons having knowledge of or practical experience in matters relating to human rights.

The State Human Rights Commissions have the power to inquire into violation of human rights only in respect of matters relatable to any of the entries enumerated in List II and List III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.

The Act also provides for the establishment of Human Rights Courts for the purpose of providing speedy trial of offences arising out of violation of human rights. The State Government may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, specify for each district a Court of Session to be a Human Rights Court to try the said offences.

The Act also lays down the procedure for the appointment, removal, and terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the National Human Rights Commission and State Human Rights Commissions.

The Act also provides for the maintenance of accounts and other relevant records and the preparation of an annual statement of accounts by the Commissions, which shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. The accounts, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, by the Commission and the Central Government or the State Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament or the State Legislature, respectively.

The Act also provides for the protection of action taken in good faith and makes it clear that no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, State Government, Commission, the State Commission or any Member thereof or any person acting under the direction either of the Central Government, State Government, Commission or the State Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or any order made thereunder or in respect of the publication by or under the authority of the Central Government, State Government, Commission or the State Commission of any report, paper or proceedings.

The Act also provides that every Member of the Commission, State Commission and every officer appointed or authorized by the Commission or the State Commission to exercise functions under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

The Act also empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act and the State Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act in relation to the State. The Act also provides for the removal of difficulties and repeals and savings.