Summary:

The Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991, is an Act that prohibits the conversion of any place of worship and aims to maintain the religious character of any place of worship as it existed on August 15, 1947. The Act applies to the whole of India, except for the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and came into force on July 11, 1991.

Under this Act, conversion is defined as alteration or change of any nature, and a place of worship is defined as a temple, mosque, gurudwara, church, monastery, or any other place of public religious worship of any religious denomination or any section thereof.

Section 3 of the Act bars any person from converting any place of worship of any religious denomination or any section thereof into a place of worship of a different section of the same religious denomination or of a different religious denomination or any section thereof.

Section 4 declares that the religious character of a place of worship existing on August 15, 1947, shall continue to be the same as it existed on that day. Any suit, appeal, or other proceeding with respect to the conversion of the religious character of any place of worship existing on August 15, 1947, pending before any court, tribunal, or other authority on the commencement of this Act shall abate, and no such suit, appeal, or other proceeding shall lie on or after such commencement in any court, tribunal, or other authority.

Section 5 states that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the place or place of worship commonly known as Ram Janma Bhumi-Babri Masjid situated in Ayodhya in the State of Uttar Pradesh and to any suit, appeal, or other proceeding relating to the said place or place of worship.

Section 6 provides for punishment for contravention of Section 3, with imprisonment for a term that may extend to three years and a fine. It also provides for punishment for attempting to commit such offence and abetting or being a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence.

Section 7 states that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.

Finally, it is important to note that the Act was made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019.