Summary:
THE UNORGANISED WORKERS' SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008

The Unorganised Workers' Social Security Act, 2008 (Act No. 33 of 2008) came into force on a date specified by the Central Government. The Act aims to provide social security and welfare to unorganised workers in India. It defines unorganised workers as home-based workers, self-employed workers, or wage workers in the unorganised sector, including workers in the organised sector who are not covered by any of the Acts mentioned in Schedule II.

The Act provides for the framing of welfare schemes for unorganised workers by the Central Government on matters relating to life and disability cover, health and maternity benefits, old age protection, and any other benefit as may be determined by the Central Government. The Act also allows the State Government to formulate and notify suitable welfare schemes for unorganised workers, including schemes relating to provident fund, employment injury benefit, housing, educational schemes for children, skill upgradation of workers, funeral assistance, and old age homes.

The Act establishes the National Social Security Board and State Social Security Boards to exercise the powers conferred on and perform the functions assigned to them under the Act. The Boards consist of members representing unorganised sector workers, employers of unorganised sector, eminent persons from civil society, members from Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, Central Government Ministries and Departments concerned, and State Governments. The Boards perform functions such as recommending suitable schemes for different sections of unorganised workers, advising the Central or State Government on matters arising out of the administration of the Act, monitoring social welfare schemes for unorganised workers, reviewing the progress of registration and issue of identity cards to unorganised workers, and reviewing the expenditure from the funds under various schemes.

The Act provides for the registration of unorganised workers and the issuance of an identity card by the District Administration. The record-keeping functions for the purpose of the Act are performed by the District Administration, and the State Government may direct that the record-keeping function shall be performed by the District Panchayat in rural areas and the Urban Local Bodies in urban areas. The Act also allows the State Government to set up Workers' facilitation centres to perform functions such as disseminating information on available social security schemes for unorganised workers, facilitating the filling, processing, and forwarding of application forms for registration of unorganised workers, assisting unorganised workers to obtain registration from the District Administration, and facilitating the enrollment of the registered unorganised workers in social security schemes.

The Act provides for the funding of Central Government and State Government schemes. Any scheme notified by the Central Government may be wholly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State Government, or partly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the State Government, and partly funded through contributions collected from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may be prescribed in the scheme by the Central Government. The State Government may seek financial assistance from the Central Government for the schemes formulated by it, and the Central Government may provide such financial assistance to the State Governments for the purpose of schemes for such period and on such terms and conditions as it may deem fit.

The Act provides for the power of the Central Government to give directions to the National Board or the Government of a State or the State Board of that State in respect of matters relating to the implementation of the provisions of the Act. The Act also provides for the laying of rules made by the Central Government and State Government before the Parliament and State Legislature, respectively.

The Act includes Schedules I and II. Schedule I lists the social security schemes for the unorganised workers, including Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme, National Family Benefit Scheme, Janani Suraksha Yojana, Handloom Weavers’ Comprehensive Welfare Scheme, Handicraft Artisans’ Comprehensive Welfare Scheme, Pension to Master craft persons, National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen and Training and Extension, Janshree Bima Yojana, Aam Admi Bima Yojana, and Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana. Schedule II lists the Acts that are applicable to unorganised workers, including The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, and The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.

The Act also provides for the power to remove difficulties by the Central Government and the laying of orders made by the Central Government and State Government before the Parliament and State Legislature, respectively. The Act also provides that nothing contained in this Act shall affect the operation of any corresponding law in a State providing welfare schemes which are more beneficial to the unorganised workers than those provided for them by or under this Act.