Summary:

THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS ACT, 2008 is an Act to facilitate the collection of statistics on economic, demographic, social, scientific, and environmental aspects, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act applies to the whole of India and consists of six chapters.

Chapter I, Preliminary, defines various terms used in the Act, such as agency, appropriate Government, informant, information schedule, nodal officer, prescribed, sampling, statistical survey, statistics, and statistics officer.

Chapter II, Collection of Statistics, empowers the appropriate Government to direct the collection of statistics through a statistical survey or otherwise, and provides for the appointment of statistics officers, agencies, or persons to collect the statistics. The appropriate Government may also employ agencies or persons on a contract basis for the collection of statistics.

Chapter III, Disclosure of Information in Certain Cases and Restrictions of Their Use, provides for the security and confidentiality of the information collected, and restricts the disclosure and use of such information. The chapter also lays down the conditions under which the appropriate Government may disclose certain information, and the disclosure of historical documents.

Chapter IV, Offences and Penalties, specifies the penalties for various offences, such as neglect or refusal to supply particulars, making false statements, mutilation or defacement of information schedule, obstruction of employees, and other offences. The chapter also provides for penalties for failure to carry out duties and functions by employees and impersonation of employees.

Chapter V, Power in Respect of Core Statistics, empowers the Central Government to declare any subject for the collection of statistics of national importance as 'core statistics' and make arrangements for regulating the collection and dissemination of statistics on the subject so declared.

Chapter VI, Miscellaneous, provides for the power to give directions, public servants, bar of jurisdiction, protection of action taken in good faith, overriding effect, power to make rules, and repeal and savings.

The Act also includes a schedule that provides for the powers and duties of statistics officers. The schedule includes provisions for the service of notice, questioning of informants, and the duty of informants to furnish information. The Act also includes an annexure and an appendix, which provide for various forms and footnotes.