Summary:
The Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act, 2000, is a law in India that holds carriers, such as airlines and shipping companies, responsible for bringing passengers into the country in violation of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and its rules. The Act imposes a penalty of one lakh rupees on carriers who bring passengers into India in contravention of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and its rules. The Act also provides for the exemption of carriers or a class of carriers from the operations of this Act in the interest of the general public or to fulfill international obligations. An appeal can be made against the order made under section 3 of this Act to the Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs. The competent authority may recover the penalty imposed under this Act by seizing, detaining, or selling the aircraft or the ship or any goods on the ship or aircraft belonging to the carrier. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or the competent authority or any officer of the Central Government or any other person exercising any powers or discharging any functions or performing any duty under this Act for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made thereunder. The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the Foreigners Act, 1946 or the rules or orders made thereunder. The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty. Every order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.