Summary:
The Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002, is an Act to provide for the operation and maintenance and to regulate the working of the metro railway in the National Capital Region, metropolitan city and metropolitan area, and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.

Chapter I of the Act deals with preliminary matters, including the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act.

Chapter II establishes the Government metro railway administration and sets out its powers and duties.

Chapter III outlines the functions and powers of the metro railway administration.

Chapter IV deals with the Commissioner of Metro Railway Safety, who is responsible for inspecting the metro railway and reporting on its fitness for public carriage of passengers.

Chapter V sets out the procedures for opening a metro railway for public carriage of passengers.

Chapter VI regulates the working of the metro railway, including the exhibition and surrender of passes and tickets, the prohibition against traveling without a pass or ticket, the carriage of goods, the prohibition against traveling of persons suffering from infectious or contagious diseases, and the communication between passengers and metro railway officials.

Chapter VII deals with fare fixation, establishing a Fare Fixation Committee to recommend fare for the carriage of passengers.

Chapter VIII deals with accidents, requiring the metro railway administration to give notice of accidents and the Commissioner to hold an inquiry into certain accidents.

Chapter IX establishes the office of the Claims Commissioner, who is responsible for adjudicating upon claims for compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of, or bodily injury to person, or damage to any property arising out of the working of the metro railway.

Chapter X sets out the liability of the metro railway administration due to accidents.

Chapter XI lists various offenses and penalties related to the metro railway, including drunkenness or nuisance on the metro railway, prohibition of demonstrations upon the metro railway, penalty for unlawfully entering or remaining upon the metro railway or walking on the metro track, and endangering the safety of passengers by metro railway officials.

Chapter XII contains miscellaneous provisions, including the power of the Central Government to issue directions, the protection of action taken in good faith, and the power of the Central Government to make rules.