Summary:

The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2009 (Act No. 24 of 2009) is an Act that aims to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a further period up to the 31st day of December, 2009. The Act was enacted on the 16th of March, 2009, and it extends to the National Capital Territory of Delhi. The Act aims to provide temporary relief and to minimize avoidable hardships and irreparable loss to the people of the National Capital Territory of Delhi against any action by the concerned agency in respect of persons covered by the policies referred to in the Act.

The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as building bye-laws, Delhi, encroachment, local authority, Master Plan, notification, punitive action, relevant law, and unauthorized development. The Act also lays down provisions for enforcement to be kept in abeyance, stating that no punitive action shall be taken till the 31st day of December, 2009, against encroachment or unauthorized development. The Act also provides that the Central Government may, at any time before the 31st day of December, 2009, withdraw the exemption by notification in respect of encroachment or unauthorized development mentioned in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be.

The Act also provides that during the period of operation of this Act, no relief shall be available under the provisions of section 3 in respect of encroachment or unauthorized development, except in certain cases. The Central Government may, from time to time, issue such directions to the local authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act, and it shall be the duty of the local authorities to comply with such directions. The Act also validates all things done, or omitted to be done, and all action taken, or not taken, during the period beginning on or after the 1st day of January, 2009, and ending immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of this Act.