Summary:

THE CENTRAL ROAD AND INFRASTRUCTURE FUND ACT, 2000 (ACT NO. 54 OF 2000) was enacted on the 27th December, 2000. The Act provides for the establishment of the Central Road and Infrastructure Fund for the development and maintenance of National Highways, railway projects, improvement of safety in railways, State and rural roads and other infrastructure. The Act imposes a cess, a duty of excise and a duty of customs, on motor spirit commonly known as petrol and high speed diesel oil.

The Act consists of three chapters.

Chapter I: Preliminary contains the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act, and definitions of terms used in the Act.

Chapter II: Central Road and Infrastructure Fund outlines the levy and collection of cess, crediting of cess to the Consolidated Fund of India, grants and loans by the Central Government, establishment of the Central Road and Infrastructure Fund, utilization of the Fund, apportionment of share of the Fund by a Committee, accounts and audit of the Fund, and administration of States' share of the Fund.

Chapter III: Management of Central Road and Infrastructure Fund deals with the powers of the Central Government to administer the Fund, functions of the Central Government, administration of States' share of the Fund, power to make rules, and rules made under this Act to be laid before Parliament.

The Act also includes Schedules I and II. Schedule I lists the items on which the cess is levied, and Schedule II lists the category of projects and infrastructure sub-sectors.

The Central Government has the power to administer the Fund, take decisions regarding investment on projects of roads and other infrastructure, and take measures to raise funds for the development and maintenance of roads and other infrastructure. The Central Government is also responsible for the administration and management of the share of Fund allocated to the development and maintenance of roads and other infrastructure, co-ordination and complete and timely utilization of all sums allocated out of the Fund, formulation of criteria for the approval and financing of specific projects of State roads of inter-State and economic importance, release of funds to the States for specific projects and monitoring of such projects and expenditure incurred thereon, formulation of the criteria for allocation of the funds for development and maintenance of national highways and other infrastructure projects, and allocation of share of funds to each State and Union territory specified in the First Schedule to the Constitution.

The share of the Fund to be apportioned to each of infrastructure projects shall be finalised by a Committee, constituted by the Central Government, headed by the Finance Minister, depending on the priorities of the project.

The Fund shall be utilized for the development and maintenance of national highways, development of the rural roads, development and maintenance of other State roads including roads of inter-State and economic importance, construction of roads either under or over the railways by means of bridges and erection of safety works at unmanned rail-road crossings, new lines, conversion of existing standard lines into gauge lines and electrification of rail lines, and undertaking other infrastructure projects.

The Central Government may, depending upon the requirement for development of infrastructure projects, and if it considers necessary or expedient to do so, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend Schedule II relating to any Category of projects or Infrastructure Sub-Sectors.

The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him.

The Central Government shall have the power to resume the whole or part of any sums which it may have at that time held for expenditure in that State or the Union territory, if the Government of any State or the administration of any Union territory has at any time failed to take such steps as the Central Government may recommend for the regulation and control of motor vehicles within the State or the Union territory or has delayed without reasonable cause the application of any portion of the Fund allocated or re-allocated, as the case may be, for expenditure within the State or Union territory.

The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

With effect from the appointed day, the Central Road Fund governed by the Parliamentary Resolution dated the 13th May, 1988 shall be deemed to be the Fund established under this Act, and all schemes relating to development and maintenance of national highways, State roads and other infrastructure sanctioned under the existing Fund in so far as such schemes are relatable to the schemes under this Act, shall be deemed to be the schemes sanctioned under this Act. All funds accrued under the existing Fund including assets and liabilities shall be transferred to the Fund established under this Act.