Summary:

THE SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING RESEARCH BOARD ACT, 2008 (ACT NO. 9 OF 2009) was enacted on 17th January, 2009. This Act establishes the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) to promote basic research in Science and Engineering and to provide financial assistance to persons, academic institutions, research and development laboratories, industrial concerns, and other agencies for such research.

Chapter I of the Act deals with preliminary provisions, including the short title and commencement of the Act, and the definitions of various terms used in the Act.

Chapter II defines the constitution, incorporation, powers, and functions of the SERB. The Board shall consist of 19 members, including ex-officio members from various government departments and ministries, and members appointed by the Central Government from different disciplines in academia, research and development laboratories, industry, and international projects on science and technology. The Board may appoint a Secretary and other officers and employees, and engage the services of personnel from within and outside the country as consultants and visiting scientists.

Chapter III outlines the application process for availing of financial assistance from the SERB. An application for availing of financial assistance shall be made to the Board in such form as may be prescribed.

Chapter IV deals with finance, accounts, and audit. The Central Government may make grants and loans to the SERB, and there shall be constituted a Fund for Science and Engineering Research to which all sums received by the Board shall be credited. The Board shall maintain proper accounts and prepare an annual statement of accounts, which shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

Chapter V contains miscellaneous provisions, including the power of the Central Government to issue directions to the Board, the power of the Central Government to supersede the Board, delegation of powers and functions of the Board, protection of action taken in good faith, power of the Central Government to make rules, power of the Board to make regulations, and rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.

The Schedule to the Act contains the forms to be used for making applications for financial assistance, and the rules and regulations made under the Act shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.