Summary:

THE NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI LAWS (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT, 2007 (ACT NO. 43 OF 2007) is an Act that aims to make special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi for a further period up to 31st December, 2008. The Act aims to provide temporary relief and minimize avoidable hardships and irreparable loss to the people of the National Capital Territory of Delhi against any action by the concerned agency in respect of persons covered by the policies referred to above which are expected to be finalized within the period so extended.

The Act defines various terms such as building bye-laws, Delhi, encroachment, local authority, Master Plan, notification, punitive action, and unauthorized development. Building bye-laws refer to the bye-laws made under relevant sections of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 or the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 or the regulations made under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 relating to buildings. Delhi refers to the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi except the Delhi Cantonment. Encroachment refers to unauthorized occupation of Government land or public land by way of putting temporary, semi-permanent or permanent structure for residential use or commercial use or any other use. Local authority refers to the Delhi Municipal Corporation, the New Delhi Municipal Council, or the Delhi Development Authority. Master Plan refers to the Master Plan for Delhi with the perspective for the year 2021 notified on 7th February, 2007 under the Delhi Development Act, 1957. Notification refers to a notification published in the Official Gazette. Punitive action refers to action taken by a local authority under the relevant law against unauthorized development and shall include demolition, sealing of premises, and displacement of persons or their business establishment from their existing location, whether in pursuance of court orders or otherwise. Unauthorized development refers to use of land or use of building or construction of building or development of colonies, village abadi area and its extension, carried out in contravention of the sanctioned plans or without obtaining the sanction of plans, or in contravention of the land use as permitted under the Master Plan or Zonal Plan or layout plan, as the case may be.

The Act provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any relevant law or any rules, regulations or bye-laws made thereunder, the Central Government shall before the expiry of this Act, take all possible measures to finalise norms, policy guidelines and feasible strategies to deal with the problem of encroachment or unauthorized development. The Act also provides that status quo shall be maintained in respect of encroachment or unauthorized development and all notices issued by any local authority for initiating action against encroachment or unauthorized development shall be deemed to have been suspended and no punitive action shall be taken till the 31st day of December, 2008.

The Act also provides that during the period of operation of this Act, no relief shall be available under the provisions of section 3 in respect of encroachment on public land except in those cases which are covered under clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 3 and removal of slums and Jhuggi-Jhompri dwellers, hawkers and urban street vendors, unauthorized colonies or part thereof, village abadi area and its extension, in accordance with the relevant policies approved by the Central Government for clearance of land required for specific public projects.

The Act also empowers the Central Government to issue such directions to the local authorities as it may deem fit, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act and it shall be the duty of the local authorities to comply with such directions.

The Act also repeals the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Ordinance, 2007 and provides that anything done or any action taken under the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Ordinance, 2007 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.