Summary:

THE FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND BUDGET MANAGEMENT ACT, 2003 is an Act to ensure inter-generational equity in fiscal management and long-term macro-economic stability. The Act defines fiscal deficit, Central Government debt, fiscal indicators, general Government debt, gross domestic product, real gross domestic product, real output growth, Reserve Bank, and other related terms.

The Act requires the Central Government to lay in each financial year before both Houses of Parliament the following statements of fiscal policy along with the annual financial statement and demands for grants except the Medium-term Expenditure Framework Statement: the Medium-term Fiscal Policy Statement, the Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement, the Macro-economic Framework Statement, and the Medium-term Expenditure Framework Statement.

The Act also specifies fiscal management principles that the Central Government shall follow, such as limiting the fiscal deficit to three per cent. of gross domestic product by March 31, 2021, ensuring that the general Government debt does not exceed sixty per cent. and the Central Government debt does not exceed forty per cent. of gross domestic product by the end of financial year 2024-2025, and not giving additional guarantees with respect to any loan on security of the Consolidated Fund of India in excess of one-half per cent. of gross domestic product in any financial year.

The Act prohibits the Central Government from borrowing from the Reserve Bank, except in accordance with the agreements entered into by that Government with the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank may subscribe to the primary issues of Central Government Securities due to specific grounds, and buy and sell the Central Government securities in the secondary market or convert Central Government Securities held by it with other Securities of the Central Government as mutually agreed between the Reserve Bank and the Central Government.

The Act requires the Central Government to take suitable measures to ensure greater transparency in its fiscal operations and make disclosures at the time of presentation of annual financial statement and demands for grants. The Minister-in-charge of the Ministry of Finance shall review the trends in receipts and expenditure in relation to the budget and place before both Houses of Parliament the outcome of such reviews.

The Act provides for the power to make rules, the rules to be laid before each House of Parliament, protection of action taken in good faith, jurisdiction of civil courts barred, application of other laws not barred, and power to remove difficulties.

In summary, THE FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND BUDGET MANAGEMENT ACT, 2003 provides a legal framework for fiscal responsibility and budget management in India, with the aim of achieving long-term macro-economic stability and inter-generational equity. The Act mandates the Central Government to follow fiscal management principles, ensure transparency in its fiscal operations, and make disclosures at the time of presentation of annual financial statement and demands for grants. The Act also empowers the Central Government to make rules, and provides for protection of action taken in good faith, jurisdiction of civil courts barred, application of other laws not barred, and power to remove difficulties.