The Competition Act, 2002, is an Act of the Indian Parliament that provides for the establishment of a Commission to prevent practices having adverse effects on competition, promote and sustain competition in markets, protect the interests of consumers, and ensure freedom of trade. The Act is divided into several chapters, with the first chapter, titled "Preliminary," containing the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act, as well as definitions of key terms used throughout the Act. The second chapter, titled "Prohibition of Certain Agreements, Abuse of Dominant Position and Regulation of Combinations," is divided into three subheadings: "Prohibition of agreements," "Abuse of dominant position," and "Regulation of combinations." Under the first subheading, Section 3 of the Act prohibits enterprises, associations of enterprises, persons, or associations of persons from entering into any agreement in respect of production, supply, distribution, or control of goods or provision of services that causes or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on competition within India. The Act also defines and prohibits the abuse of a dominant position by an enterprise, as well as regulates combinations, which are defined as agreements or understandings between enterprises that may have an appreciable adverse effect on competition. The Act includes provisions for the investigation and prosecution of violations of these prohibitions, as well as penalties for such violations. The Act also establishes the Competition Commission of India, which is responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Act and promoting competition in India.
Summary:

The Competition Act, 2002 is a law in India that promotes and protects fair competition in markets. The Act applies to enterprises, groups, and individuals involved in the production, distribution, or trading of goods or services. The Act prohibits anti-competitive agreements, abuse of dominant position, and regulates combinations (mergers, acquisitions, and amalgamations).

Anti-competitive agreements are those that cause or are likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on competition in India. These agreements include those that determine prices, limit or control production, supply, markets, technical development, investment, or provision of services, share the market or source of production or provision of services, or result in bid rigging or collusive bidding.

Abuse of dominant position occurs when an enterprise or group with a dominant position in the relevant market abuses that position by imposing unfair or discriminatory conditions or prices, limiting or restricting production, technical or scientific development, denying market access, making contracts subject to acceptance of supplementary obligations, or using its dominant position in one relevant market to enter into or protect other relevant markets.

Combinations are regulated if they exceed certain thresholds. These thresholds are based on the value of assets or turnover of the parties to the combination. Combinations that exceed these thresholds are subject to notification and approval by the Competition Commission of India.

The Act also provides for exemptions to protect intellectual property rights and the right to export goods from India. The Act is enforced by the Competition Commission of India, which has the power to investigate, penalize, and prevent anti-competitive practices.
Summary:

The Competition Commission of India (CCI) is a body established under the Competition Act, 2002 to regulate and promote competition in the Indian market. The CCI is a corporate body with perpetual succession and a common seal, and is headquartered in New Delhi. The Commission consists of a Chairperson and not less than two and not more than six other Members, all appointed by the Central Government. The Chairperson and Members must have special knowledge of and professional experience in various fields including international trade, economics, business, commerce, law, finance, accountancy, management, industry, public affairs, or competition matters. The Chairperson and Members are appointed by the Central Government from a panel recommended by a Selection Committee consisting of the Chief Justice of India or his nominee, the Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice, and two experts in competition matters. The Chairperson and Members hold office for a term of five years and are eligible for re-appointment, but cannot hold office after they have attained the age of sixty-five years. In the event of a vacancy, the senior-most Member shall act as the Chairperson until a new Chairperson is appointed. The Chairperson or any Member may resign from their office by giving notice in writing to the Central Government. The Central Government may remove the Chairperson or any Member from office for reasons including misbehavior or incapacity, after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court. The Central Government may also suspend the Chairperson or any Member pending such inquiry.
Summary:
The document outlines the powers and duties of the Competition Commission of India. According to Section 18, it is the duty of the Commission to eliminate practices having adverse effect on competition, promote and sustain competition, protect the interests of consumers and ensure freedom of trade carried on by other participants, in markets in India. The Commission can inquire into any alleged contravention of the provisions contained in Section 3 or Section 4 either on its own motion or on receipt of information from any person, consumer or their association or trade association or on a reference made to it by the Central Government or a State Government or a statutory authority. Section 19 outlines the factors that the Commission shall have due regard to while determining whether an agreement has an appreciable adverse effect on competition under Section 3 and while inquiring whether an enterprise enjoys a dominant position or not under Section 4. The Commission shall also determine the relevant geographic market and relevant product market while determining the relevant market for the purposes of this Act. Section 12 states that the Chairperson and other Members shall not, for a period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any employment in, or connected with the management or administration of, any enterprise which has been a party to a proceeding before the Commission under this Act. Section 13 states that the Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence, direction and control in respect of all administrative matters of the Commission. Section 14 states that the salary, and the other terms and conditions of service, of the Chairperson and other Members, including travelling expenses, house rent allowance and conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance and medical facilities shall be such as may be prescribed. Section 15 states that no act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission or any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson or as a Member or any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits of the case. Section 16 states that the Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Director General for the purposes of assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry into contravention of any of the provisions of this Act and for performing such other functions as are, or may be, provided by or under this Act. The Director General and Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees shall be appointed from amongst persons of integrity and outstanding ability and who have experience in investigation, and knowledge of accountancy, management, business, public administration, international trade, law or economics and such other qualifications as may be prescribed. Section 17 states that the Commission may appoint a Secretary and such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Act and engage experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, who have special knowledge of, and experience in, economics, law, business or such other disciplines related to competition, as it deems necessary to assist the Commission in the discharge of its functions under this Act.
Summary:

The document summarizes several sections of the Competition Act, 2002, which governs competition in India. The Act seeks to promote and sustain competition in markets, protect consumer interests, and ensure freedom of trade.

Section 20 outlines the powers of the Competition Commission of India (CCI) to inquire into combinations (acquisitions, mergers, or amalgamations) that may cause an appreciable adverse effect on competition in India. The CCI may initiate an inquiry on its own knowledge or information, or upon receipt of a notice or reference under other sections of the Act. The CCI must complete its inquiry within one year from the date the combination took effect.

Section 21 allows any statutory authority, upon raising an issue that a decision taken or proposed to be taken is contrary to the provisions of the Act, to make a reference to the CCI. The CCI must give its opinion within 60 days of receiving the reference, and the statutory authority must consider the opinion and give its findings.

Section 21A allows the CCI to make a reference to a statutory authority if an issue is raised during a proceeding that a decision taken or proposed to be taken is contrary to any provision of the Act. The statutory authority must give its opinion within 60 days of receiving the reference, and the CCI must consider the opinion and give its findings.

Section 22 outlines the rules of procedure for meetings of the CCI. The CCI shall meet at such times and places, and observe such rules of procedure as may be provided by regulations. The Chairperson, if unable to attend a meeting, shall be replaced by the senior-most Member present. All questions shall be decided by a majority of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the Member presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. The quorum for such meeting shall be three Members.

Section 26 outlines the procedure for inquiry under section 19. On receipt of a reference from the Central Government or a State Government or a statutory authority or on its own knowledge or information received under section 19, if the Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie case, it shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made into the matter. The Director General shall submit a report on his findings within such period as may be specified by the Commission. The Commission may forward a copy of the report to the parties concerned and invite objections or suggestions. If the Commission agrees with the recommendation of the Director General, it shall close the matter forthwith and pass such orders as it deems fit. If further investigation is called for, the Commission may direct further investigation by the Director General or cause further inquiry to be made in the matter or itself proceed with further inquiry in the matter.

Section 27 outlines the orders by the Commission after inquiry into agreements or abuse of dominant position. Where after inquiry the Commission finds that any agreement referred to in section 3 or action of an enterprise in a dominant position, is in contravention of section 4, the Commission may pass appropriate orders, including imposing a penalty on the enterprise. The Commission may also direct the enterprise to modify its agreement or to cease and desist from the contravention. The Commission may also direct the enterprise to disgorge any profit made due to the contravention.

The document also mentions that Sections 23, 24, and 25, which dealt with the distribution of business of Commission amongst Benches, procedure for deciding a case where Members of a Bench differ, and jurisdiction of Bench, have been omitted by the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2007.
Summary:

The document outlines various sections of Indian laws related to competition and monopoly. Section 3 or Section 4 of the Act allows the Commission to pass orders against enterprises or associations of enterprises involved in anti-competitive agreements or abuse of dominant position. The orders that can be passed include directing the parties to discontinue and not to re-enter the agreement or abuse of dominant position, imposing penalties, directing the agreements to be modified, and passing other orders as deemed fit. The Commission can also pass orders against members of a group that are responsible for or have contributed to the contravention of the Act.

Section 28 deals with the division of enterprises enjoying a dominant position. The Commission may direct the division of such an enterprise to ensure that it does not abuse its dominant position. The order may provide for the transfer or vesting of property, rights, liabilities, or obligations, adjustment of contracts, creation, allotment, surrender, or cancellation of shares, stocks, or securities, formation or winding up of an enterprise, and any other matter necessary to give effect to the division of the enterprise.

Section 29 outlines the procedure for investigating combinations. If the Commission is of the prima facie opinion that a combination is likely to cause or has caused an appreciable adverse effect on competition within the relevant market in India, it shall issue a notice to show cause to the parties to the combination. The Commission may call for a report from the Director General and direct the parties to publish details of the combination. The Commission may also invite any person or member of the public affected or likely to be affected by the combination to file written objections.

Section 30 deals with inquiries into disclosures under sub-section (2) of section 6. The Commission shall inquire whether the disclosure made in the notice is correct and whether the combination has or is likely to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition.

Section 31 outlines the orders of the Commission on certain combinations. If the Commission is of the opinion that a combination does not or is not likely to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall approve the combination. If the Commission is of the opinion that the combination has or is likely to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall direct that the combination shall not take effect. If the Commission is of the opinion that the adverse effect can be eliminated by suitable modification to such combination, it may propose appropriate modifications to the parties to the combination. The parties may accept or reject the modification, and if they fail to carry out the modification within the period specified by the Commission, the combination shall be deemed to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition. The Commission may also order that the acquisition, control, or merger or amalgamation shall not be given effect to. The Commission may frame a scheme to implement its order under this sub-section. If the Commission does not pass an order or issue a direction within 90 working days from the date of publication, it shall be deemed to have approved the combination.
Summary:
The document is a section of the Competition Act, 2002, which outlines the powers and duties of the Director General in investigating contraventions of the Act. The Director General is required to assist the Commission in investigating any contravention of the provisions of the Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder. The Director General has the power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person and examine him on oath, require the discovery and production of documents, receive evidence on affidavit, issue commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents, and requisition any public record or document or copy of such record or document from any office. The Director General may call upon experts from various fields to assist in the conduct of any inquiry and may direct any person to produce books or other documents in their custody or under their control. The Director General may also amend any order passed by the Commission to rectify any mistake apparent from the record. If a person fails to pay any monetary penalty imposed on them under the Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover such penalty in the manner specified by the regulations. The Commission may also make a reference to the Income-tax Authority for recovery of the penalty as tax due under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Summary:

This document outlines the penalties for non-compliance with orders of the Commission under various sections of the Act. The Commission has the power to cause an inquiry into compliance with its orders or directions. Failure to comply with orders or directions of the Commission can result in a fine or imprisonment. The fine may extend to rupees one lakh for each day during which such non-compliance occurs, subject to a maximum of rupees ten crore. Imprisonment may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to rupees twenty-five crore, or with both. The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi has the authority to take cognizance of any offence under this section, but only on a complaint filed by the Commission or any of its officers authorized by it.

Section 42A allows for the recovery of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to have been suffered as a result of the enterprise violating directions issued by the Commission or contravening, without any reasonable ground, any decision or order of the Commission.

Section 43 imposes a penalty on any person who fails to comply with a direction given by the Commission or the Director General. The penalty may extend to rupees one lakh for each day during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of rupees one crore, as may be determined by the Commission.

Section 43A imposes a penalty on any person or enterprise who fails to give notice to the Commission under sub-section (2) of section 6. The penalty may extend to one per cent. of the total turnover or the assets, whichever is higher, of such a combination.

Section 44 imposes a penalty on any person who makes a false statement or omits to state a material particular in relation to a combination. The penalty shall not be less than rupees fifty lakhs but may extend to rupees one crore, as may be determined by the Commission.

Section 45 imposes a penalty on any person who furnishes or is required to furnish under this Act any particulars, documents or any information, and makes any statement or furnishes any document which he knows or has reason to believe to be false in any material particular, or omits to state any material fact knowing it to be material, or wilfully alters, suppresses or destroys any document which is required to be furnished. The penalty may extend to rupees one crore as may be determined by the Commission.

Section 46 allows the Commission to impose a lesser penalty on a producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider included in a cartel, who makes a full and true disclosure in respect of the alleged violations and such disclosure is vital. The Commission may also pass such other order as it deems fit.

Section 47 states that all sums realized by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.

Section 48 states that where a person committing contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, order made or direction issued thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Section 49 allows the Central Government or a State Government to make a reference to the Commission for its opinion on possible effect of a policy on competition. The Commission shall give its opinion within sixty days of making such reference. The opinion given by the Commission is not binding upon the Central Government or the State Government. The Commission shall take suitable measures for the promotion of competition advocacy, creating awareness and imparting training.
Summary:

The document outlines the financial and audit procedures for the Competition Commission of India (CCI). According to Section 50, the Central Government may provide grants to the CCI for its functions as specified in the Act. Section 51 establishes the Competition Fund, which includes government grants, fees received under the Act, and interest accrued on those amounts. The Fund is used to cover the salaries and administrative expenses of the CCI, as well as other expenses related to the discharge of its functions. The Fund is administered by a committee of CCI members, and monies are spent for the purposes for which the Fund was constituted. Section 52 outlines the accounting and audit requirements for the CCI. The CCI must maintain proper accounts and prepare an annual statement of accounts, which is audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. The audit report and certified accounts are forwarded annually to the Central Government for laying before Parliament. Section 53 requires the CCI to furnish returns, statements, and particulars regarding any proposed or existing measures for the promotion of competition advocacy, creating awareness, and imparting training about competition issues to the Central Government. The CCI must also prepare an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year, which is forwarded to the Central Government and laid before Parliament.

Additionally, the document outlines the provisions related to the Appellate Tribunal for the Competition Act, which is the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. The Appellate Tribunal hears and disposes of appeals against any direction, decision, or order referred to in clause (a) of Section 53A of the Act. It also adjudicates on claims for compensation that may arise from the findings of the Commission or the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in an appeal against any findings of the Commission or under Section 42A or under sub-section (2) of Section 53Q of the Act. Section 53B outlines the procedure for filing an appeal with the Appellate Tribunal, while Section 53C to Section 53L, which were previously related to the composition, qualifications, selection, terms, and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal, have been omitted by the Finance Act, 2017. Section 53M, which was related to the staff of the Appellate Tribunal, has also been omitted by the Finance Act, 2017. Section 53N outlines the procedure for awarding compensation by the Appellate Tribunal for any loss or damage caused to the applicant as a result of any contravention of the provisions of Chapter II of the Act.
Summary:

This document outlines provisions related to an Appellate Tribunal under Indian law. The Appellate Tribunal is not bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, but is guided by the principles of natural justice. It has the power to regulate its own procedure and has the same powers as a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure for certain purposes, such as summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath, requiring the discovery and production of documents, and issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents. The Appellate Tribunal's proceedings are deemed to be judicial proceedings and it is deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of certain sections of the Indian Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal shall be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a court in a suit pending therein. If the Appellate Tribunal is unable to execute such order, it may send it to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office of the company is situated or in the case of an order against any other person, to the place where the person concerned voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain. The Appellate Tribunal may transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court. If any person contravenes, without any reasonable ground, any order of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be liable for a penalty of not exceeding rupees one crore or imprisonment for a term up to three years or with both as the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi may deem fit. The Appellate Tribunal may also order for the recovery of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to have been suffered by any person as a result of the said enterprise contravening, without any reasonable ground, any order of the Appellate Tribunal or delaying in carrying out such orders of the Appellate Tribunal. The Appellate Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may exercise under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971. The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any class of enterprises, any practice or agreement arising out of and in accordance with any obligation assumed by India under any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries, or any enterprise which performs a sovereign function on behalf of the Central Government or a State Government from the application of this Act. The Commission shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.
Summary:

The document discusses various sections of Indian laws related to the Competition Commission of India. 

Section 56 deals with the power of the Central Government to supersede the Commission. This can occur if the Central Government believes that the Commission is unable to discharge its functions due to circumstances beyond its control, has persistently made defaults in complying with directions given by the Central Government, or if there are public interest reasons to do so. The Central Government must provide a reasonable opportunity to the Commission to make representations against the proposed supersession before issuing a notification. 

Section 57 restricts the disclosure of information relating to any enterprise that has been obtained by or on behalf of the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act. Such information cannot be disclosed without the previous permission in writing of the enterprise, except in compliance with or for the purposes of this Act or any other law for the time being in force.

Section 58 states that the Chairperson, Members, Director General, Secretary, officers, and other employees of the Commission, as well as the Chairperson, Members, officers, and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal, shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

Section 59 provides protection to the Central Government, Commission, any officer of the Central Government, the Chairperson, any Member, the Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General, or the Secretary or officers or other employees of the Commission or the Chairperson, Members, officers, and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal from any suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedings for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.

Section 60 states that the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.

Section 61 excludes the jurisdiction of civil courts to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.

Section 62 states that the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.

Section 63 provides that the Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. The rules may provide for matters such as the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names, the form and manner in which the oath of office and of secrecy shall be made and subscribed to, the salary and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members, the qualifications for appointment of the Director General, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees, the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and officers and other employees, the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared, the time within which and the form and manner in which the Commission may furnish returns, statements, and such particulars as the Central Government may require, the form in which the annual report shall be prepared, the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Appellate Tribunal and the fees payable in respect of such appeal, the fee which shall be accompanied with every application made under sub-section (2) of section 53N, and any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.

Section 64 provides that the Commission may, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act. The regulations may provide for matters such as the cost of production to be determined under clause (b) of the Explanation to section 4, and the form of notice as prescribed.

Every notification issued under Section 20 and Section 54 and every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament for a total period of thirty days. If both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or rule, or both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued or rule should not be made, the notification or rule shall have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be. Any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or rule.
Summary:

The Competition Act, 2002, which regulates competition in India, has various provisions related to the making of regulations, removal of difficulties, and repeal and saving of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969.

Under section 64 of the Competition Act, the central government has the power to make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The regulations may be made in respect of various matters, including the fee for filing notices, the form in which details of acquisitions are to be filed, the procedures for engaging experts and professionals, the fee for filing information, the rules of procedure for the transaction of business at meetings of the Commission, the manner of recovering penalties, and any other matter in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations. Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament for a total period of thirty days.

Section 65 of the Competition Act provides for the power to remove difficulties. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the central government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty. However, no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act. Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

Section 66 of the Competition Act deals with the repeal and saving of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969. The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, is hereby repealed, and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission established under the Act stands dissolved. However, the repeal of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, shall not affect the previous operation of the Act, any right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired, accrued, or incurred under the Act, any penalty, confiscation, or punishment incurred in respect of any contravention under the Act, or any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, confiscation, or punishment. On the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, the person appointed as the Chairman of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission and every other person appointed as Member and Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy, or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration and any officer and other employee of that Commission and holding office as such immediately before such dissolution shall vacate their respective offices. However, they shall be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three months' pay and allowances for the premature termination of the term of their office or of any contract of service.

Further, the Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy, or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee who has been employed on regular basis by the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission shall become, on and from the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, the officer and employee, respectively, of the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, in such manner as may be specified by the central government, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity, and other like matters as would have been admissible to him if the rights in relation to such Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission had not been transferred to, and vested in, the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms, and conditions of employment are duly altered by the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.

Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy, or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee, employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, to the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal shall not entitle such Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy, or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other employee any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal, or other authority.

Where the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission has established a provident fund, superannuation, welfare, or other fund for the benefit of the Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy, or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration or the officers and other employees employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, the monies relatable to the officers and other employees whose services have been transferred by or under this Act to the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal shall, out of the monies standing to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare, or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, and such monies which stand so transferred shall be dealt with by the said Commission or the Tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed.

Further, all cases pertaining to monopolistic trade practices or restrictive trade practices pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and shall be adjudicated by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act as if that Act had not been repealed.

All cases pertaining to unfair trade practices other than those referred to in clause (x) of sub-section (1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, and pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission immediately before the commencement of the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2009, shall, on such commencement, stand transferred to the National Commission constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, and the National Commission shall dispose of such cases as if they were cases filed under that Act.

Further, the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2009, provides that all cases relating to the unfair trade practices pending before the National Commission under this sub-section, on or before the date on which the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2009, receives the assent of the President, shall, on and from that date, stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and be dealt with by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act as if that Act had not been repealed.
Summary:

The Competition Act, 2002, was amended in 2007, 2009, 2017, and 2022. These amendments have brought significant changes to the Act, including changes to the definition of enterprise, thresholds for notification, and the powers of the Competition Commission of India.

One of the significant changes brought by the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2009, is the transfer of certain cases and proceedings from the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission to the Competition Commission of India and the National Commission constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. Specifically, all cases pertaining to unfair trade practices referred to in clause (x) of sub-section (1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, and pending before the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal. All investigations or proceedings, other than those relating to unfair trade practices, pending before the Director General of Investigation and Registration on or before the commencement of this Act, shall stand transferred to the Competition Commission of India. All investigations or proceedings, relating to unfair trade practices, other than those referred to in clause (x) of sub-section (1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969, and pending before the Director General of Investigation and Registration on or before the commencement of this Act, shall stand transferred to the National Commission constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.

The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2009, also made provisions for the transfer of certain investigations or proceedings relating to unfair trade practices pending before the National Commission to the Appellate Tribunal.

The Competition (Amendment) Act, 2017, brought further changes to the Act, including changes to the definition of enterprise, thresholds for notification, and the powers of the Competition Commission of India. The definition of enterprise was expanded to include any entity carrying on any business or activity, whether alone or in combination with other persons, whether incorporated or not, and whether or not it is established or registered under any law for the time being in force. The thresholds for notification were also increased, making it mandatory for enterprises to notify the Competition Commission of India only if their assets in India or outside India, in aggregate, are more than two billion US dollars, including at least rupees five hundred crores in India, or their turnover in India or outside India, in aggregate, is more than six billion US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India.

The Competition (Amendment) Act, 2022, brought further amendments to the Act, including changes to the powers of the Competition Commission of India and the procedure for investigation. The amendments also introduced provisions for the protection of informants and the imposition of penalties for non-compliance with the Act.

In conclusion, the Competition Act, 2002, has undergone significant amendments since its enactment, with the most recent amendments in 2022. These amendments have brought changes to the definition of enterprise, thresholds for notification, and the powers of the Competition Commission of India, among other things. The transfer of certain cases and proceedings from the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission to the Competition Commission of India and the National Commission constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, is one of the significant changes brought by the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2009.
Summary:
The document summarizes various amendments to Indian laws, specifically the Information Technology Act, 2000. The amendments were made by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008, and further amendments were made by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2009. The amendments include changes to sections 2, 3, 33, 36, 39, 42, 43, and 58, and the insertion of new sections, such as sections 43A, 53A, and 67C. The changes made by the amendments include the substitution of certain words, the omission of certain clauses, and the insertion of new clauses. The amendments also include changes to the provisions related to the appointment and powers of the Registrar and other officers of the Commission. The date of notification of these amendments is also mentioned. The purpose of these amendments is to strengthen the legal framework for electronic governance and to provide for electronic delivery of services. The amendments also aim to protect the privacy and security of sensitive personal data or information.