Summary:

The National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research Act, 2007 (Act No. 29 of 2007) declares certain institutions of technology, science education, and research to be Institutions of national importance. The Act provides for instructions and research in various branches of engineering, technology, management, education, sciences, and arts, and for the advancement of learning and dissemination of knowledge in such branches. The Act is divided into four chapters, with Chapter I covering preliminary provisions, Chapter II dealing with the Institutes, Chapter III establishing the Council, and Chapter IV containing miscellaneous provisions.

Under Chapter II, each of the Institutions mentioned in the First, Second, and Third Schedules is incorporated as a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, and is responsible for providing instruction and research in various branches of engineering, technology, management, education, sciences, and arts. The Institutions are also responsible for holding examinations, granting degrees, diplomas, and other academic distinctions, and for establishing and maintaining halls and hostels for the residence of students. The Institutions are open to all races, creeds, and classes, and no test or condition is imposed as to religious belief or profession in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers, or workers.

The Board of Governors is responsible for the general superintendence, direction, and control of the affairs of each Institute, and exercises all the powers of the Institute not otherwise provided for by the Act, the Statutes, and the Ordinances. The Senate is responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education, and examination in the Institute and exercises such other powers and performs such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.

The Chairperson of the Board is responsible for ensuring that the decisions taken by the Board are implemented and exercises such other powers and performs such other duties as may be assigned to him by the Act or the Statutes. The Director is the principal academic and executive officer of the Institute and is responsible for the proper administration of the Institute and for the imparting of instruction and maintenance of discipline therein.

The Registrar is the custodian of records, the common seal, the funds of the Institute, and such other property of the Institute as the Board shall commit to his charge, and acts as the Secretary of the Board, Senate, and such committees as may be prescribed by the Statutes.

The Act also provides for the establishment of a Council, which is responsible for co-ordinating the activities of all the Institutes. The Council is composed of various members, including the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the Chairperson of every Board, the Director of every Institute, the Chairman, University Grants Commission, the Director General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government having administrative control of the technical education, and not less than three but not more than five persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of education, industry, science, or technology.

The Council is responsible for advising on matters relating to the duration of the courses, the degrees and other academic distinctions to be conferred by the Institutes, admission standards and other academic matters, laying down policy regarding cadres, methods of recruitment and conditions of service of employees, institution of scholarships and free ships, levying of fees and other matters of common interest, examining the development plans of each Institute and approving such of them as are considered necessary, advising the Visitor, if so required, in respect of any function to be performed by him under the Act, and performing such other functions as are assigned to it by or under the Act.

The Act also contains provisions for the appointment of officers and employees of the Institutes, the maintenance of accounts and audit, the grant of degrees and diplomas, and the establishment of pension, insurance, and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, teachers, and other staff of the Institutes.

In summary, the National Institutes of Technology, Science Education and Research Act, 2007 establishes certain institutions of technology, science education, and research as Institutions of national importance, and provides for the governance and management of these Institutions. The Act also establishes a Council to co-ordinate the activities of all the Institutes and to advise on matters relating to their administration and management.