Summary:

The Central Universities Act, 2009 establishes and incorporates universities for teaching and research in various states of India. The Act defines the University as a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, andsuing and being sued by the name of the University. The Act also specifies the powers and functions of the University, including providing instructions in various branches of learning, granting degrees and other academic distinctions, organizing and undertaking extramural studies, training and extension services, and establishing centers and specialized laboratories for research and instruction. The University is also required to maintain an all-India character and high standards of teaching and research, and to promote innovations in teaching-learning process and inter-disciplinary studies and research. The Act also specifies the powers and duties of the officers of the University, including the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Deans of Schools, Registrar, Finance Officer, Controller of Examination, and Librarian. The Act also establishes various authorities of the University, including the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Board of Studies, the Finance Committee, and other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes. The Act also provides for the appointment and removal of the members of these authorities, and specifies their powers and functions. The Act also provides for the establishment of a University open to all castes, creed, race or class, and prohibits the University from adopting or imposing any test of religious belief or profession as a condition for appointment, holding of office, admission, graduation, or enjoyment of any privilege. The Act also establishes the Visitor of the University, who has the power to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made by such person or persons as he may direct, and to give directions to the University in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University. The Act also provides for the appointment of employees of the University, their conditions of service, and their discipline. The Act also provides for the submission of annual reports and accounts to the Court and the Visitor, and the laying of the annual accounts before both Houses of Parliament. The Act also provides for the return and information to be furnished by the University, and for the protection of action taken in good faith. The Act also provides for the repeal and savings of the Central Universities Ordinance, 2009, and for the transitional provisions for the first Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, Registrar, and Finance Officer of the University. The Act also provides for the amendment of the Madhya Pradesh Act 22 of 1973 and the President’s Act 10 of 1973. The Act also provides for the repeal and savings of the Central Universities Ordinance, 2009. The Second Schedule to the Act contains the Statutes of the University, including the Statutes relating to the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Deans of Schools, the Registrar, the Finance Officer, the Controller of Examinations, the Librarian, the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Board of Studies, the Finance Committee, the conditions of service and code of conduct of teachers, and the removal of employees of the University. The Act also provides for the making of Regulations by the authorities of the University for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees appointed by them. The Act also provides for the submission of annual reports and accounts to the Court and the Visitor, and the laying of the annual accounts before both Houses of Parliament. The Act also provides for the return and information to be furnished by the University, and for the protection of action taken in good faith. The Act also provides for the repeal and savings of the Central Universities Ordinance, 2009. The Second Schedule to the Act contains the Statutes of the University, including the Statutes relating to the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the Deans of Schools, the Registrar, the Finance Officer, the Controller of Examinations, the Librarian, the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Board of Studies, the Finance Committee, the conditions of service and code of conduct of teachers, and the removal of employees of the University. The Act also provides for the making of Regulations by the authorities of the University for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees appointed by them.