Summary:

THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA (PROHIBITION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 2005 (ACT NO. 50 OF 2005) is a law that prohibits the improper use of the State Emblem of India for professional and commercial purposes. The Act extends to the whole of India and applies to Indian citizens outside India as well. The Act defines "competent authority" as any authority competent under any law for the time being in force to register any company, firm, or other body of persons or any trademark or design or to grant a patent. "Emblem" is defined as the State Emblem of India as described and specified in the Schedule to be used as an official seal of the Government.

Section 3 of the Act prohibits the use of the emblem or any colorable imitation thereof in any manner that creates an impression that it relates to the Government or that it is an official document of the Central Government or of a State Government without the previous permission of the Central Government or of such officer of that Government as may be authorized by it in this behalf.

Section 4 of the Act prohibits the use of the emblem for the purpose of any trade, business, calling, or profession or in the title of any patent or in any trademark or design, except in such cases and under such conditions as may be prescribed.

Section 5 of the Act prohibits a competent authority from registering a trademark or design that bears the emblem or granting a patent in respect of an invention that bears a title containing the emblem.

Section 6 of the Act gives the Central Government the power to make rules to regulate the use of the emblem in official seals used in offices of the Central Government and the State Governments and their organizations, including diplomatic missions abroad, subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed.

Section 7 of the Act provides for penalties for contravention of the provisions of the Act. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 4 for any wrongful gain shall be punishable for such offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.

Section 8 of the Act requires previous sanction for prosecution. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of any officer authorized in this behalf by general or special order of the Central Government.

The Schedule of the Act describes the State Emblem of India, which is an adaptation from the Sarnath Lion Capital of Asoka. The motto "Satyameva Jayate" – Truth alone triumphs – written in Devanagari script below the profile of the Lion Capital is part of the State Emblem of India. The State Emblem of India shall conform to the designs as set out in Appendix I or Appendix II.