The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") is an Indian law that regulates securitisation and reconstruction of financial assets and enforcement of security interest. The Act came into force on June 21, 2002.

The Act defines various terms such as "Appellate Tribunal," "asset reconstruction," "asset reconstruction company," "bank," "banking company," "Board," "borrower," "Central Registry," "company," "corresponding new bank," "debt," "Debts Recovery Tribunal," "debt securities," "default," "financial assistance," "financial asset," "financial institution," "financial lease," "hypothecation," "negotiable document," "non-performing asset," "notification," "obligor," and "originator."

The Act is divided into several chapters. Chapter I, titled "Preliminary," contains the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act, as well as definitions of various terms used throughout the Act.

Chapter II of the Act deals with securitisation and asset reconstruction. It defines securitisation as the acquisition by any asset reconstruction company of any right or interest of any bank or financial institution in any financial assistance for the purpose of realisation of such financial assistance. It also lays down the conditions for registration of an asset reconstruction company and the powers and duties of such companies.

Chapter III of the Act deals with enforcement of security interest. It provides for the creation of a Central Registry for the registration of security interests created on property rights, and sets out the procedure for enforcement of security interest.

Chapter IV of the Act deals with miscellaneous provisions, including the power of the Central Government to make rules, the power of the Reserve Bank to issue directions, and the protection of action taken in good faith.

Overall, the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 is a law that regulates the securitisation and reconstruction of financial assets and the enforcement of security interest in India. It defines various terms used in the Act, sets out the conditions for registration of asset reconstruction companies, and provides for the creation of a Central Registry for the registration of security interests created on property rights. The Act also sets out the procedure for enforcement of security interest and contains miscellaneous provisions.
Summary:

This is an excerpt from the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, which defines various terms related to the securitization and reconstruction of financial assets of banks and financial institutions in India. The Act defines terms such as "property," "qualified buyer," "Registrar of Companies," "Reserve Bank," "scheme," "securitisation," "security agreement," "secured asset," "secured creditor," "secured debt," "security interest," "security receipt," "sponsor," "State Bank of India," and "subsidiary bank." The Act also specifies the conditions for registering an asset reconstruction company and obtaining a certificate of registration to carry on the business of securitisation or asset reconstruction. The Reserve Bank is responsible for granting or rejecting the application for registration and has the power to impose conditions on the certificate of registration. The Act also requires prior approval of the Reserve Bank for any substantial change in the management or location of the registered office or name of an asset reconstruction company.
Summary:

The Reserve Bank has the authority to cancel the certificate of registration of an asset reconstruction company if it ceases to carry on the business of securitization or asset reconstruction, ceases to receive or hold any investment from a qualified buyer, fails to comply with any conditions subject to which the certificate of registration has been granted, fails to fulfill any of the conditions referred to in clauses (a) to (g) of sub-section (3) of section 3, fails to comply with any direction issued by the Reserve Bank, fails to maintain accounts in accordance with the requirements of any law or any direction or order issued by the Reserve Bank, fails to submit or offer for inspection its books of account or other relevant documents when so demanded by the Reserve Bank, or fails to obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank required under sub-section (6) of section 3. The Reserve Bank must provide an opportunity to the company to comply with the provisions or fulfill the conditions before canceling the certificate of registration, unless it is of the opinion that the delay in canceling the certificate of registration will be prejudicial to the public interest or the interests of the investors or the asset reconstruction company. An asset reconstruction company aggrieved by the order of cancellation of certificate of registration may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within thirty days from the date on which the order of cancellation is communicated to it. A company holding investments of qualified buyers and whose application for grant of certificate of registration has been rejected or certificate of registration has been cancelled shall be deemed to be an asset reconstruction company until it repays the entire investments held by it (together with interest, if any) within such period as the Reserve Bank may direct. An asset reconstruction company may acquire financial assets of any bank or financial institution by issuing a debenture or bond or any other security in the nature of debenture, for consideration agreed upon between such company and the bank or financial institution, incorporating therein such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between them, or by entering into an agreement with such bank or financial institution for the transfer of such financial assets to such company on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between them. Any document executed by any bank or financial institution under sub-section (1) in favour of the asset reconstruction company acquiring financial assets for the purposes of asset reconstruction or securitisation shall be exempted from stamp duty. If the bank or financial institution is a lender in relation to any financial assets acquired under sub-section (1) by the asset reconstruction company, such company shall, on such acquisition, be deemed to be the lender and all the rights of such bank or financial institution shall vest in such company in relation to such financial assets. If the bank or financial institution is holding any right, title or interest upon any tangible asset or intangible asset to secure payment of any unpaid portion of the purchase price of such asset or an obligation incurred or credit otherwise provided to enable the borrower to acquire the tangible asset or assignment or licence of intangible asset, such right, title or interest shall vest in the asset reconstruction company on acquisition of such assets under sub-section (1). All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers-of-attorney, grants of legal representation, permissions, approvals, consents or no-objections under any law or otherwise and other instruments of whatever nature which relate to the said financial asset and which are subsisting or having effect immediately before the acquisition of financial asset under sub-section (1) and to which the concerned bank or financial institution is a party or which are in favour of such bank or financial institution shall, after the acquisition of the financial assets, be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the asset reconstruction company, as the case may be, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if, in the place of the said bank or financial institution, the asset reconstruction company had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in favour of the asset reconstruction company. If, on the date of acquisition of financial asset under sub-section (1), any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature relating to the said financial asset is pending by or against the bank or financial institution, such suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the asset reconstruction company. On acquisition of financial assets under sub-section (1), the asset reconstruction company may, with the consent of the originator, file an application before the Debts Recovery Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal or any court or other Authority for the purpose of substitution of its name in any pending suit, appeal or other proceedings and on receipt of such application, such Debts Recovery Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal or court or Authority shall pass orders for the substitution of the asset reconstruction company in such pending suit, appeal or other proceedings. If any financial asset, of a borrower acquired by an asset reconstruction company, comprises of secured debts of more than one bank or financial institution for recovery of which such banks or financial institutions have filed applications before two or more Debts Recovery Tribunals, the asset reconstruction company may file an application to the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction over any of such Tribunals in which such applications are pending for transfer of all pending applications to any one of the Debts Recovery Tribunals as it deems fit. The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the application an opportunity of being heard, pass an order for transfer of the pending applications to any one of the Debts Recovery Tribunals. Any recovery certificate, issued by the Debts Recovery Tribunal to which all the pending applications are transferred, shall be executed in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-section (23) of section 19 and other provisions of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 shall, accordingly, apply to such execution. The bank or financial institution may give a notice of acquisition of financial assets by an asset reconstruction company to the concerned obligor and any other concerned person and to the concerned registering authority in whose jurisdiction the mortgage, charge, hypothecation, assignment or other interest created on the financial assets had been registered. Where a notice of acquisition of financial asset under sub-section (1) is given by a bank or financial institution, the obligor, on receipt of such notice, shall make payment to the concerned asset reconstruction company, as the case may be, and payment made to such company in discharge of any of the obligations in relation to the financial asset specified in the notice shall be a full discharge.
Title: Summary of Indian Laws for Asset Reconstruction Companies

Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) in India are entities that specialize in acquiring and managing non-performing assets (NPAs) or bad loans from banks and financial institutions. The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act), provides the legal framework for ARCs to operate in India. This summary will focus on key sections of the SARFAESI Act relevant to ARCs.

1. Acquisition of Financial Assets (Section 5):
ARCs can acquire financial assets from banks or financial institutions after giving notice of acquisition. If a bank or financial institution fails to give notice, any subsequent money or property received shall be held in trust for the ARC.

2. Issue of Security Receipts (Section 7):
ARCs can issue security receipts to qualified institutional buyers after acquiring financial assets. The ARC must maintain separate accounts for each scheme and hold assets acquired or funds raised in trust for the benefit of qualified buyers.

3. Exemption from Registration of Security Receipts (Section 8):
Security receipts issued by ARCs and transfers of such receipts do not require compulsory registration under the Registration Act, 1908.

4. Measures for Asset Reconstruction (Section 9):
ARCs can take various measures to reconstruct assets, including:
- Managing the business of the borrower
- Selling or leasing part or whole of the business
- Rescheduling debts
- Enforcing security interests
- Settling dues
- Taking possession of secured assets
- Converting debt into shares of a borrower company

5. Other Functions of ARCs (Section 10):
ARCs can act as an agent for banks or financial institutions for recovering dues, act as a manager, or act as a receiver if appointed by a court or tribunal. However, ARCs cannot act as a manager if it gives rise to any pecuniary liability.

6. Resolution of Disputes (Section 11):
Disputes between parties involved in securitization or reconstruction or non-payment of any amount due can be settled through conciliation or arbitration under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.

7. Power of Reserve Bank to Determine Policy and Issue Directions (Section 12):
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) can issue policy guidelines and give directions to ARCs on matters such as income recognition, accounting standards, making provisions for bad and doubtful debts, capital adequacy, and deployment of funds.

8. Power of Reserve Bank to Call for Statements and Information (Section 12A):
The RBI can direct an ARC to furnish statements and information relating to its business or affairs as it considers necessary.

9. Power of Reserve Bank to Carry out Audit and Inspection (Section 12B):
The RBI can conduct audits and inspections of ARCs to ensure compliance with the SARFAESI Act and RBI guidelines.

By understanding these key sections of the SARFAESI Act, stakeholders can better navigate the legal landscape for ARCs operating in India.
Summary:

The document outlines the enforcement of security interest in India. According to the act, a security interest created in favor of any secured creditor may be enforced without the intervention of the court or tribunal, by such creditor in accordance with the provisions of this Act. If a borrower defaults on repayment of secured debt, the secured creditor may require the borrower to discharge his liabilities within 60 days. If the borrower fails to do so, the secured creditor may take possession of the secured assets, transfer by way of lease, assignment or sale for realizing the secured asset, take over the management of the business of the borrower, appoint any person to manage the secured assets, or require any person who has acquired any of the secured assets from the borrower to pay the secured creditor. Any payment made by any person to the secured creditor shall give such person a valid discharge as if he has made payment to the borrower. The act also outlines the process for sale of an immovable property, transfer of secured asset after taking possession, and recovery of costs, charges and expenses. The act also specifies the provisions for joint financing of a financial asset by secured creditors.
Summary:

The document summarizes provisions related to the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. Specifically, it outlines the process by which a secured creditor can take possession of a borrower's secured assets, including the requirement for the secured creditor to request assistance from the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the secured asset or related documents may be situated or found. The document also specifies the information that must be included in an affidavit submitted by the secured creditor, as well as the powers of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate to take necessary steps to secure compliance with the provisions of the Act.

Additionally, the document explains the manner and effect of taking over the management of a borrower's business by an asset reconstruction company or a secured creditor, including the appointment of directors or administrators and the termination of existing management contracts. The document also specifies that any contract of management between the borrower and any director or manager thereof holding office as such immediately before publication of the notice under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be terminated.

The document also includes provisions related to the sale of secured assets, including the requirement for the secured creditor to intimate the workmen's dues in accordance with the provisions of section 529A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956). If such workmen's dues cannot be ascertained, the liquidator shall intimate the estimated amount of workmen's dues under that section to the secured creditor, and the secured creditor may retain the sale proceeds of the secured assets after depositing the amount of such estimate dues with the liquidator. If the secured creditor deposits the estimated amount of workmen's dues, such creditor shall be liable to pay the balance of the workmen's dues or entitled to receive the excess amount, if any, deposited by the secured creditor with the liquidator. The secured creditor shall furnish an undertaking to the liquidator to pay the balance of the workmen's dues, if any.
Summary:

The Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (the Act) governs the enforcement of security interest by secured creditors in India. The Act allows secured creditors to take possession of the secured assets of a borrower and sell them to recover their debt. If the management of the borrower's business has been taken over by the secured creditor, then the borrower's shareholders cannot appoint directors, and no resolution passed at a shareholders' meeting will be effective without the secured creditor's approval. Additionally, no proceeding for winding up or appointment of a receiver can be initiated without the secured creditor's consent.

Section 16 of the Act states that no managing director, director, manager, or person in charge of management of the borrower's business shall be entitled to compensation for loss of office or premature termination of any contract of management entered into by him with the borrower. However, such persons can recover any moneys owed to them by the borrower's business.

Section 17 of the Act allows any person aggrieved by any of the measures taken by the secured creditor to enforce security to make an application to the Debts Recovery Tribunal (DRT) within 45 days of the measure being taken. The DRT will consider whether the measures taken by the secured creditor are in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder. If the DRT finds that the measures are not in accordance with the Act, it may declare them invalid and restore possession or management of the secured assets to the borrower or other aggrieved person. The DRT must dispose of the application within 60 days from the date of such application, which can be extended for reasons recorded in writing, but the total period of pendency should not exceed four months.

Section 18 of the Act allows any person aggrieved by an order made by the DRT under Section 17 to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the order. The Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal only if the borrower has deposited 50% of the amount of debt due from him, as claimed by the secured creditors or determined by the DRT, whichever is less. The Appellate Tribunal may reduce the amount to not less than 25% of the debt referred to in the second proviso.

Section 18A validates any fee levied and collected for preferring an appeal to the DRT or the Appellate Tribunal before the commencement of the Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws (Amendment) Act, 2004.

Section 18B, which allowed for an appeal to the High Court in certain cases, has been omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020.
Summary:

The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act) provides for the rights of secured creditors to recover their dues by taking possession of the secured assets. This document contains notifications related to the Act, including Section 18C, which deals with the right to lodge a caveat. A caveat is a notice lodged by a secured creditor or any person claiming a right to appear before the Tribunal, Court of District Judge, Appellate Tribunal, or High Court, on the hearing of an application or appeal. The caveator is required to serve notice of the caveat to the person by whom the application has been or is expected to be made. If a caveat has been lodged, the Tribunal or Court shall serve a notice of the application or appeal filed by the applicant or appellant on the caveator. The caveat shall not remain in force after the expiry of ninety days from the date on which it was lodged, unless the application or appeal has been made before the expiry of the said period.

Section 19 of the Act provides for the right of the borrower to receive compensation and costs in certain cases. If the Debts Recovery Tribunal or the Court of District Judge, on an application made under Section 17 or Section 17A, or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court on an appeal preferred under Section 18 or Section 18A, holds that the possession of secured assets by the secured creditor is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder, the borrower or any other aggrieved person shall be entitled to the payment of such compensation and costs as may be determined by such Tribunal or Court of District Judge or Appellate Tribunal or the High Court.

The Central Government may set up a registry to be known as the Central Registry for the purposes of registration of transactions of securitisation and reconstruction of financial assets and creation of security interest under this Act. The Central Registry shall have a head office at such place as the Central Government may specify and may have branch offices at such other places as the Central Government may think fit. The provisions of this Act pertaining to the Central Registry shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any of the provisions contained in the Registration Act, 1908, the Companies Act, 1956, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, the Patents Act, 1970, the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, and the Designs Act, 2000 or any other law requiring registration of charges and shall not affect the priority of charges or validity thereof under those Acts or laws.

The Central Government may integrate the registration records of various registration systems with the records of the Central Registry, in such manner as may be prescribed. After integration of records of various registration systems with the Central Registry, security interests over properties which are registered under any registration system shall be deemed to be registered with the Central Registry for the purposes of this Act.

The Central Government may delegate its powers and functions under this Chapter, in relation to establishment, operations, and regulation of the Central Registry to the Reserve Bank, subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. The Central Government may appoint a person for the purpose of registration of transactions relating to securitisation, reconstruction of financial assets, and security interest created over properties, to be known as the Central Registrar. The Central Registrar may appoint other officers with such designations as he thinks fit for the purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction of the Central Registrar, such functions of the Central Registrar under this Act as he may, from time to time, authorise them to discharge.

The particulars of every transaction of securitisation, asset reconstruction, or creation of security interest shall be filed, with the Central Registrar in the manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed. The Central Government may require the registration of all transactions of securitisation, asset reconstruction, or creation of security interest which are subsisting on or before the date of establishment of the Central Registry within such period and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed. The Central Government may prescribe forms for registration for different types of security interest and fee to be charged for such registration.

Whenever the terms or conditions, or the extent or operation of any security interest registered under this Chapter are modified, it shall be the duty of the asset reconstruction company or the secured creditor, as the case may be, to send to the Central Registrar, the particulars of such modification.
Summary:
The document outlines various provisions related to the registration of securitization, asset reconstruction, and security interest transactions in India. According to Section 9, asset reconstruction companies or secured creditors must report satisfaction of security interest relating to the company or creditors within 30 days of payment or satisfaction. On receipt of such intimation, the Central Registrar will enter a memorandum of satisfaction in the Central Register. If the borrower informs the Central Registrar of non-recording of payment or satisfaction, the Central Registrar will send a notice to the asset reconstruction company or secured creditors, who will have to show cause within 14 days as to why payment or satisfaction should not be recorded. If no cause is shown, the Central Registrar will enter a memorandum of satisfaction in the Central Register.

Section 26 provides for the right to inspect particulars of securitization, reconstruction, and security interest transactions. The particulars of such transactions entered in the Central Register shall be open for inspection by any person during business hours on payment of prescribed fees. The Central Register maintained in electronic form shall also be open for inspection through electronic media on payment of such fees.

Section 26A allows the Central Government to rectify matters of registration, modification, and satisfaction, etc. The Central Government may, on being satisfied that the omission to file particulars of any transaction of securitization, asset reconstruction, or security interest or modification or satisfaction of such transaction or the omission or mis-statement of any particular was accidental or due to inadvertence or some other sufficient cause, direct that the time for filing of the particulars of the transaction for registration or modification or satisfaction shall be extended or, as the case may require, the omission or mis-statement shall be rectified.

Section 26B extends the provisions of Chapter IV relating to the Central Registry to all creditors other than secured creditors for creation, modification, or satisfaction of any security interest over any property of the borrower for the purpose of securing due repayment of any financial assistance granted by such creditor to the borrower. From the date of notification, any creditor, including the secured creditor, may file particulars of transactions of creation, modification, or satisfaction of any security interest with the Central Registry in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

Section 26C provides that registration of transactions of creation, modification, or satisfaction of security interest by a secured creditor or other creditor or filing of attachment orders under this Chapter shall be deemed to constitute a public notice from the date and time of filing of particulars of such transaction with the Central Registry. The claim of such secured creditor or other creditor holding attachment order shall have priority over any subsequent security interest created upon such property and any transfer by way of sale, lease, or assignment or license of such property or attachment order subsequent to such registration shall be subject to such claim.

Section 26D provides that no secured creditor shall be entitled to exercise the rights of enforcement of securities under Chapter III unless the security interest created in its favor by the borrower has been registered with the Central Registry.

Section 26E provides that after the registration of security interest, the debts due to any secured creditor shall be paid in priority over all other debts and all revenues, taxes, cesses, and other rates payable to the Central Government or State Government or local authority.

Section 27 provides for penalties for default in filing particulars of every transaction of securitization or asset reconstruction or security interest or modification or satisfaction of such transaction. If a default is made, every company and every officer of the company or the secured creditors and every officer of the secured creditor who is in default shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues.

Section 29 provides for offenses. If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
Summary:

This document outlines sections of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. Section 30 of the Act states that only certain courts have the authority to hear cases related to non-compliance with specific sections of the Act, and that these cases can only be brought by officers of the Central Registry or the Reserve Bank. Section 30A outlines the penalties that can be imposed by the adjudicating authority for non-compliance with directions issued by the Reserve Bank, including a penalty not exceeding one crore rupees or twice the amount involved in the failure, whichever is more. Section 30B allows a person in default to appeal the adjudicating authority's order within 30 days. The Appellate Authority has the power to pass any order it deems fit and may stay the enforcement of the adjudicating authority's order. Section 30D outlines the process for recovering penalties, including the ability to debit the person in default's current account or liquidate securities held by the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank may also issue a notice to any person who owes money to the person in default, requiring them to deduct the amount of the recoverable sum from the amount payable to the person in default. The provisions of this Act do not apply to certain liens, pledges, and security interests as outlined in Section 31.
Summary:

The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, is a law in India that governs the securitization and reconstruction of financial assets and the enforcement of security interests. The Act includes provisions for creating security interests in agricultural land, with certain exceptions, and exempting certain classes of banks or financial institutions from certain provisions of the Act. The Act also includes provisions for protection of actions taken in good faith, offences by companies, and the liability of directors and officers. The Act establishes a Debts Recovery Tribunal and an Appellate Tribunal to determine matters related to debt recovery. The Act also includes provisions for the limitation of actions, the application of other laws, and the power of the Central Government to make rules. The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (Second) Ordinance, 2002 is repealed, and anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance is deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Summary:

The document summarizes amendments to various Indian laws, specifically the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act), the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, and the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985. The amendments are made by the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (Amendment) Act, 2016.

The amendments to the SARFAESI Act include the addition of a new definition for "asset reconstruction company" and the insertion of a new clause in section 2(h) defining "security receipt." The amendments also provide that no reference shall be made to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction after the commencement of the SARFAESI Act, where financial assets have been acquired by any asset reconstruction company under section 5 of that Act. Furthermore, where a reference is pending before the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, such reference shall abate if the secured creditors have taken any measures to recover their secured debt under section 13 of the SARFAESI Act.

The amendments to the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, include the insertion of a new definition for "security receipt" in section 2(h).

The amendments to the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985, provide that no reference shall be made to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction after the commencement of the SARFAESI Act, where financial assets have been acquired by any asset reconstruction company under section 5 of that Act. Furthermore, where a reference is pending before the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, such reference shall abate if the secured creditors have taken any measures to recover their secured debt under section 13 of the SARFAESI Act.

Overall, the amendments aim to streamline the process of securitization and reconstruction of financial assets and enforcement of security interest in India.
Summary:

The document summarizes various amendments made to the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act) through different Acts over the years. The first amendment was made by the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (Amendment) Act, 2004 (Act 30 of 2004), which came into effect on November 11, 2004. This amendment substituted the term "any properties not liable to attachment" with "any property or assets not chargeable to debt".

The second amendment was made by the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (Amendment) Act, 2013 (Act 1 of 2013), which came into effect on January 15, 2013. This amendment inserted new sections 17, 18, and 19, which dealt with the rights of a secured creditor in the event of default by the borrower, the appointment of a manager to manage the secured assets, and the transfer of the rights of the secured creditor to a third party, respectively.

The third amendment was made by the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (Amendment) Act, 2016 (Act 44 of 2016), which came into effect on September 1, 2016. This amendment made several changes to the SARFAESI Act, including the substitution of the term "securitisation company or reconstruction company" with "securitisation company or insolvency professional agency or reconstruction company". It also inserted new sections 17A and 17B, which dealt with the transfer of the rights of the secured creditor to a third party in the event of insolvency resolution of the borrower and the transfer of the secured assets, respectively.

The fourth amendment was made by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC), which came into effect on May 28, 2016. The IBC made significant changes to the SARFAESI Act, including the substitution of the term "securitisation company or reconstruction company" with "insolvency professional agency". It also inserted new sections 22A, 22B, and 22C, which dealt with the transfer of the rights of the secured creditor to a third party in the event of liquidation of the borrower, the transfer of the secured assets, and the rights of the secured creditor in the case of a joint lender, respectively.

In summary, the SARFAESI Act has been amended several times since its enactment in 2002 to include new provisions and make changes to existing ones. These amendments have been made by various Acts, including the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (Amendment) Act, 2004, the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (Amendment) Act, 2013, the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (Amendment) Act, 2016, and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. These amendments have expanded the scope of the SARFAESI Act and provided greater protection to secured creditors in the event of default by the borrower.