Summary:
The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 (Act No. 6 of 2007) came into force on 10th January 2007, with the objective of prohibiting child marriages and associated issues. The Act defines a child as a person who, if a male, has not completed 21 years of age, and if a female, has not completed 18 years of age. The Act considers any marriage to which either of the contracting parties is a child as a child marriage.

Key provisions of the Act include:

1. Section 3: Every child marriage is voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a child at the time of the marriage. A petition for annulling a child marriage by a decree of nullity may be filed in the district court only by a contracting party to the marriage who was a child at the time of the marriage.
2. Section 4: The district court may make an interim or final order directing the male contracting party to the child marriage, and in case the male contracting party to such marriage is a minor, his parent or guardian to pay maintenance to the female contracting party to the marriage until her remarriage.
3. Section 5: Where there are children born of the child marriage, the district court shall make an appropriate order for the custody of such children. While making an order for the custody of a child under this section, the welfare and best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration to be given by the district court.
4. Section 6: Notwithstanding that a child marriage has been annulled by a decree of nullity under section 3, every child begotten or conceived of such marriage before the decree is made, whether born before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be a legitimate child for all purposes.
5. Section 9: Whoever, being a male adult above eighteen years of age, contracts a child marriage shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
6. Section 10: Whoever performs, conducts, directs or abets any child marriage shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees unless he proves that he had reasons to believe that the marriage was not a child marriage.
7. Section 11: Where a child contracts a child marriage, any person having charge of the child, whether as parent or guardian or any other person or in any other capacity, lawful or unlawful, including any member of an organisation or association of persons who does any act to promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnised, including attending or participating in a child marriage, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees.
8. Section 13: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, if, on an application of the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer or on receipt of information through a complaint or otherwise from any person, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate is satisfied that a child marriage in contravention of this Act has been arranged or is about to be solemnised, such Magistrate shall issue an injunction against any person including a member of an organisation or an association of persons prohibiting such marriage.
9. Section 14: Any child marriage solemnised in contravention of an injunction order issued under section 13, whether interim or final, shall be void ab initio.
10. Section 15: Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.

The Act also includes provisions related to the appointment of Child Marriage Prohibition Officers, their powers, and duties. The Act also states that the Child Marriage Prohibition Officers shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 (19 of 1929) is hereby repealed, but all cases and other proceedings pending or continued under the said Act at the commencement of this Act shall be continued and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act, as if this Act had not been passed.