Summary:
The Government Securities Act, 2006, is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Government securities and its management by the Reserve Bank of India. The Act applies to Government securities created and issued by the Central or State Government, whether before or after the commencement of this Act. The Act defines various terms related to Government securities, including "agent," "Bank," "bond ledger account," "constituents' subsidiary general ledger account," "Government," "Government security," "prescribed," "promissory note," and "specified." The Act also defines the forms in which Government securities can be issued, including Government promissory notes, bearer bonds, stocks, and bonds held in a bond ledger account.

The Act allows for the opening and maintenance of subsidiary general ledger accounts, including constituents' subsidiary general ledger accounts and bond ledger accounts, subject to certain conditions and restrictions. The Act also provides for the transfer of Government securities and the recognition of title to Government securities of deceased sole holders or joint holders. The Act also includes provisions for the nomination of one or more persons by holders of Government securities, as well as the right of survivors of joint holders or several payees.

The Act also includes provisions for the Bank to make orders in relation to Government securities, including the cancellation of Government securities and the issue of duplicate Government securities. The Act also includes provisions for the Bank to determine title to Government securities in case of dispute, and for the Bank to request a District Magistrate to record or have recorded evidence in relation to Government securities. The Act also includes provisions for the law applicable in regard to Government securities, as well as the postponement of payments and registration of transfers pending the making of vesting orders.

The Act also includes provisions for the Bank to require bonds from persons in relation to Government securities, as well as the publication of notices in the Official Gazette. The Act also includes provisions for the procedure and scope of vesting orders, as well as the legal effect of orders made by the Bank. The Act also includes provisions for the stay of proceedings on orders of courts, as well as the cancellation of vesting proceedings. The Act also includes provisions for discharge in respect of interest on Government securities and bearer bonds, as well as the period of limitation of governments' liability in respect of interest.

The Act also includes provisions for the inspection of documents, as well as the use of micro films, facsimile copies of documents, magnetic tapes, and computer print outs as documents of evidence. The Act also includes provisions for the Bank and its officers to be public officers, as well as provisions for the misuse of subsidiary general ledger account facility. The Act also includes provisions for pledge, hypothecation, or lien, as well as power for the Bank to call for information, cause inspection, and issue directions. The Act also includes provisions for contravention and penalties, as well as power to make regulations. The Act also includes provisions for the repeal and saving of certain laws.