Summary:

THE SUPPRESSION OF UNLAWFUL ACTS AGAINST SAFETY OF MARITIME NAVIGATION AND FIXED PLATFORMS ON CONTINENTAL SHELF ACT, 2002

Act No. 69 of 2002

Enactment Date: 20th December, 2002

This Act aims to give effect to the International Maritime Organisation Convention for Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf and for matters connected therewith. The Act defines various legal terms related to maritime navigation and fixed platforms on the continental shelf.

Chapter I of the Act deals with preliminary provisions, including the short title, extent, application, and commencement of the Act. It also defines various terms used in the Act, such as "Code," "Continental Shelf of India," "Convention," "Convention State," "fixed platform," "Protocol," "Protocol State," and "ship."

Chapter II of the Act deals with offences related to ships, fixed platforms, cargo of a ship, maritime navigational facilities, etc. It specifies various offences and their corresponding punishments, including violence against a person on board a fixed platform or a ship, destruction of a fixed platform or a ship, seizure or control of a fixed platform or a ship, placement of a device or substance on a fixed platform or a ship, destruction or damage to maritime navigational facilities, and communication of false information endangering the safe navigation of a ship.

Chapter III of the Act deals with miscellaneous provisions, including provisions related to extradition, contracting parties to the Convention or Protocol, power to treat certain ships to be registered in Convention States, previous sanction necessary for prosecution, presumptions as to offences under section 3, protection of action taken in good faith, and repeal and savings.

The Act applies to any offence committed outside India by any person, to a ship navigating or scheduled to navigate into, through or from waters beyond the outer limits of the territorial waters of India, or the lateral limits of its territorial waters with adjacent States, and when the offence is committed on board a ship in the territorial waters of India or against a fixed platform located on the Continental Shelf of India. The Act also applies to offences committed by a stateless person whose habitual residence is in India but does not have nationality of any country.

The Act confers powers of investigation on any gazetted officer of the Coast Guard or any other gazetted officer of the Central Government. The Act also specifies a Court of Session to be a Designated Court for the purpose of providing for speedy trial. The Designated Court may exercise the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a case may exercise under section 167 of the Code, in relation to an accused person in such case who has been forwarded to him under that section. The Designated Court may take cognizance of an offence without the accused being committed to it for trial.

The Act specifies that no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release and where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.

The Act also specifies that the offences under section 3 shall be deemed to have been included as extraditable offences and provided for in all the extradition treaties made by India with Convention States or Protocol States and which extend to, and are binding on, India on the date of commencement of this Act. The Act also provides that for the purposes of the application of the Extradition Act, 1962, any ship registered in a Convention State or Protocol State shall, at any time while that ship is plying, be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that Convention State or Protocol State, whether or not it is for the time being also within the jurisdiction of any other country.