Summary:

The Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Act, 2007 is an Indian law aimed at providing access to the largest number of listeners and viewers, on a free to air basis, of sporting events of national importance through mandatory sharing of sports broadcasting signals with Prasar Bharati. The Act defines various terms related to broadcasting, such as broadcaster, broadcasting, broadcasting service, broadcasting networks service, cable television channel service, cable television network, community radio service, content, content broadcasting service, Direct-to-Home (DTH) broadcasting service, Guidelines, multi-system cable television network, Prasar Bharati, prescribed, satellite television service, satellite radio service, service provider, specified, sporting events of national importance, terrestrial television service, and terrestrial radio service.

The Act consists of four chapters. Chapter I, titled "Preliminary," provides the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act, as well as definitions of various terms used throughout the Act. Chapter II, titled "Mandatory Sharing of Sports Broadcasting Signals with Prasar Bharati," states that no content rights owner or holder and no television or radio broadcasting service provider shall carry a live television broadcast on any cable or Direct-to-Home network or radio commentary broadcast in India of sporting events of national importance, unless it simultaneously shares the live broadcasting signal, without its advertisements, with the Prasar Bharati to enable them to re-transmit the same on its terrestrial networks and Direct-to-Home networks in such manner and on such terms and conditions as may be specified. The terms and conditions under this section also provide that the advertisement revenue sharing between the content rights owner or holder and the Prasar Bharati shall be in the ratio of not less than 75:25 in case of television coverage and 50:50 in case of radio coverage. The Central Government may specify a percentage of the revenue received by the Prasar Bharati under this section, which shall be utilized by the Prasar Bharati for broadcasting other sporting events.

Chapter III, titled "Powers of the Central Government to Issue Guidelines," states that the Central Government shall take all such measures, as it deems fit or expedient, by way of issuing Guidelines for mandatory sharing of broadcasting signals with Prasar Bharati relating to sporting events of national importance. The Guidelines issued before the promulgation of the Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Ordinance, 2007, shall be deemed to have been issued validly under the provisions of this section. Chapter IV, titled "Miscellaneous," contains provisions for validation, power of the Central Government to make rules, rules and Guidelines to be laid before Parliament, saving, and repeal and saving.

The Act specifies penalties for violation of various terms and conditions under section 3, subject to the condition that the amount of a pecuniary penalty shall not exceed one crore rupees. No penalty shall be imposed without giving a reasonable opportunity to the service provider. No act or omission on the part of any person after the 11th November, 2005, and before the date of promulgation of the Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Ordinance, 2007, shall be subjected to penalties.