Summary:
The Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) Act, 2017, is an Act to make provisions for levy and collection of tax on inter-State supply of goods or services or both by the Central Government. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as 'central tax', 'export of goods', 'export of services', 'integrated tax', 'non-taxable online recipient', 'online information and database access or retrieval services', 'output tax', 'Special Economic Zone', 'Special Economic Zone developer', 'supply', 'taxable territory', and 'zero-rated supply'.

The Act is divided into nine chapters. Chapter I, Preliminary, deals with the short title, extent, and commencement of the Act. Chapter II, Administration, deals with the appointment of officers and their powers and functions. Chapter III, Levy and Collection of Tax, deals with the levy and collection of integrated tax, power to grant exemption from tax, and determination of the nature of supply. Chapter IV, Determination of Nature of Supply, deals with the place of supply of goods and services. Chapter V, Place of Supply of Goods or Services or Both, deals with the place of supply of goods other than supply of goods imported into, or exported from India, place of supply of goods imported into, or exported from India, place of supply of services where the location of supplier and recipient is in India, and place of supply of services where the location of supplier or location of recipient is outside India. Chapter VI, Refund of Integrated Tax to International Tourist, deals with the refund of integrated tax paid on supply of goods to tourist leaving India. Chapter VII, Zero Rated Supply, deals with zero-rated supply and apportionment of tax and settlement of funds. Chapter VIII, Miscellaneous, deals with the application of provisions of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, import of services made on or after the appointed day, power to make rules, power to make regulations, laying of rules, regulations and notifications, removal of difficulties, and transitional provisions.

The Act applies to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and came into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint. The Act also provides for the power to make rules and regulations, and the laying of rules, regulations, and notifications before each House of Parliament. The Act also provides for the removal of difficulties.