Summary:
The National Capital Territory of Delhi (Recognition of Property Rights of Residents in Unauthorized Colonies) Act, 2019, was enacted on December 11, 2019. This Act aims to provide special provisions for the National Capital Territory of Delhi to recognize the property rights of residents in unauthorized colonies. These colonies have been identified based on applications made by Residents Welfare Associations. The properties in these colonies are not registered by registering authorities, and residents do not have any title documents. The ownership of the properties has been transferred several times through various documents, including Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter, and other documents evidencing payment of consideration. However, stamp duty on these multiple transactions has not been assessed or paid.

The Act recognizes and confers rights of ownership or transfer or mortgage to the residents of unauthorized colonies on the basis of Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter and other documents including documents evidencing payment of consideration. This recognition is a one-time special measure to improve existing infrastructure, civic, and social amenities, leading to a better quality of life.

The Act defines "resident" as a person having physical possession of property on the basis of a registered sale deed or latest Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter, and other documents including documents evidencing payment of consideration in respect of a property in unauthorized colonies. "Unauthorized colony" means a colony or development comprising of a contiguous area where no permission has been obtained for approval of layout plan or building plans and has been identified for regularization of such colony in pursuance to the notification number S.O. 683(E), dated the 24th March, 2008 of the Delhi Development Authority.

Section 3 of the Act allows the Central Government to regularize the transactions of immovable properties based on the latest Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter, and other documents including documents evidencing payment of consideration for conferring or recognizing right of ownership or transfer or mortgage in regard to an immovable property in favor of a resident of an unauthorized colony. The Central Government may fix charges on payment of which transactions of immovable properties based on the latest Power of Attorney, Agreement to Sale, Will, possession letter, and other documents including documents evidencing payment of consideration for conferring or recognizing right of ownership or transfer or mortgage in regard to an immovable property in favor of a resident of an unauthorized colony through a conveyance deed or authorization slip, as the case may be.

No stamp duty and registration charges shall be payable on any previous sale transactions made prior to any transaction referred to in sub-section (4). The tenants, licensees, or permissive users shall not be considered for conferring or recognizing any property rights under this Act.