Summary:

THE REPEALING AND AMENDING (SECOND) ACT, 2015 is an Act to repeal certain enactments and to amend certain other enactments. The Act has three sections and two schedules.

Section 1 is about the short title of the Act. It can be called the Repealing and Amending (Second) Act, 2015.

Section 2 deals with the repeal of certain enactments. It lists 52 enactments that are being repealed, along with the year and short title of each enactment. The repeal of these enactments will not affect any Act in which they have been applied, incorporated, or referred to. It also will not affect the validity, invalidity, effect, or consequences of anything already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation, or liability already acquired, accrued, or incurred, or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim, or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing. It will also not affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form, or course of pleading, practice, or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office, or appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed, recognized, or derived by, in, or from any enactment hereby repealed.

Section 3 is about the amendment of certain enactments. It lists two enactments that are being amended, along with the year and short title of each enactment. The amendments to these enactments are specified in the Fourth Schedule.

The First Schedule is about the repeals. It lists 52 enactments that are being repealed, along with the year and short title of each enactment.

The Second Schedule is about the amendments. It lists two enactments that are being amended, along with the year and short title of each enactment. The amendments to these enactments are specified in the Fourth Schedule.

The Act also includes a savings clause, which states that the repeal of any enactment shall not affect any Act in which such enactment has been applied, incorporated, or referred to, or any right, title, obligation, or liability already acquired, accrued, or incurred, or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim, or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing. It also states that the repeal of any enactment shall not affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form, or course of pleading, practice, or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office, or appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed, recognized, or derived by, in, or from any enactment hereby repealed. It also states that the repeal of any enactment shall not revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure, or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.