Summary:

The Specified Bank Notes (Cessation of Liabilities) Act, 2017, is an Act that aims to cease the liabilities of the specified bank notes and is related to other legal terms. The Act was enacted on 27th February, 2017. The Act has five sections that describe the cessation of liabilities of specified bank notes and the penalties for contravention of the provisions of the Act.

Section 1 of the Act describes the short title and commencement of the Act. The Act may be called the Specified Bank Notes (Cessation of Liabilities) Act, 2017, and it came into force on the 31st day of December, 2016.

Section 2 of the Act provides definitions for various terms used in the Act. The terms defined include "appointed day," "grace period," "notification," "Reserve Bank," and "specified bank note."

Section 3 of the Act states that on and from the appointed day, the specified bank notes shall cease to be liabilities of the Reserve Bank under section 34 and shall cease to have the guarantee of the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 26 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.

Section 4 of the Act provides for the exchange of specified bank notes. The section specifies that certain persons holding specified bank notes on or before the 8th day of November, 2016 shall be entitled to tender within the grace period with such declarations or statements, at such offices of the Reserve Bank or in such other manner as may be specified by it.

Section 5 of the Act prohibits the holding, transferring, or receiving of specified bank notes on or after the appointed day. However, there are certain exceptions to this provision.

Section 6 of the Act provides for the penalty for contravention of section 4. The penalty for knowingly and wilfully making a false declaration or statement is a fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or five times the amount of the face value of the specified bank notes tendered, whichever is higher.

Section 7 of the Act provides for the penalty for contravention of section 5. The penalty for contravention of section 5 is a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or five times the amount of the face value of the specified bank notes involved in the contravention, whichever is higher.

Section 8 of the Act provides for the penalties for offences by companies. If a company commits a contravention or default, every person who was in charge of and responsible for the conduct of the company's business at the time of the contravention or default shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention or default and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Section 9 of the Act provides that the court of a Magistrate of the First Class or the court of a Metropolitan Magistrate may impose a fine for contravention of the provisions of this Act.

Section 10 of the Act provides protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the Reserve Bank or any of their officers for anything done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.

Section 11 of the Act provides for the power to make rules. The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Section 12 of the Act provides for the power to remove difficulties. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.

Section 13 of the Act provides for the repeal and savings. The Specified Bank Notes (Cessation of Liabilities) Ordinance, 2016 (Ord. 10 of 2016) is hereby repealed. However, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.