Summary:

The Repealing and Amending Act, 2019 (Act No. 31 of 2019) was enacted on 8th August, 2019. The Act aims to repeal certain enactments and amend certain other enactments.

Section 1 of the Act specifies the short title of the Act as the Repealing and Amending Act, 2019.

Section 2 of the Act repeals the enactments specified in the First Schedule to the Act. The First Schedule contains a list of 52 enactments that are being repealed, including the Public Accountants' Defaults Act, 1850, the Municipal Taxation Act, 1881, the Government Management of Private Estates Act, 1892, and the Terminal Tax on Railway Passengers Act, 1956.

Section 3 of the Act amends the enactments specified in the Second Schedule to the Act. The Second Schedule contains a list of two enactments that are being amended, namely the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017. The amendments made to the Income-tax Act, 1961 include the insertion of the words and figure "of section 2" after the word, brackets, letters "clause (za)" in section 54GA, in the Explanation to sub-section (1). The amendments made to the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 include the substitution of the word "Ordinance" with the word "Ordinances" in section 36, in sub-section (1) and the substitution of the words "Director means" for the words "Director means" in section 3, in clause (f).

Section 4 of the Act contains savings provisions that provide that the repeal of any enactment shall not affect any other enactment in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to. The section also provides that the repeal of any enactment shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing. The section further provides that the repeal of any enactment shall not affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognized or derived by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed. The section also provides that the repeal of any enactment shall not revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.

The First Schedule to the Act lists 52 enactments that are being repealed, including the Public Accountants' Defaults Act, 1850, the Municipal Taxation Act, 1881, the Government Management of Private Estates Act, 1892, and the Terminal Tax on Railway Passengers Act, 1956.

The Second Schedule to the Act lists two enactments that are being amended, namely the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017. The amendments made to the Income-tax Act, 1961 include the insertion of the words and figure "of section 2" after the word, brackets, letters "clause (za)" in section 54GA, in the Explanation to sub-section (1). The amendments made to the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 include the substitution of the word "Ordinance" with the word "Ordinances" in section 36, in sub-section (1) and the substitution of the words "Director means" for the words "Director means" in section 3, in clause (f).

Overall, the Repealing and Amending Act, 2019 aims to repeal certain enactments and amend certain other enactments, with a view to streamline and consolidate the law. The Act contains provisions for savings, so as to ensure that the repeal or amendment of any enactment does not affect any rights, obligations, or liabilities that have already arisen under such enactment. The Act also ensures that any principles or rules of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognized or derived by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed, shall not be affected by the repeal of such enactment.