Summary:
The Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015 is an act to provide for allocation of coal mines and vesting of the right, title and interest in and over the land and mine infrastructure together with mining leases to successful bidders and allottees with a view to ensure continuity in coal mining operations and production of coal, and for promoting optimum utilisation of coal resources consistent with the requirement of the country in national interest and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The act defines various terms used in the act, including 'additional levy', 'allotment order', 'appointed date', 'bank', 'coal mining operations', 'company', 'corporation', 'financial institution', 'Government company', 'mine infrastructure', 'nominated authority', 'notification', 'prescribed', 'prior allottee', 'Schedule', 'Schedule I coal mines', 'Schedule II coal mines', 'Schedule III coal mines', 'secured creditor', 'secured debt', 'security interest', 'specified end-use', 'vesting order'.
The act is divided into five chapters. Chapter I, titled 'Preliminary', contains the short title, extent and commencement of the act, declaration as to expediency of Union action, and definitions. Chapter II, titled 'Auction and Allotment', contains provisions related to eligibility to participate in auction and payment of fees, allotment of mines to Government companies or corporations, central government to act through nominated authority, power to classify certain Schedule I coal mines by Central Government, and nominated authority to issue vesting order or allotment order. Chapter III, titled 'Treatment of Rights and Obligations of Prior Allottees', contains provisions related to utilisation of movable property used in coal mining operations, discharge or adoption of third party contracts with prior allottees, provisions in relation to secured creditors, void alienations and permitted security interests, and liabilities of prior allottees. Chapter IV, titled 'Certain Arrangements', contains provision for power of Central Government to approve certain arrangements. Chapter V, titled 'Miscellaneous', contains provisions related to acquisition of land, realisation of additional levy, penalties for certain offences, penalty for failure to comply with directions of Central Government, offences by companies, cognizance of offences, dispute settlement and bar of jurisdiction of civil courts, protection of action taken in good faith, act to have overriding effect, amendment of certain acts contained in Schedule IV, power to make rules, power to remove difficulties, and repeal and saving.
The act also contains four schedules. Schedule I lists the Schedule I coal mines, Schedule II lists the Schedule II coal mines, Schedule III lists the Schedule III coal mines, and Schedule IV lists the amendments to the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 and the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.