Summary:
The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 2011 (Act No. 13 of 2012) was enacted on 6th February, 2012, to establish an academy for the advancement of learning and prosecution of research in the field of science and technology in association with the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. The Act declares the institution known as the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research as an institution of national importance.

The Act has 37 sections and a schedule. The sections cover various aspects of the academy's establishment, functions, powers, and governance. The academy is established with a headquarters at a place specified by the central government and may have regional centers and campuses. The academy is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and it can acquire, hold, and dispose of property and contract.

The objects of the academy include disseminating advanced knowledge in science and technology, undertaking inter-disciplinary studies and research, conducting courses in various branches of learning, taking appropriate measures for innovations in teaching and learning processes, creating an ambience for learning and scholarship, educating and training manpower in scientific and technological fields, establishing linkages with industries in India and outside India, collaborating with reputed universities and institutions in India or outside India, and promoting research in science and technology having a bearing on social, economic, cultural, intellectual, and academic welfare.

The academy is affiliated with the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, and it can use the council's infrastructure and scientific manpower for teaching and research purposes. The academy can grant degrees or diplomas to persons pursuing studies in the council for the award of any degree or diploma.

The academy has a board of governors, a senate, a chancellor, a director, associate directors, boards of studies, and other authorities as may be declared by the statutes. The board is responsible for the general superintendence, direction, and control of the affairs of the academy and exercises all the powers of the academy not otherwise provided for by the act, the statutes, and the ordinances. The senate is responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education, and examinations in the academy.

The chancellor is the head of the academy and is appointed by the central government. The director is the principal academic and executive officer of the academy and is responsible for the administration of the academy and imparting instruction, research, and maintenance of discipline. The associate directors are appointed by the director with the approval of the board and exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to them by the act, the statutes, or the director.

The act provides for the appointment and duty of the director, associate directors, and other officers and employees of the academy. The academy maintains a fund to which all fees, charges, grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests, transfers, and other monies received by the academy are credited. The academy's accounts are audited annually, and the audited accounts are submitted to the board and the council of scientific and industrial research.

The act provides for the enactment of statutes by the board and the making of ordinances by the senate. The statutes and ordinances provide for the conferment of degrees and diplomas, the constitution, powers, and functions of the board of studies, the tuition fee and other charges, the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals, and prizes, the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the academy, the qualification of faculty, officers, and other staff of the academy, the classification, the method of appointment, and the determination of the terms and conditions of service of faculty, officers, and other staff of the academy, the provision of insurance fund, provident fund, and other retirement benefits, the constitution, powers, and duties of authorities of the academy, the establishment and maintenance of hostels, the conditions of residence of students of the academy and the levying of fees for residence in the hostels and of other charges, the allowances to be paid to the chairperson and other members of the board and any committee constituted by the academy, and any other matter which may be required or necessary for the purposes of this act.

The act provides for the review of the functioning of the academy once in every four years by persons of eminence appointed by the council of scientific and industrial research. The academy shall meet the expenses for conducting the review, and upon receipt of the report of such review, the board may take appropriate action. The board may also conduct review of functioning of administrative and academic wings of the academy in such manner and at such intervals as may be provided in the statutes.

The act provides for the appointment of staff of the academy (except appointment of the director) by the board for the academic staff and by the director in any other case. The academy shall have a flexible compensation system which recognises performance, and all employees of the academy shall be appointed on contractual basis under a written contract.

The act provides for the removal of the chairperson, any member of the board, or the director on grounds of insolvency, engagement in any paid employment during the term of office, conviction of an offence involving moral turpitude, physical or mental incapacity, unsound mind, acquisition of financial or other interest likely to affect prejudicially the exercise of functions, abuse of position, proved misbehavior, or any other disqualifications as may be prescribed.

The meetings of the board, senate, or other committees constituted by the academy may be held using contemporary tools of information and communication technologies without the members necessarily having to be physically present.

No act of the board or the academy or any other body set up under this act or the statutes shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof, any defect in the selection, nomination, or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof, or any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.

The central government may, by order, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing any difficulty that arises in giving effect to the provisions of this act.

The act applies to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.