Summary:
The International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 establishes an Authority to develop and regulate the financial services market in the International Financial Services Centres in India. The Act applies to the International Financial Services Centres set up under section 18 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and Members nominated by the Reserve Bank of India, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India, and Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority, as well as two Members appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee. The Members may be appointed as whole-time or part-time Members. The Authority has the power to regulate financial products, financial services, and financial institutions in the International Financial Services Centres, including regulating financial products, financial services, and financial institutions that have been permitted before the commencement of this Act, regulating such other financial products, financial services, or financial institutions as may be notified by the Central Government from time to time, and recommending to the Central Government such other financial products, financial services, and financial institutions that may be permitted in an International Financial Services Centre. The Authority may delegate its powers and functions to any Member or officer of the Authority or form committees of the Members and delegate to them the powers and functions of the Authority. The Members, officers, and employees of the Authority shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or the Authority or its Members, officers, or other employees for anything which is done, or intended to be done, in good faith under this Act. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of the provisions of any other Central Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder or any notification or order issued or direction given thereunder shall not apply to financial products, financial services, or financial institutions in an International Financial Services Centre or shall apply to financial products, financial services, or financial institutions in an International Financial Services Centre with such exceptions, modifications, and adaptations as may be specified in the notification. The enactments specified in the Second Schedule shall be amended in the manner specified therein. All rules and regulations made or purporting to have been made or all notifications issued or purporting to have been issued under any Central Act relating to the financial products, financial services, or financial institutions shall, in so far as they relate to matters for which provision is made in this Act or the rules or regulations made or notification issued thereunder and are not inconsistent therewith, be deemed to have been made or issued under this Act as if this Act had been in force on the date on which such rules were made or notifications were issued and shall continue to be in force unless and until they are superseded by any rules or regulations made or notifications issued under this Act.