Summary:
The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 establishes a National Green Tribunal for the effective and expeditious disposal of cases relating to environmental protection and conservation of forests and other natural resources. The Act defines various terms related to the environment, such as "hazardous substance", "injury", "person", and "substantial question relating to environment". The Tribunal shall consist of a full-time Chairperson, not less than ten but subject to maximum of twenty full-time Judicial Members, and not less than ten but subject to maximum of twenty full-time Expert Members. The Chairperson, Judicial Members and Expert Members shall not hold any other office during their tenure as such. The Act also provides for the appointment, term of office, salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, Judicial Members and Expert Members. The Tribunal shall have the jurisdiction to settle disputes involving a substantial question relating to environment arising out of the implementation of the enactments specified in Schedule I. The Tribunal may also provide relief and compensation to the victims of pollution and other environmental damage arising under the enactments specified in Schedule I. The Tribunal shall have appellate jurisdiction over certain orders and decisions made under various environmental laws. The Act also provides for the liability to pay relief or compensation in certain cases and sets out the procedure for making an application or appeal to the Tribunal. The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice. The Tribunal shall have the same powers as a civil court for the purposes of discharging its functions. The Tribunal shall apply the principles of sustainable development, the precautionary principle and the polluter pays principle while passing any order or decision or award. The decision of the Tribunal by majority shall be binding. Any person aggrieved by any award, decision or order of the Tribunal may file an appeal to the Supreme Court within ninety days from the date of communication of the award, decision or order of the Tribunal. The Tribunal shall have the power to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. The Act also amends certain enactments, such as the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977, the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, and the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 to provide for an appeal to the National Green Tribunal.