Summary:
THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP) ACT, 2017 (NO. 23 OF 2017) was enacted on the 9th of August, 2017. The Act declares certain Indian Institutes of Information Technology established under public-private partnership as institutions of national importance. The objective of the Act is to develop new knowledge in information technology and to provide manpower of global standards for the information technology industry. The Act has 48 sections divided into six chapters. The first chapter is the preliminary chapter which defines the short title, commencement, declaration of certain institutions as institutions of national importance, and definitions. The second chapter deals with the institutes, incorporation of institutes, effect of incorporation of institutes, objects of institutes, powers and functions of institutes, institutes to be open to all races, creeds and classes, teaching at institute, institute to be a distinct legal entity not-for-profit, establishment of institute by Central Government, State Government and industry partners, and authorities of Indian Institutes of Information Technology established in public-private partnership. The third chapter deals with the authorities of Indian Institutes of Information Technology established in public-private partnership, Visitor, Board of Governors, Senate, Finance Committee, meetings, Director, Registrar, review of performance of institute, and powers and duties of Board. The fourth chapter deals with accounts and audit, grants by Central Government and State Governments, fund of institute, accounts and audit, pension and provident fund, and appointments. The fifth chapter deals with statutes, statutes how to be made, ordinances, ordinances how to be made, tribunal of arbitration, annual report of Director, annual report of each institute, and co-ordination forum. The sixth chapter deals with miscellaneous provisions, power to make rules, acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc., returns and information to be provided to Central Government or State Government, power of Central Government to issue directions, institute to be public authority under Right to Information Act, transitional provisions, power to remove difficulties, laying to rules, Statutes, Ordinances and notification, and repeal and savings. The schedule to the Act lists the institutes that are declared as institutions of national importance.