Summary:

The Rashtriya Raksha University Act, 2020 establishes and declares an institution to be known as the Rashtriya Raksha University as an institution of national importance. The Act includes definitions of various terms used throughout the document. Chapter I, titled "Preliminary," includes sections related to the short title and commencement of the Act, declaration of the Rashtriya Raksha University as an institution of national importance, and definitions of various terms used throughout the Act. Chapter II, titled "Establishment of University," includes sections related to the establishment and incorporation of the University, the effect of the incorporation of the University, the objects of the University, the powers and functions of the University, the jurisdiction of the University, the University to be open to all races, creeds and classes, admission of students, and teaching at the University. Chapter III, titled "Authorities of University," includes sections related to the authorities of the University, the Governing Body, the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Finance Committee, and other authorities and officers of the University. Chapter IV, titled "Accounts and Audit," includes sections related to the corpus of the University, the Fund, accounts and audit, and pension and provident fund. Chapter V, titled "Annual Report and Appointments," includes sections related to the annual report of the University, and appointments. Chapter VI, titled "Statutes and Ordinances," includes sections related to Statutes, statutes how made, Ordinances, and ordinances how made. Chapter VII, titled "Tribunal of Arbitration," includes sections related to a Tribunal of Arbitration for employees and redressal for debarment from examination and disciplinary action against students. Chapter VIII, titled "Miscellaneous," includes sections related to disputes as to the constitution of authorities and bodies, power of Central Government to make rules in respect of matters relating to the Governing Body, acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc., the University to be a public authority under the Right to Information Act, power of Central Government to review work and progress made and to hold enquiries, protection of action taken in good faith, residuary provisions, power of Central Government to issue directions, power to remove difficulties, laying of rules, Statutes, Ordinances and notifications, transitional provisions, repeal of the Raksha Shakti University Act, 2009, and savings. The Act includes a schedule and an annexure.