Summary:
THE FARMERS (EMPOWERMENT AND PROTECTION) AGREEMENT ON PRICE ASSURANCE AND FARM SERVICES ACT, 2020 (ACT NO. 20 OF 2020) is an Act to provide for a national framework on farming agreements that protects and empowers farmers to engage with agri-business firms, processors, wholesalers, exporters or large retailers for farm services and sale of future farming produce at a mutually agreed remunerative price framework in a fair and transparent manner.

Chapter I of the Act deals with preliminary provisions. It defines various terms used in the Act, such as APMC yard, company, electronic trading and transaction platform, farming agreement, farming produce, firm, force majeure, notification, person, prescribed, Registration Authority, Sponsor, and State.

Chapter II of the Act deals with farming agreements. It lays down provisions regarding the period of the agreement, quality, grade and standards of farming produce, pricing of farming produce, sale or purchase of farming produce, exemptions with respect to farming produce, sponsor prohibited from acquiring ownership rights or making permanent modifications on farmer’s land or premises, linkage of farming agreement with insurance or credit, and other parties to farming agreement.

Chapter III of the Act deals with dispute settlement. It lays down provisions regarding conciliation board for dispute settlement, mechanism for dispute resolution, and powers of conciliation board, Sub-Divisional Authority, and Appellate Authority.

Chapter IV of the Act deals with miscellaneous provisions. It lays down provisions regarding power of Central Government to give directions, authorities under the Act to be public servants, protection of action taken in good faith, bar of jurisdiction of civil court, act to have an overriding effect, act not to apply to stock exchange and clearing corporations, power of Central Government to make rules, power of State Government to make rules, power to remove difficulties, and repeal and savings.

The Act has various provisions to protect the interests of farmers and promote fair and transparent trade in agricultural produce. It is aimed at empowering farmers to engage with agri-business firms, processors, wholesalers, exporters or large retailers for farm services and sale of future farming produce at a mutually agreed remunerative price framework.