Summary:
THE DIRECT TAX VIVAD SE VISHWAS ACT, 2020 is an Act to provide for resolution of disputed tax and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, including "appellant", "appellate forum", "declarant", "declaration", "designated authority", "disputed fee", "disputed income", "disputed interest", "disputed penalty", "disputed tax", "Income-tax Act", "last date", "prescribed", "specified date", and "tax arrear". The Act specifies the amount payable by the declarant in respect of tax arrear, based on the nature of the tax arrear. The declarant is required to file a declaration before the designated authority in a prescribed form and manner. Upon the filing of the declaration, any appeal pending before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal or Commissioner (Appeals) in respect of the disputed income or disputed interest or disputed penalty or disputed fee and tax arrear shall be deemed to have been withdrawn. The declarant is required to furnish an undertaking waiving his right to seek or pursue any remedy or any claim in relation to the tax arrear. The declaration shall be presumed never to have been made if any material particular furnished in the declaration is found to be false or if the declarant violates any of the conditions referred to in this Act. No appellate forum or arbitrator, conciliator or mediator shall proceed to decide any issue relating to the tax arrear mentioned in the declaration in respect of which an order has been made by the designated authority. The designated authority shall not institute any proceeding in respect of an offence or impose or levy any penalty or charge any interest under the Income-tax Act in respect of tax arrear. Any amount paid in pursuance of a declaration made under section 4 shall not be refundable under any circumstances. The provisions of this Act shall not apply in respect of tax arrear relating to an assessment year in respect of which an assessment has been made under certain sections of the Income-tax Act on the basis of search initiated under certain sections of the Income-tax Act, if the amount of disputed tax exceeds five crore rupees. The Central Board of Direct Taxes may issue directions or orders to the income-tax authorities as it may deem fit. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, remove the difficulty. The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament.