Summary:
The National Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020 establishes a National Commission for Homoeopathy to oversee and regulate medical education, research, and practice in Homoeopathy in India. The Act defines Homoeopathy as the Homoeopathic System of Medicine and includes biochemic remedies supplemented by modern advances, scientific and technological development. The Commission is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal. The Act also establishes an Advisory Council for Homoeopathy, which is the primary platform for States and Union territories to put forth their views and concerns before the Commission. The Act provides for a uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to undergraduate courses in Homoeopathy in all medical institutions governed under the Act, and a National Exit Test for granting a license to practice Homoeopathy and enrolment in the State Register or National Register. The Act also provides for a Post-Graduate National Entrance Test and a National Teachers' Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy. The Act also establishes Autonomous Boards, such as the Homoeopathy Education Board, the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy, and the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy, to perform specific functions under the Act. The Act also provides for the maintenance of a National Register and State Register of Homoeopathy, and sets out the rights and obligations of persons enrolled in the National Register and State Register. The Act also provides for the recognition of qualifications granted by Universities or medical institutions in India and recognition of qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India. The Act also provides for the withdrawal of recognition or de-recognition of qualifications. The Act also includes provisions for grants, audit, and accounts, and includes miscellaneous provisions such as the power of the Central Government to give directions to the Commission and Autonomous Boards, and the power of the Central Government to supersede the Commission.