Summary:
The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020 was enacted on 20th September, 2020. The Act aims to provide for a medical education system that improves access to quality and affordable medical education, ensures availability of adequate and high-quality medical professionals in all parts of the country, promotes equitable and universal healthcare, encourages community health perspective, and maintains high ethical standards in medical services. The Act establishes the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine, which is a body corporate, to exercise the powers conferred upon and perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, fifteen ex officio Members, and twenty-three part-time Members. The Act also establishes four Autonomous Boards, namely, the Board of Ayurveda, the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa, the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine, and the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine. Each Board shall be an autonomous body which shall carry out its functions under this Act in accordance with the regulations made by the Commission. The Act also provides for the composition, appointment, term of office, conditions of service, and removal of Members of the Commission and the Autonomous Boards. The Act also establishes the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine, which shall consist of a Chairperson and Members, including the Chairperson and Members of the Commission, the Chairpersons and Members of the Autonomous Boards, and representatives of the States and Union territories. The Advisory Council shall advise the Commission on measures to determine and maintain minimum standards in all matters relating to medical education, training, research and development, and help shape the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education, training, research and development. The Act also provides for the recognition of medical qualifications granted by Universities or medical institutions in India and outside India, and the withdrawal of recognition or de-recognition of qualifications. The Act also provides for the establishment of a National Commission Fund for Indian System of Medicine, and the maintenance of accounts and audit. The Act also provides for the furnishing of returns and reports to the Central Government, and the power of the Central Government to give directions to the Commission and Autonomous Boards. The Act also provides for the power of the Central Government to give directions to State Governments, the furnishing of information to the Central Government, the obligation of Universities and medical institutions, the completion of courses of studies in medical institutions, and the protection of action taken in good faith. The Act also provides for the supersession of the Commission, joint sittings of the Commission, National Commission for Homoeopathy and National Medical Commission, state government to promote public health, the power to make rules, the power to make regulations, rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament, power to remove difficulties, repeal and saving, transitory provisions, and forms. The Act also includes a Schedule, an Annexure, and an Appendix.