The Constitution (Twenty-Second Amendment) Act, 1969, added a new article 244A to the Constitution, which empowers Parliament to create an autonomous state within the state of Assam. This autonomous state can consist of all or any of the tribal areas specified in Part A of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule. The law enacted by Parliament can specify the constitution, powers, and functions of a legislature or council of ministers or both for the autonomous state. This law can also specify the matters with respect to which the legislature of the autonomous state can make laws, the executive power of the autonomous state, and the taxes that will be assigned to the autonomous state. Any amendment to this law that relates to the matters specified in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (2) will require the approval of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting in each House of Parliament.

The Twenty-Second Amendment also amended article 275 of the Constitution. It added a new clause (1A) that specifies the sums payable under clause (a) of the second proviso to clause (1) will be paid to the autonomous state if it comprises all the tribal areas referred to therein, or be apportioned between the state of Assam and the autonomous state if it comprises only some of those tribal areas. The President may specify the apportionment by order. Additionally, grants-in-aid of the revenues of the autonomous state will be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India for the purpose of raising the level of administration of that state to that of the administration of the rest of the state of Assam.

Furthermore, the Twenty-Second Amendment inserted new article 371B in the Constitution, which provides for the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam. This committee will consist of members of the Assembly elected from the tribal areas specified in Part A of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and such number of other members of the Assembly as may be specified in the order. The President may make an order to modify the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the constitution and proper functioning of such committee.