The Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019, amends the Indian Constitution to provide for 10% reservation for economically weaker sections (EWS) of society. This amendment adds a new clause (6) to Article 15 and a new clause (6) to Article 16 of the Constitution. The new clause (6) in Article 15 allows the State to make special provisions for the advancement of economically weaker sections of citizens, other than the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5), in admission to educational institutions, including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30. The new clause (6) in Article 16 allows the State to make any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favor of economically weaker sections of citizens, other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the posts in each category. The term "economically weaker sections" is defined in the Explanation to these new clauses as those who may be notified by the State from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic disadvantage. The Amendment does not make such reservations mandatory in State Government-run educational institutions or State Government jobs. However, some states have chosen to implement the 10% reservation for economically weaker sections. Currently, the quota can be availed by persons with an annual gross household income of up to ₹8 lakh (US$10,000). Families that own over 5 acres of agricultural land, a house over 1,000 square feet, a plot of over 100-yards in a notified municipal area or over a 200-yards plot in a non-notified municipal area cannot avail the reservation. Persons belonging to communities that already have reservations such as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the "non creamy layer" of Other Backward Classes are also not eligible for reservation under this quota.