The Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016 introduces the goods and services tax (GST) in India. This tax aims to replace various indirect taxes levied by the Union and State Governments and create a common national market for goods and services. The GST will be levied on all transactions involving the supply of goods or services or both, except those explicitly excluded.

The Act proposes to subsume various Central indirect taxes, such as Central Excise Duty, Additional Excises Duties, Excise Duty on medicinal and toilet preparations, Service Tax, Countervailing Duty, Special Additional Duty of Customs, and Central Surcharges and Cesses related to the supply of goods and services. Similarly, State Value Added Tax/Sales Tax, Entertainment Tax, Central Sales Tax, Octroi and Entry tax, Purchase Tax, Luxury tax, Taxes on lottery, betting and gambling, and State cesses and surcharges related to supply of goods and services will also be subsumed.

The Act also introduces Integrated Goods and Services Tax on inter-State transactions of goods and services. An additional tax of up to 1% on the supply of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce will be levied for a period of two years, collected by the Government of India, and assigned to the States from where the supply originates.

The Act confers concurrent powers upon Parliament and State Legislatures to make laws governing goods and services tax, covering all goods and services, except alcoholic liquor for human consumption. Petroleum and petroleum products will not be subject to the levy of Goods and Services Tax till a date notified on the recommendation of the Goods and Services Tax Council.

The Act provides compensation to the States for loss of revenue arising on account of implementing the Goods and Services Tax for a period that may extend to five years. A Goods and Services Tax Council is created to examine issues relating to goods and services tax and make recommendations to the Union and the States on parameters like rates, exemption list, and threshold limits. The Council will function under the Chairmanship of the Union Finance Minister and will have the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue or Finance as a member, along with the Minister in-charge of Finance or Taxation or any other Minister nominated by each State Government. The Council's decisions will be taken by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the weighted votes of the members present and voting.

The Act provides transitional provisions to address any inconsistency arising with respect to any law relating to tax on goods or services or on both in force in any State on the commencement of the provisions of the Constitution as amended by this Act within a period of one year.