The Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, amends the Constitution of India to provide for the reservation of seats for women in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, the House of the People, and the Legislative Assemblies of the States.

In the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, seats will be reserved for women, with one-third of the seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes. The total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, will also have one-third of the seats reserved for women.

In the House of the People, seats will be reserved for women, with one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (2) of article 330 reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes. One-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election to the House of the People will also be reserved for women.

Similarly, seats will be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of every State, with one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (3) of article 332 reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes. One-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of every State will also be reserved for women.

These provisions will come into effect after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken for this purpose after the relevant figures for the first census taken after the commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023 have been published and shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of fifteen years from such commencement. The reservation of seats for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State, and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall continue till such date as the Parliament may by law determine. Rotation of seats reserved for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State, and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall take effect after each subsequent exercise of delimitation as the Parliament may by law determine.

These amendments shall not affect any representation in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State, or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing House of the People, Legislative Assembly of a State, or the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, as the case may be.