
Amendment of article 243-D.-

In article 243-D of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words "one-third of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat", the words "such number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat as may be prescribed by the Legislature of a State" shall be substituted.



Amendment of article 243-T.-

In article 243-T of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words "one-third of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality", the words "such number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality as may be prescribed by the Legislature of a State" shall be substituted.



Insertion of new article 243-ZA.-

After article 243-Z of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

"243-ZA. Reservation of seats and rotation of reservation of seats.-(1) In every Panchayat, there shall be reserved such number of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population as the Legislature of a State may by law provide:

Provided that the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayat at any level shall in no case be less than the number of seats reserved for such castes and tribes in the Panchayat at the next lower level.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at any level in such manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that such reservation shall not exceed fifty per cent. of the total number of seats in the Panchayat at any level.

(3) The seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under clauses (1) and (2) shall be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat:

Provided that the constituencies reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall be determined by rotation in such manner as the Legislature of a State may by law provide.

(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat in favour of backward classes.

(5) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the reservation of offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any level in favour of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the backward classes.



Insertion of new article 243-ZB.-

After article 243-ZA of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

"243-ZB. Reservation of seats and rotation of reservation of seats in Municipalities.-(1) In every Municipality, there shall be reserved such number of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population as the Legislature of a State may by law provide:

Provided that the number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipality at any level shall in no case be less than the number of seats reserved for such castes and tribes in the Municipality at the next lower level.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipalities at any level in such manner as may be prescribed:

Provided that such reservation shall not exceed fifty per cent. of the total number of seats in the Municipality at any level.

(3) The seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under clauses (1) and (2) shall be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality:

Provided that the constituencies reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall be determined by rotation in such manner as the Legislature of a State may by law provide.

(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation of seats in any Municipality in favour of backward classes.

(5) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the reservation of offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities at any level in favour of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the backward classes.



Insertion of new article 243-ZE.-

After article 243-ZB of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

"243-ZE. Conduct of elections to the Panchayats and Municipalities.-The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats and the Municipalities shall be vested in the Election Commission.



Amendment of article 334.-

In article 334 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "sixty years", the words "seventy years" shall be substituted.



Amendment of the Ninth Schedule.-

In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 222, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:-

"223. The Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992.

224. The Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993.

225. The Constitution (Seventy-sixth Amendment) Act, 1994.

226. The Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995.



This document is the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995. It makes several amendments to the Constitution of India regarding Panchayats and Municipalities.

Firstly, this Act amends article 243-D and article 243-T of the Constitution to allow state legislatures to prescribe the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Panchayats and Municipalities, respectively. Previously, the Constitution mandated that one-third of the total number of seats be reserved for these groups.

Secondly, this Act inserts new articles 243-ZA and 243-ZB into the Constitution, which provide for the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and backward classes in Panchayats and Municipalities, respectively. These articles also provide for the rotation of reservation of seats in a manner prescribed by the state legislature. The reservation of seats for these groups shall not exceed 50% of the total number of seats in a Panchayat or Municipality.

Thirdly, this Act inserts new article 243-ZE into the Constitution, which vests the superintendence, direction, and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the Election Commission.

Lastly, this Act amends article 334 of the Constitution to extend the period of reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies from sixty years to seventy years. The Ninth Schedule to the Constitution is also amended to include the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993, the Constitution (Seventy-sixth Amendment) Act, 1994, and the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995.