Amendment of article 343.- In article 343 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the words `Hindustani', the words `Nepali' shall be inserted.

  
Amendment of the Fourth Schedule.- In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table, before entry 22, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:

   
`21A. Sikkim.- 1.'

  
Amendment of the Fifth Schedule.- In the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 1, in the proviso, for the words `a Scheduled Tribe in any State', the words `a Scheduled Tribe in any State other than Sikkim' shall be substituted.

  
Amendment of the Sixth Schedule.- In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 20, in sub-paragraph (2), in clause (b), for the words `to the State of Assam', the words `to the States of Assam and Sikkim' shall be substituted.

  
Amendment of the Twelfth Schedule.- In the Twelfth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 29, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:

   
`30. Urban Local Bodies.-  (a) Preparation of a master plan for the development of the area.

   
(b) Planning for economic and social development.

   
(c) Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.

   
(d) Planning for traffic and transportation.

   
(e) Planning for water supply, drainage and sewerage.

   
(f) Fire services.

   
(g) Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries.

   
(h) Solid waste management.

   
(i) Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects.

   
(j) Slum improvement and upgradation.

   
(k) Urban poverty alleviation.

   
(l) Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens and playgrounds.

   
(m) Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.

   
(n) Burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds; and electric crematoriums.

   
(o) Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals.

   
(p) Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.

   
(q) Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences.

   
(r) Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.'

  


Summary:

The Constitution (Seventy-first Amendment) Act, 1992, adds the Nepali language to the list of official languages in clause (1) of article 343 of the Constitution of India. The Act also makes several amendments to the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Twelfth Schedules of the Constitution. In the Fourth Schedule, a new entry 21A is added for the state of Sikkim. In the Fifth Schedule, the proviso of paragraph 1 is amended to exclude Sikkim from the list of states where a Scheduled Tribe exists. In the Sixth Schedule, sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 20 is amended to include Sikkim in the list of states to which the provision applies. Finally, in the Twelfth Schedule, a new entry 30 is added, which outlines the powers and functions of urban local bodies, including planning for economic and social development, regulation of land-use and construction of buildings, planning for traffic and transportation, and promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.