The Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, makes several changes to the Constitution of India. The act creates a new constitutional authority, the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes (NCST), to promote the economic advancement of India's Scheduled Tribes. This act inserts a new Article 338A under Article 338, giving the NCST constitutional status.

The act amends Article 338 of the Constitution by changing the marginal heading to "National Commission for Scheduled Castes" and substituting clauses (1) and (2) to provide for the appointment of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and three other Members for the Commission. It also omits the words "and Scheduled Tribes" from clauses (5), (9), and (10).

The act further inserts a new Article 338A, which provides for the establishment of the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and three other Members appointed by the President. The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure and investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes under the Constitution or any other law. The Commission shall present reports to the President annually and at such other times as it deems fit, making recommendations for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare, and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes.

The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations. Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

The Commission shall, while investigating any matter or inquiring into any complaint, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular, the power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person from any part of India and examine him on oath, require the discovery and production of any document, receive evidence on affidavits, requisition any public record or copy thereof from any court or office, issue commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents, and any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine. The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes.