Amendment of the Fourth Schedule.-

In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table, after entry 25 relating to the State of Sikkim, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"26. Goa.

Reasons and Objects.-

The Bill seeks to give effect to the re-organisation of the existing Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu by the creation of the new State of Goa. The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, inserted a new clause (2) in article 371-I of the Constitution to provide for the continuance of the existing laws and administrative arrangements in the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu. The administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu has been carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Goa, Daman and Diu Official Language Act, 1967 (18 of 1967) and the existing laws and administrative arrangements for a period of ten years from the date of the commencement of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976. The administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu is proposed to be further continued under the existing laws and administrative arrangements for a period of five years from the date of expiry of the aforesaid period of ten years, that is, up to the 19th day of December, 1987.

The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, also provided for the establishment of a Special Officer for the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu to examine and report as to whether any provision of any law made before the commencement of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, relating to Goa, Daman and Diu is required to be amended or repealed in order to bring the provisions of such law in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution. The Special Officer has submitted his report. The Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, also provided for the appointment of a Committee of the Council of States consisting of thirty members to examine and report on the appropriateness and feasibility of Central laws for the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu. The Committee has also submitted its report.

The re-organisation of the existing Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu into the new State of Goa and the Union territory of Daman and Diu is proposed to take place on the 30th day of May, 1987. The administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu is proposed to be further continued under the existing laws and administrative arrangements for a period of five years from the date of expiry of the aforesaid period of ten years, that is, up to the 19th day of December, 1987.

It is proposed to make a special provision in the Constitution to enable the President to appoint a Governor for the new State of Goa for a term of five years. It is also proposed to make a special provision in the Constitution to enable the President to appoint a Lieutenant-Governor for the Union territory of Daman and Diu for a term of five years.



Summary:
The Constitution (Fifty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1987, allows for the creation of a new state called Goa from the existing Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu. This amendment also extends the existing laws and administrative arrangements in the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu for a period of five years from the date of expiry of the previous ten-year period, which is up to December 19, 1987. Additionally, the Act enables the President to appoint a Governor for the new State of Goa for a term of five years and a Lieutenant-Governor for the Union territory of Daman and Diu for a similar term. This amendment came into force on the date appointed by the Central Government through a notification in the Official Gazette.