Amendment of article 338.- In article 338 of the Constitution, for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-

"(1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal:

Provided that the total number of Members, including the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, shall be five if the Vice-Chairperson is drawn from among the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes:

Provided further that in making appointments under this clause, the President shall have regard to the principle of adequate representation of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Commission.

(1A) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall be persons of eminence, ability and integrity having special knowledge or experience in matters relating to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(1B) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall be whole-time Members and shall not hold any other office of profit or indulge in any trade or business.

(1C) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the President by rule:

Provided that neither the salary and allowances payable to, nor the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members shall be varied to their disadvantage after their appointment.

(1D) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members shall be appointed for a term of five years from the date on which they enter upon their office or until they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.

(1E) If the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or any Member of the Commission dies or resigns his office or is removed from his office or is otherwise unable to carry out his duties, the President may appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this article to fill the vacancy and the person so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of the person in whose place he is appointed.

(1F) The Chairperson or, as the case may be, the Vice-Chairperson shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by the President by rule.

(1G) A Member who is not the Chairperson or the Vice-Chairperson may be removed from office by the President on the recommendation of the Chairperson after he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

(1H) The Vice-Chairperson shall act as the Chairperson in the event of the absence of the Chairperson or his inability to act as such due to illness, leave or any other cause.

(1-I) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and any law made by Parliament, the Commission shall have power to regulate its own procedure and the conduct of all business.

(1J) The terms of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall not be extendable beyond the date on which they attain the age of sixty-five years.

(1K) The administrative expenses of the Commission, including the salaries, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members of the Commission, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India.

(1L) The Commission shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of each financial year, present an annual report to the President in such form and on such date as may be prescribed by him and the President shall cause every such report to be laid before each House of Parliament.

(1M) The Commission shall, on such date and in such manner as the President may direct, furnish to the Central Government such returns and statements as the President may require.

(1N) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Commission, appoint such other officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Commission.

(1O) The Commission may delegate any of its powers to any officer or authority subordinate to it.

(1P) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and any law made by Parliament, the Commission shall have the power to inquire into and report upon all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to review the working of such safeguards and to make such recommendations as it may think fit for the effective implementation of such safeguards and for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(1Q) The Commission shall, while inquiring into any matter referred to in clause (1P), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:-

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;

(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;

(e) any other matter which may be prescribed.

(1R) The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.

(1S) In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be construed as including references to such other backward classes as may be specified by the President by public notification for the purposes of this article.


Amendment of article 338A.- In article 338A of the Constitution, for the words "National Commission for the Scheduled Castes", the words "National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" shall be substituted.


Amendment of the Fourth Schedule.- In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table,-

(a) against the entries "Scheduled Castes" and "Scheduled Tribes", for the figures "1", the figures "2" shall be substituted;

(b) for the entries "Scheduled Castes" and "Scheduled Tribes", the following entries shall be substituted, namely:-

"Scheduled Castes

| --- | --- |
| --- | --- |
| 1. | Adi Dravida, Arundhathiyar, Arunthathiyar, Chakkiliyan, Chamar, Cheruman, Chuhra, Dhobi, Dom, Dosadh, Holeya, Jatav, Kallar, Madiga, Mahar, Mala, Mehtar, Nat, Paraiyan, Pasi, Pichhada, Rajak, Scheduled Castes |
| 2. | Adi Andhra, Adi Karnataka, Arunthathiyar, Arundhati, Badhai, Bauri, Chamar, Cheruman, Chuhra, Dhobi, Dosadh, Gouda, Haddi, Holeya, Jatav, Kallar, Madiga, Mahar, Mala, Mehtar, Nat, Paraiyan, Pasi, Pichhada, Rajak, Scheduled Castes |
| 3. | Adi Karnataka, Adi Dravida, Adi Andhra, Arunthathiyar, Arundhati, Badhai, Bauri, Chakkiliyan, Chamar, Cheruman, Chuhra, Dhobi, Dosadh, Gouda, Haddi, Holeya, Jatav, Kallar, Madiga, Mahar, Mala, Mehtar, Nat, Paraiyan, Pasi, Pichhada, Rajak, Scheduled Castes |

Scheduled Tribes

| --- | --- |
| --- | --- |
| 1. | Adivasi, Bhil, Gond, Khasi, Kodava, Kuki, Lushai, Mizo, Naga, Oraon, Santal, Toda, Scheduled Tribes |
| 2. | Adivasi, Bhil, Gond, Khasi, Kodava, Kuki, Lushai, Mizo, Naga, Oraon, Santal, Toda, Scheduled Tribes |
| 3. | Adivasi, Bhil, Gond, Khasi, Kodava, Kuki, Lushai, Mizo, Naga, Oraon, Santal, Toda, Scheduled Tribes |

Explanation I.- The entries in the Table shall be in the English language and shall be in a printed or typewritten form and shall be divided into paragraphs, numbered consecutively and each paragraph shall be separated from every other paragraph by a blank line.

Explanation II.- The entries in the Table shall be authenticated by the signature of the President and the seal of the Republic of India.


Amendment of the Fifth Schedule.- In the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "Scheduled Areas", the words "Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes" shall be substituted.


Amendment of the Sixth Schedule.- In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "Scheduled Areas", the words "Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes" shall be substituted.


Amendment of the Seventh Schedule.- In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List I,-

(a) for entry 23, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"23. Education, including technical education, medical education and universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66;";

(b) after entry 32, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"32A. Population control and family planning.";

(c) for entry 35, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"35. Social security and social insurance, including invalidity and old age pensions, subject to the provisions of entry 20 of List III;";

(d) for entry 59, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"59. Relations between the Government of India and the Governments of the States in so far as such relations related to the matters specified in List I or List III.";

(e) after entry 60, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"60A. Inter-State migration;";

(f) after entry 68, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"68A. Major ports, that is to say, ports declared to be major ports under section 3 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908);";

(g) after entry 72, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"72A. National highways.";

(h) after entry 77, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"77A. Drainage of land in any State for purposes of navigation, irrigation or the disposal of waste and sewage.";

(i) for entry 84, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"84. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinematographs, including theatres granting licences for such performances.";

(j) after entry 84, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"84A. Betting and gambling.";

(k) for entry 85, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"85. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of, the products of any industry where the control thereof is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest;";

(l) after entry 85, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"85A. Foreign trade and commerce;";

(m) for entry 86, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"86. Economic and social planning;.";

(n) after entry 86, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"86A. Population control and family planning in so far as such planning is not covered by entry 32A of this List;";

(o) for entry 87, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"87. Scientific research, including technical research;.";

(p) after entry 87, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"87A. Non-conventional energy sources;";

(q) for entry 88, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"88. Communications, that is to say, railways, highways, inland waterways, shipping and air transport;.";

(r) after entry 88, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"88A. Posts and telegraphs, telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other forms of communication;";

(s) for entry 90, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"90. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List;.";

(t) for entry 91, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"91. Preventive detention for reasons connected with any of the matters in this List;.";

(u) for entry 92, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:-

"92. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List;.";

(v) after entry 92, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"92A. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters in this List;";

(w) after entry 93, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"93A. Trade and commerce with foreign countries and among the States in, and the production, supply and distribution of, the products of any industry;";

(x) after entry 93A, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"93B. Inter-State trade and commerce;";

(y) after entry 94, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94A. Banking, that is to say, the incorporation, regulation and winding up of banks, including co-operative banks;.";

(z) after entry 94A, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94B. Currency, coinage and legal tender, that is to say, the issue of notes and coins, the declaration of legal tender, the prohibition of private coinage and the demonetization of currency;.";

(za) after entry 94B, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94C. Foreign exchange;.";

(zb) after entry 94C, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94D. Foreign investments;.";

(zc) after entry 94D, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94E. Export and import of goods;.";

(zd) after entry 94E, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94F. Customs and central excise duties;.";

(ze) after entry 94F, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94G. Corporation tax;.";

(zf) after entry 94G, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94H. Income-tax;.";

(zg) after entry 94H, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94-I. Wealth-tax;.";

(zh) after entry 94-I, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94J. Gift-tax;.";

(zi) after entry 94J, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94K. Estate duty;.";

(zj) after entry 94K, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94L. Excise duties on medicinal and toilet preparations;.";

(zk) after entry 94L, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94M. Taxes on railway fares and freights;.";

(zl) after entry 94M, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94N. Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and commodity exchanges;.";

(zm) after entry 94N, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94O. Taxes on the sale or purchase of newspapers, books and journals;.";

(zn) after entry 94O, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"94P. Taxes on advertisements other than advertisements published in newspapers, books and journals;.";

(zo