Amendment of article 101.-

In article 101 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (a), for the words "or voluntarily quits his seat,", the words "or voluntarily relinquishes his membership of his political party, or is expelled from his political party," shall be substituted.

Amendment of article 102.-

In article 102 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (a), for the words "or voluntarily quits his seat,", the words "or voluntarily relinquishes his membership of his political party, or is expelled from his political party," shall be substituted;


Amendment of article 190.-

In article 190 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (a), for the words "or voluntarily quits his seat,", the words "or voluntarily relinquishes his membership of his political party, or is expelled from his political party," shall be substituted.

Amendment of article 191.-

In article 191 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (a), for the words "or voluntarily quits his seat,", the words "or voluntarily relinquishes his membership of his political party, or is expelled from his political party," shall be substituted.


Amendment of article 361B.-

In article 361B of the Constitution, for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-

(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in article 194 or article 195, a person who has been elected as the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State or as the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State, and who was, at the time of his election, a member of a political party, shall not be required to vacate his seat on the ground that he has become subject to the provisions of article 192 on the ground that he has ceased to be a member of the political party of which he was a member at the time of his election and shall not be disqualified under article 193 on the ground of defection.


Amendment of article 194.-

In article 194 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (a), for the words "or voluntarily quits his seat,", the words "or voluntarily relinquishes his membership of his political party, or is expelled from his political party," shall be substituted.

Amendment of article 195.-

In article 195 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (a), for the words "or voluntarily quits his seat,", the words "or voluntarily relinquishes his membership of his political party, or is expelled from his political party," shall be substituted.


Insertion of new article 102A.-

After article 102 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

(1)Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, a member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he is so disqualified on the ground of defection under the Tenth Schedule.

(2)The Tenth Schedule shall apply to the members of the Council of States as it applies to the members of the House of the People.

(3)A member of a House belonging to any political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House as an independent candidate or as a candidate sponsoring himself by a registered political party of which he is a member.

(4)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(5)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(6)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(7)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(8)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.


Insertion of new Tenth Schedule.-

After the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, the following Schedule shall be inserted, namely:-

(1)Subject to the provisions of paragraph 5, if any question arises as to whether a member of a House has become subject to the provisions of paragraph 2 or paragraph 3, the question shall be referred for decision to the Chairman or the Speaker of such House and his decision shall be final.

(2)A member of a House shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he is so disqualified on the ground of defection under this Schedule.

(3)A member of a House shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he is so disqualified on the ground of defection under this Schedule.

(4)A member of a House shall be disqualified for being a member of the House if he is so disqualified on the ground of defection under this Schedule.

(5)A member of a House shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House as an independent candidate or as a candidate sponsoring himself by a registered political party of which he is a member.

(6)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(7)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(8)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(9)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(10)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(11)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.

(12)A member of a House who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and who does not belong to that political party shall not be disqualified under this Schedule if he has been elected to the House by that political party and continues to be a member of that political party.


The Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985 amends the Constitution of India to provide that an elected member of Parliament or a State Legislature, who has been elected as a candidate set up by a political party and a nominated member of Parliament or a State Legislature who is a member of a political party at the time he takes his seat or who becomes a member of a political party within six months after he takes his seat would be disqualified on the ground of defection if he voluntarily relinquishes his membership of such political party or votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction of such party or is expelled from such party. An independent member of Parliament or a State Legislature shall also be disqualified if he joins any political party after his election. A nominated member of Parliament or a State Legislature who is not a member of a political party at the time of his nomination and who has not become a member of any political party before the expiry of six months from the date on which he takes his seat shall be disqualified if he joins any political party after the expiry of the said period of six months. The Act also makes suitable provisions with respect to splits in, and mergers of, political parties. A special provision has been included in the Act to enable a person who has been elected as the presiding officer of a House to sever his connections with his political party. The question as to whether a member of a House of Parliament or State Legislature has become subject to the proposed disqualification will be determined by the presiding officer of the House; where the question is with reference to the presiding officer himself, it will be decided by a member of the House elected by the House in that behalf. The Act amends articles 101, 102, 190, 191, 361B, 194, and 195 of the Constitution and inserts a new article 102A and a new Tenth Schedule. The Tenth Schedule provides for the disqualification of members of Parliament and State Legislatures on the ground of defection.