
Amendment of article 323B.-

In article 323B of the Constitution, for clauses (2) and (3), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-

"(2)Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of a tribunal for the adjudication of disputes relating to the levy and collection of land revenue, including the assessment and revision thereof, the recovery of land revenue and the enforcement of land revenue laws in any area in respect of which the Legislature of a State has no power to make laws under the Constitution.

(3)Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of a tribunal for the adjudication of disputes relating to the levy and collection of land revenue, including the assessment and revision thereof, the recovery of land revenue and the enforcement of land revenue laws in any area in respect of which the Legislature of a State has no power to make laws under the Constitution.

(4)Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of a tribunal for the adjudication of disputes relating to the levy and collection of land revenue, including the assessment and revision thereof, the recovery of land revenue and the enforcement of land revenue laws in any area in respect of which the Legislature of a State has no power to make laws under the Constitution.

(5)The provisions of this article shall not apply to a tribunal referred to in clause (2) or clause (4)."



Explanation.-

In this article, unless the context otherwise requires,-

(a)"land revenue" includes rent or revenue payable under any lease or agreement for the occupation or use of any land or any building or part thereof;

(b)"land revenue laws" includes any law for the time being in force relating to the levy and collection of land revenue, the assessment and revision thereof and the recovery of land revenue and the enforcement of land revenue laws.



Amendment of the First Schedule.-

In the First Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 20, after entry 42, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"42A.The Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993."



Amendment of the Third Schedule.-

In the Third Schedule to the Constitution, after the entry relating to the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"The Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993."



The Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993 sets up State-level Rent Tribunals to provide timely relief to rent litigants and reduce the number of appeals. This is in response to the Supreme Court's observation in the Prabhakaran Nair and others Vs. State of Tamil Nadu case, which called for simpler and quicker litigation procedures for rent disputes. The Act amends article 323B of the Constitution to establish State-level Rent Tribunals for the adjudication of disputes related to land revenue, including the assessment, revision, and recovery of land revenue and the enforcement of land revenue laws. The Act also excludes the jurisdiction of all courts, except the Supreme Court, under article 136 of the Constitution. The Act includes a definition of "land revenue" and "land revenue laws" in the explanation section. The First and Third Schedules of the Constitution are also amended to include the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993.