Amendment of article 217.-

In article 217 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "sixty years", the words "sixty-two years" shall be substituted.


Insertion of new clauses 2 and 3 in article 217.-

After clause (1) of article 217 of the Constitution, the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:-

"(2) If any question arises as to the correct age of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, the question shall be decided by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India or, as the case may be, the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned and with any other Judge or Judges of the Supreme Court or of the High Court concerned, as the President may deem necessary for the purpose.

(3) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court shall be determined by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed by or under law made by Parliament."


Amendment of article 220.-

In article 220 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(1A) The provisions of clause (1) shall not apply to a Judge who has been a Judge of a High Court and who has been transferred to another High Court."


Amendment of article 226.-

In article 226 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the words "the High Court", the words "or, if the cause of action arises within the local limits of the jurisdiction of any High Court, that High Court" shall be inserted.


Amendment of the First Schedule.-

In the First Schedule to the Constitution, in Part A, in the entry relating to the State of Kerala, for the words "Travancore-Cochin", the words "Travancore-Cochin and the Malabar area of the State of Madras" shall be substituted.


Amendment of the Fourth Schedule.-

In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table, in column 2, for the entries relating to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bombay, Madras, Mysore, Punjab and Rajasthan, the following entries shall be substituted, namely:-

"State of Andhra Pradesh 18
State of Bombay 30
State of Madras 25
State of Mysore 11
State of Punjab 15
State of Rajasthan 14".


Savings.-

Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercised by the Punjab High Court immediately before the commencement of this Act.


Repeal and saving.-

(1) The Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.


The Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, amends the Constitution of India in the following ways:

1. Article 217: The age of retirement for High Court Judges is raised from sixty years to sixty-two years. If any question arises about the correct age of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court, it will be decided by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India or the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned and with any other Judge or Judges of the Supreme Court or of the High Court concerned, as the President may deem necessary.

2. Article 220: A new clause (1A) is added, which states that the provisions of clause (1) shall not apply to a Judge who has been a Judge of a High Court and who has been transferred to another High Court.

3. Article 226: The High Court within whose jurisdiction the cause of action arises may also have jurisdiction to issue appropriate directions, orders, or writs, even if the relief is sought against the Central Government, authority, or person for any action taken.

4. The First Schedule is amended to substitute the words "Travancore-Cochin" with "Travancore-Cochin and the Malabar area of the State of Madras" in the entry relating to the State of Kerala.

5. The Fourth Schedule is amended to substitute the entries relating to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bombay, Madras, Mysore, Punjab, and Rajasthan with new entries.

6. The Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, is repealed, but anything done or any action taken under it shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.