

Amendment of article 243A.-In article 243A of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Part, the provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the Scheduled Areas and the Scheduled Tribes in the States in Part VI and in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura, subject to such exceptions and modifications as the President may by order specify:

Provided that no such order shall be made except after consultation with the Governor of the concerned State.".




Insertion of new articles 243B, 243C, 243D, 243E, 243F, 243G and 243H. - After article 243A of the Constitution, the following articles shall be inserted, namely:-

"243B. Gram Sabha.-(1) In every Panchayat there shall be a Gram Sabha.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and perform such functions at the village level as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

243C. Constitution of Panchayats.-(1) There shall be constituted in every State,-

(a) a Panchayat at the village level which may consist of a single Gram Panchayat or a group of Gram Panchayats;

(b) such other Panchayats at the intermediate level or levels as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide; and

(c) a Panchayat at the district level.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Panchayats at the intermediate level or levels may not be constituted in such States and areas as the President may, by order, specify.

243D. Composition of Panchayats.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to,-

(a) the composition of Panchayats at each level;

(b) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats and the offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level; and

(c) the reservation of not less than one-third of the total number of seats for women in the Panchayats and the offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level.

(2) The reservation of seats under clause (1) shall be in proportion to the population of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats areas.

243E. Duration of Panchayats, etc.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to,-

(a) the duration of each Panchayat;

(b) the disqualifications for membership of the Panchayats;

(c) the manner of filling vacancies in the Panchayats;

(d) the authority, if any, to be exercised by the Panchayats in relation to the disqualifications for membership and the filling of vacancies;

(e) the manner of elections to the Panchayats;

(f) the superintendence, direction and control of elections to the Panchayats; and

(g) the authority responsible for conducting elections to the Panchayats.

(2) The duration of each Panchayat shall be five years from the date appointed for its first meeting.

(3) No Panchayat shall be dissolved or superseded, except as provided in this Constitution.

(4) Subject to the provisions of clause (5), all the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by direct elections from the territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area.

(5) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the reservation of seats in any Panchayat or Panchayats at any level or levels for, and the reservation of offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at such level or levels for, the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as may be prescribed.

(6) The reservation of seats under clause (5) shall be in proportion to the population of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayat areas.

243F. Powers and authority of Panchayats.-(1) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government.

(2) Such law may provide for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon the Panchayats at the appropriate level with respect to,-

(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;

(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule;

(c) the levying and collection of such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution as may be authorised by law; and

(d) the custody and maintenance of community assets.

243G. Finance Commission.-(1) The Governor of a State shall, within one year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992 and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial position of the Panchayats and to make recommendations to the Governor as to,-

(a) the principles which should govern the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes which are to be, or may be, divided between them and the allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds;

(b) the principles which should govern the distribution between the Panchayats at different levels of their respective shares of such proceeds;

(c) the determination of the taxes which may be assigned to the Panchayats at any level and the determination of the basis of the assignment of such taxes;

(d) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats at any level from the Consolidated Fund of the State;

(e) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the Panchayats;

(f) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor of a State in the interests of sound finance of the Panchayats.

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision for the composition of the Finance Commission and the qualifications of its members.

(3) The Governor of a State shall, after each Finance Commission has made its recommendations, cause every recommendation to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

243H. Audit of accounts of Panchayats.-The accounts of every Panchayat shall be audited by an auditor duly qualified to be appointed as an auditor of companies under the Companies Act, 1956 and appointed as such by the State Government.".




Amendment of article 280.-In article 280 of the Constitution, in clause (3), in sub-clause (c), for the words "in consultation with the Governor", the words "after consultation with the Governor" shall be substituted.




Insertion of new entry 11 in Eleventh Schedule.-After entry 10 in Eleventh Schedule, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"11. Urban planning including town planning.".




Amendment of article 334.-In article 334 of the Constitution, the proviso shall be omitted.




Amendment of article 335.-In article 335 of the Constitution, for the words "claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes", the words "claims for reservation in matters of promotion to reserved posts in the services under the Central Government or under the State Government" shall be substituted.




Insertion of new article 338A.-After article 338 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

"338A. National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.-(1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.

(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.

(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.

(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.

(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission-

(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes under this Constitution or under any law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to report to the President annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, upon the working of those safeguards;

(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes;

(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State;

(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;

(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes;

(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.

(6) The President may, by rule, define the manner in which the Commission shall exercise its powers and discharge its functions.

(7) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter or inquiring into any complaint under this Constitution have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:-

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;

(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;

(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;

(f) any other matter which the President may by rule determine.

(8) The Union and every State shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the Scheduled Castes.

(9) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires, "Scheduled Castes" has the same meaning as in clause (24) of article 366.".




Insertion of new article 338B.-After article 338A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

"338B. National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.-(1) There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.

(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.

(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.

(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.

(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission-

(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes under this Constitution or under any law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to report to the President annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, upon the working of those safeguards;

(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Tribes;

(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State;

(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;

(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes;

(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.

(6) The President may, by rule, define the manner in which the Commission shall exercise its powers and discharge its functions.

(7) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter or inquiring into any complaint under this Constitution have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:-

(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;

(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;

(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;

(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;

(f) any other matter which the President may by rule determine.

(8) The Union and every State shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting the Scheduled Tribes.

(9) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires, "Scheduled Tribes" has the same meaning as in clause (25) of article 366.".




Amendment of article 342.-In article 342 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "the President may, by public notification,", the words "the President, with the concurrence of the Governor of the State concerned, may, by public notification," shall be substituted.




Amendment of the Fourth Schedule.-In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table,-

(a) against the figures "0-19" and "20-39", for the entries "Scheduled Castes", the entries "Scheduled Castes (Other than the Scheduled Castes mentioned in the State or Union territory lists below)" shall be substituted;

(b) for the entries against the figures "40-59" and "60-79", the following entries shall be substituted, namely:-

"40-59 Scheduled Castes (Other than the Scheduled Castes mentioned in the State or Union territory lists below) and Scheduled Tribes.

60-79 Scheduled Castes (Other than the Scheduled Castes mentioned in the State or Union territory lists below) and Scheduled Tribes.";

(c) for the entries against the figures "80 and above", the following entries shall be substituted, namely:-

"80 and above Scheduled Castes (Other than the Scheduled Castes mentioned in the State or Union territory lists below) and Scheduled Tribes.";

(d) after the entries against the figures "80 and above", the following entries shall be inserted, namely:-

"Angami Scheduled Castes
Ao Scheduled Castes
Chakhesang Scheduled Castes
Chang Scheduled Castes
Khiamniungan Scheduled Castes
Konyak Scheduled Castes
Lotha Scheduled Castes
Phom Scheduled Castes
Pochury Scheduled Castes
Rengma Scheduled Castes
Sangtam Scheduled Castes
Sumi Scheduled Castes
Yimchunger Scheduled Castes

Khasi
Jaintia
Garo

Bodo

Deori

Mikir

Sonowal Kachari

Thegar

Tiwa

In the First Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table,-

(a) after entry 10, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:-

"10A. Arunachal Pradesh

10B. Assam

10C. Bihar

10D. Chhattisgarh

10E. Go