Amendment of article 330.-

In article 330 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes", the words "Scheduled Castes" shall be substituted.


Amendment of article 332.-

In article 332 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes", the words "Scheduled Castes" shall be substituted.


Amendment of article 333.-

 In article 333 of the Constitution, for the words "not more than two Anglo-Indians", the words "not more than one Anglo-Indian" shall be substituted.


Amendment of the Ninth Schedule.-

In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, entry 17 shall be renumbered as entry 17A and before entry 17A as so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"17. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Local Authorities) Act, 1957 (Andhra Pradesh Act 32 of 1957) as amended by the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Local Authorities) (Amendment) Act, 1968 (Andhra Pradesh Act 16 of 1968)."


THE CONSTITUTION (TWENTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) ACT, 1969 

 This Act amends the Constitution of India to make changes related to the representation of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Anglo-Indians in the legislatures of the State of Nagaland and other states. 

 The Act amends article 330 of the Constitution to change the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People to only Scheduled Castes in the State of Nagaland. 

 Similarly, the Act amends article 332 to change the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the State Legislative Assembly to only Scheduled Castes in the State of Nagaland. 

 The Act also amends article 333 to limit the number of Anglo-Indians who may be nominated to the State Legislative Assemblies to not more than one. 

 Lastly, the Act amends the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution to include the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Local Authorities) Act, 1957, as amended by the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Local Authorities) (Amendment) Act, 1968.