1. Short title and commencement.

(1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.


2. Amendment of article 102.

In article 102 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (b), for the words “or any other electoral ground”, the words “or any other ground whatsoever” shall be substituted.


3. Amendment of article 191.

In article 191 of the Constitution, in clause (1), in sub-clause (b), for the words “or any other electoral ground”, the words “or any other ground whatsoever” shall be substituted.


4. Omission of paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule.

Paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution shall be omitted.


5. Insertion of new article 164A.

After article 164 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

“164A. Restriction on the size of the Council of Ministers.

(1) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members of the House of the People.

(2) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause (1) for a period of six months from the date of such disqualification or the date on which the order of such disqualification is set aside, whichever is earlier.

(3) If a person who is a member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political party is appointed as a Minister under clause (1), his seat in the House shall become vacant on the date on which he takes oath of office as such Minister.

(4) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the Prime Minister.

(5) The President may, on the advice of the Prime Minister, by order, specify the number of Ministers to be appointed by him from the State or States to which the Ministry does not belong and the number of such Ministers shall not exceed twenty per cent. of the total number of Ministers appointed by him under clause (1).

(6) The total number of Ministers appointed by the President under clauses (1) and (5) shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members of the House of the People.

(7) The Prime Minister shall not be a member of either House of Parliament or of the Council of States.

(8) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the Council of Ministers of a State.”.


6. Amendment of article 356.

In article 356 of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words “President’s Rule”, the words “provisional arrangement” shall be substituted.


7. Amendment of the Fifth Schedule.

In the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 1, for the words “the Governor may by public notification”, the words “the Governor may, after consultation with the Council of Ministers” shall be substituted.


8. Amendment of the Sixth Schedule.

In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 1, for the words “the Governor may by public notification”, the words “the Governor may, after consultation with the Council of Ministers” shall be substituted.


9. Amendment of the Seventh Schedule.

In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List I, in entry 92, after the words “stock exchanges”, the words “, except the Securities and Exchange Board of India” shall be inserted.


10. Power of Parliament to amend.

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 13 and 368, Parliament may, in exercise of its constituent power, amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this article.

(2) An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the President for his assent and upon such assent being given to the Bill, the Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill.

(3) No amendment of this Constitution (including the provisions of Part III) shall be called in question in any court on any ground.

(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no limitation whatever on the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this Constitution under this article.


The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, aims to amend the Constitution of India by making changes to several articles and schedules. The Act seeks to achieve the following objectives:

1. Amend Article 102 and 191: The Act substitutes the words "or any other electoral ground" with "or any other ground whatsoever" in Article 102 and 191 of the Constitution. This amendment allows the disqualification of a member of Parliament or State Legislature on any ground and not just on electoral grounds.

2. Omit Paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule: The Act omits Paragraph 3 of the Tenth Schedule, which provides for exemption from disqualification in case of splits. This amendment aims to prevent bulk defections and destabilization of the Government.

3. Insert new Article 164A: The Act inserts a new article, Article 164A, which restricts the size of the Council of Ministers. According to this article, the total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen percent of the total number of members of the House of the People.

4. Amend Article 356: The Act substitutes the words "President's Rule" with "provisional arrangement" in Article 356 of the Constitution. This amendment aims to clarify the nature of the President's rule in a State.

5. Amend the Fifth Schedule: The Act amends the Fifth Schedule to provide that the Governor may, after consultation with the Council of Ministers, make public notifications.

6. Amend the Sixth Schedule: The Act amends the Sixth Schedule to provide that the Governor may, after consultation with the Council of Ministers, make public notifications.

7. Amend the Seventh Schedule: The Act amends the Seventh Schedule to provide that the Securities and Exchange Board of India shall not be included in the list of stock exchanges that can be regulated by the Parliament.

8. Power of Parliament to amend: The Act provides that Parliament may amend the Constitution by way of addition, variation, or repeal in accordance with the procedure laid down in this article.

In summary, The Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, aims to amend the Constitution of India to address various issues, including the Anti-defection Law, the size of the Council of Ministers, and the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution. The Act seeks to achieve these objectives by making changes to several articles and schedules of the Constitution.