

Amendment of article 19.

In article 19 of the Constitution, in clause (6), after sub-clause (g), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(h) make any special provision, by law, for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.".[The Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, adjoined a subclause to Article 19 stating that the state has the authority to establish specific provisions regarding accommodations for the progress of any sociologically and academically disadvantaged sectors of the society, as well as to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, with respect to their enrollment to academic institutions, including private academic institutions, whether assisted or unassisted by the state, except minority institutions.]




Amendment of article 239A.

In article 239A of the Constitution, in clause (1), after sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(c) the National Capital Territory of Delhi;".[The Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, inserted a subclause to Article 239A that added the National Capital Territory of Delhi to the list of areas that are governed by the Lieutenant Governor of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.]




Amendment of the Seventh Schedule.

In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List III-Concurrent List, after entry 25, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"25A. Education, including technical education, medical education and universities, other than minorities' education as defined in clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitution."[The Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, added an entry to the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule that pertains to education, including technical education, medical education, and universities, with the exception of minorities' education as defined in clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitution.]




Amendment of the Ninth Schedule.

In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 243, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"244. The Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005."[The Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, added an entry to the Ninth Schedule of the Constitution that pertains to the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005.]




Short title.

This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005.