Amendment of the Seventh Schedule.-

In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in Part A (Union List), after entry 90, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"90A. Sikkim, including the administration of the State, and all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto."

Amendment of the Fourth Schedule.-

In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table, after Sikkim (2), the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"Sikkim (3) 1"

Amendment of the Representation of the People Act, 1950.-

In the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) (hereafter in this section referred to as the principal Act), in section 5, after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(ea) "Sikkim Assembly" means the Assembly established under the Government of Sikkim Act, 1974;".

Amendment of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.-

In the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) (hereafter in this section referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(ca) "Sikkim Assembly" means the Assembly established under the Government of Sikkim Act, 1974;".

Addition of the Tenth Schedule.-

After the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, the following Schedule shall be added, namely:-

"TENTH SCHEDULE
(Article 244A)
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF ASSOCIATION OF SIKKIM WITH THE UNION

1. The territory of Sikkim shall be an integral part of the territory of India.

2. The people of Sikkim shall be entitled to the fundamental rights conferred on all citizens of India.

3. The Government of Sikkim shall continue to enjoy all the powers and privileges and immunities which it enjoyed before the commencement of the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, except in so far as such powers, privileges and immunities are inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution.

4. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the allotment to Sikkim of one seat in the Council of States and one seat in the House of the People and for the election of the representatives of Sikkim in the Council of States and the House of the People by the members of the Sikkim Assembly.

5. The President may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Commission to examine and report on the working of the association of Sikkim with the Union and to recommend such measures as may be necessary for strengthening and consolidating the relationship between Sikkim and the Union.

6. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the administration of the State of Sikkim and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

7. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the integration of the administration of Sikkim with that of the Union.

8. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the continuance of the laws in force in Sikkim and make such adaptations and modifications therein as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of facilitating the application thereof in Sikkim.

9. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the amendment of the Government of Sikkim Act, 1974, and of any other law in force in Sikkim for the purpose of bringing the provisions of such Act or law into accord with the provisions of the Constitution.

10. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Chief Executive to exercise such of the functions of the Government of Sikkim as may be specified in the order.

11. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a High Court for Sikkim.

12. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the transfer to Sikkim of any property, right or liability of the Government of India or of any State Government.

13. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the transfer to Sikkim of any function vested in any authority or body in India.

14. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the transfer to Sikkim of the services of any officer or employee of the Government of India or of any State Government.

15. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Finance Commission to recommend the distribution between the Union and Sikkim of the revenues raised by the Union.

16. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Public Service Commission for Sikkim.

17. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a State Election Commission for Sikkim.

18. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Comptroller and Auditor-General of Sikkim.

19. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the establishment of a University in Sikkim.

20. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the establishment of a Tribunal for the adjudication of disputes relating to the association of Sikkim with the Union.

21. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Special Officer for Sikkim.

22. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Legal Adviser for Sikkim.

23. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Registrar of Co-operative Societies for Sikkim.

24. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Registrar of Societies for Sikkim.

25. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Chief Engineer for Sikkim.

26. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Surveyor-General for Sikkim.

27. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Registrar of Newspapers for Sikkim.

28. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Chief Censor of Films for Sikkim.

29. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Chief Controller of Explosives for Sikkim.

30. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Industries for Sikkim.

31. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Agriculture for Sikkim.

32. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Animal Husbandry for Sikkim.

33. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Health Services for Sikkim.

34. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Education for Sikkim.

35. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Social Welfare for Sikkim.

36. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Industries and Commerce for Sikkim.

37. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Fisheries for Sikkim.

38. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Statistics for Sikkim.

39. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Mines for Sikkim.

40. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Public Relations for Sikkim.

41. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Tourism for Sikkim.

42. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Youth Services for Sikkim.

43. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Sports for Sikkim.

44. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Handicrafts for Sikkim.

45. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Handlooms for Sikkim.

46. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Sericulture for Sikkim.

47. The Government of India may, by order, provide for the appointment of a Director of Co-operative Development for Sikkim."

THE CONSTITUTION (THIRTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) ACT, 1974 

 Summary:

The Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, amends the Constitution of India to provide for the association of Sikkim with the Union. The Act includes Sikkim in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, providing for the administration of the State and all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act also amends the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and the Representation of the People Act, 1951, to include the Sikkim Assembly in the definition of "Assembly."

The Act adds the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution, which sets out the terms and conditions of association of Sikkim with the Union. The Schedule provides for the allotment of one seat in the Council of States and one seat in the House of the People to Sikkim and for the election of the representatives of Sikkim in the Council of States and the House of the People by the members of the Sikkim Assembly. The Schedule also provides for the appointment of a Commission to examine and report on the working of the association of Sikkim with the Union and to recommend such measures as may be necessary for strengthening and consolidating the relationship between Sikkim and the Union.

The Act empowers the President to provide for the administration of the State of Sikkim and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto, including the integration of the administration of Sikkim with that of the Union, the continuance of the laws in force in Sikkim, and the amendment of the Government of Sikkim Act, 1974, and of any other law in force in Sikkim for the purpose of bringing the provisions of such Act or law into accord with the provisions of the Constitution.

The Act also empowers the Government of India to provide for the appointment of various officers and authorities for Sikkim, including a Chief Executive, a High Court, a Finance Commission, a Public Service Commission, a State Election Commission, a Comptroller and Auditor-General, a University, a Tribunal for the adjudication of disputes relating to the association of Sikkim with the Union, a Special Officer, a Legal Adviser, a Registrar of Co-operative Societies, a Registrar of Societies, a Chief Engineer, a Surveyor-General, a Registrar of Newspapers, a Chief Censor of Films, a Chief Controller of Explosives, a Director of Industries, a Director of Agriculture, a Director of Animal Husbandry, a Director of Health Services, a Director of Education, a Director of Social Welfare, a Director of Industries and Commerce, a Director of Fisheries, a Director of Statistics, a Director of Mines, a Director of Public Relations, a Director of Tourism, a Director of Youth Services, a Director of Sports, a Director of Handicrafts, a Director of Handlooms, and a Director of Sericulture.

The Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, came into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.