Amendment of the Ninth Schedule.-

In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 81, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:---

"81A. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Act, 1970 (Act 10 of 1970), in so far as it relates to the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State."



Explanation.-

In this entry, "State" has the same meaning as in clause (56) of article 366 of the Constitution.



Repeal and saving.-

(1) The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Ordinance, 1974 (Ord. 8 of 1974), is hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Act, 1970 (10 of 1970), as amended by this Act.



This document, named "THE CONSTITUTION (THIRTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) ACT, 1974," outlines an amendment to the Constitution of India. The amendment adds a new entry to the Ninth Schedule of the Constitution, which pertains to the reservation of appointments or posts in favor of any backward class of citizens that, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State. This amendment is related to the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Act, 1970. The Act also repeals the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Ordinance, 1974, and states that anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation in Posts and Services) Act, 1970, as amended by this Act. The term "State" in this entry has the same meaning as in clause (56) of article 366 of the Constitution.