 Amendment of article 338.-

In article 338 of the Constitution, for the words "a Special Officer for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes", the words "a Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" shall be substituted.


Insertion of new article 338A.-

After article 338 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

"338A. National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.-

(1)There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes.

(2)Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.

(3)The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.

(4)The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.

(5)It shall be the duty of the Commission-

(a)to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to report to the President upon the working of those safeguards;

(b)to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes;

(c)to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State;

(d)to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;

(e)to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes; and

(f)to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.

(6)The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

(7)Where any report of the Commission relates to any matter with which a State Government is concerned, the President shall cause a copy of that report to be laid before the Legislature of that State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

(8)The Commission shall, while investigating any matter or inquiring into any complaint under this article, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:-

(a)summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;

(b)requiring the discovery and production of any document;

(c)receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d)requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;

(e)issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;

(f)any other matter which may be prescribed.

(9)The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes.

Explanation.-In this article, the expression "major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes" does not include any policy formulated for the purpose of securing the scheduled castes in so far as such policy provides for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the Government, is not adequately represented in the services under the Government.

(10)Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the Commission shall be consulted-

(a)before the introduction in Parliament or, as the case may be, in the Legislature of any State of any Bill or amendment affecting the Scheduled Castes; and

(b)on any matter of policy affecting the Scheduled Castes in any important legislation, regulation or order proposed to be issued by the Government.

(11)In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes shall be construed as including references to such other backward classes as the President may, if he is of opinion that any such class has suffered any social or educational backwardness similar to that of the Scheduled Castes, by order specify and also to the members of the Scheduled Castes converting from Hinduism to any other religion and to the children of any such converted members.".


Insertion of new article 338B.-

After article 338A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

"338B. National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.-

(1)There shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.

(2)Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be such as the President may by rule determine.

(3)The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.

(4)The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.

(5)It shall be the duty of the Commission-

(a)to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes under this Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the Government and to report to the President upon the working of those safeguards;

(b)to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Tribes;

(c)to participate and advise on the planning process of socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any State;

(d)to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;

(e)to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes; and

(f)to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.

(6)The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

(7)Where any report of the Commission relates to any matter with which a State Government is concerned, the President shall cause a copy of that report to be laid before the Legislature of that State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

(8)The Commission shall, while investigating any matter or inquiring into any complaint under this article, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in respect of the following matters, namely:-

(a)summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining him on oath;

(b)requiring the discovery and production of any document;

(c)receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d)requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;

(e)issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;

(f)any other matter which may be prescribed.

(9)The Union and every State Government shall consult the Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes.

Explanation.-In this article, the expression "major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes" does not include any policy formulated for the purpose of securing the scheduled tribes in so far as such policy provides for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the Government, is not adequately represented in the services under the Government.

(10)Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the Commission shall be consulted-

(a)before the introduction in Parliament or, as the case may be, in the Legislature of any State of any Bill or amendment affecting the Scheduled Tribes; and

(b)on any matter of policy affecting the Scheduled Tribes in any important legislation, regulation or order proposed to be issued by the Government.

(11)In this article, references to the Scheduled Tribes shall be construed as including references to such other backward classes as the President may, if he is of opinion that any such class has suffered any social or educational backwardness similar to that of the Scheduled Tribes, by order specify and also to the members of the Scheduled Tribes converting from Hinduism to any other religion and to the children of any such converted members.".


Amendment of article 341.-

In article 341 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "the President may, with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof", the words "the President, after consultation with the Governor of the State, may, with respect to any State or Union territory" shall be substituted.


Amendment of article 342.-

In article 342 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "the President may, with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof", the words "the President, after consultation with the Governor of the State, may, with respect to any State or Union territory" shall be substituted.


Amendment of the Ninth Schedule.-

In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 65, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"66. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (37 of 1976);

67. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Act, 1977 (40 of 1977);

68. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Act, 1987 (38 of 1987);

69. The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Act, 1989 (39 of 1989);".




Summary:

The Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990, was enacted to amend the Constitution of India. The Act provides for the insertion of new articles 338A and 338B, which establish the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and the National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes, respectively. These Commissions are responsible for investigating and monitoring matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under the Constitution or any other law, inquiring into specific complaints, participating in the planning process of socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and evaluating the progress of their development.

The Act also amends article 338 to replace the Special Officer for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with a Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The Commission will consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and three other Members, and their conditions of service and tenure of office will be determined by the President.

Additionally, the Act amends articles 341 and 342 to allow the President, after consultation with the Governor of the State, to specify the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to any State or Union territory.

Finally, the Act amends the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution to include the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Acts of 1976, 1977, 1987, and 1989.