
 Insertion of new article 2A.-

After article 2 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:-

"2A. Formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States.- Parliament may, by law, form a new State by separation of territory from any State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any territory to a part of any State;

Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the President and unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects the area, boundaries or name of any of the States, the Bill has been referred by the President to the Legislature of that State for expressing its views thereon within such period as may be specified in the reference or within such further period as the President may allow and the Legislature of the State has expressed its views in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution."



Amendment of article 3.-

In article 3 of the Constitution, in clause (1), after the words "or by any of the territories so included", the words "or by any territory contained within India but not included within any State" shall be inserted.



Amendment of article 4.-

In article 4 of the Constitution, in clause (1), for the words "or of the boundaries of any of the States therein", the words "or of the boundaries of any of the States therein or of the territory of India" shall be substituted.



Amendment of the Seventh Schedule.-

In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading "Union", in List I- Legislative List, after entry 97, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"97A. Formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States."



This document, known as the Constitution (Fifty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1986, aims to amend the Constitution of India in order to give effect to certain proposals. It specifies that a new State can be formed by separating territory from any existing State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by uniting any territory to a part of any State. However, a Bill for this purpose cannot be introduced in Parliament without the recommendation of the President and the approval of the Legislature of the State(s) affected. The Act also amends articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution to include provisions for the formation of new States and alteration of the boundaries or names of existing States, as well as the territory of India. Additionally, a new entry is added to the Seventh Schedule under the Union's Legislative List to allow for the formation of new States and alteration of the areas, boundaries, or names of existing States. The Act will come into force on a date appointed by the Central Government through a notification in the Official Gazette.