The Constitution (Twenty-Seventh Amendment) Act, 1971 made several changes to the Constitution of India. The Act was enacted in two parts, with different provisions coming into force at different times. The first part, consisting of sections 1 and 3, came into force immediately, while the remaining provisions came into force on a date specified by the Central Government.

The Act made several amendments to article 239A of the Constitution, which deals with the administration of Union territories. Specifically, it substituted the words "Goa, Daman and Diu, Pondicherry" with "Goa, Daman and Diu, Pondicherry and Mizoram" in clause (1) of the article.

The Act also inserted a new article 239B into the Constitution, which provides the administrator of a Union territory with the power to promulgate Ordinances during the recess of the Legislature. However, this power can only be exercised with the instructions of the President and is subject to certain limitations.

Additionally, the Act made several amendments to article 240 of the Constitution, which deals with the power of the President to make regulations for the peace, progress, and good government of Union territories. These amendments include the addition of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh to the list of Union territories covered by the article, as well as the provision for the President to make regulations during the period of dissolution or suspension of the Legislature.

Finally, the Act inserted a new article 371C into the Constitution, which provides for the constitution and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Manipur consisting of members elected from the Hill Areas of the State. The article also provides for the modification of the rules of business of the Government and the rules of procedure of the Legislative Assembly of the State, as well as for any special responsibilities of the Governor in order to secure the proper functioning of the committee. The Governor is required to make an annual report to the President regarding the administration of the Hill Areas in the State of Manipur, and the executive power of the Union extends to the giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas.