Summary:

The North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 2002, is an amendment to the North-Eastern Council Act of 1971. This Act was enacted to expand the membership of the North-Eastern Council, which is a regional planning body for the north-eastern area of India, to include the State of Sikkim.

The Amendment Act makes several changes to the principal Act. Firstly, in section 2, the words "Nagaland and Tripura" are replaced with "Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura" to include Sikkim in the Council.

Secondly, in section 3, sub-section (1) is substituted with a new sub-section that includes the Chief Ministers of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, and Tripura as members of the Council. The President may also nominate up to three members to the Council.

Thirdly, in section 4, sub-sections (1) and (2) are substituted with new sub-sections that give priority to schemes and projects that benefit two or more States. In the case of Sikkim, the Council is required to formulate specific projects and schemes for that State, including the review of implementation of such projects and schemes. Sub-section (3)(c) is omitted, and a new sub-section (5) is added, which gives the Council the power to exercise such functions as may be delegated to it by the Central Government.

Fourthly, in section 5, the words "The Council shall meet at such times" are replaced with "The Council shall meet at least twice in a year at such times" to ensure that the Council meets regularly.

Lastly, in section 6, the words "and Planning" are replaced with "Planning and the Department of Development of North-Eastern Region" to include the development of the north-eastern region as one of the Council's functions.

In conclusion, the North-Eastern Council (Amendment) Act, 2002, is an important amendment that expands the membership of the North-Eastern Council to include the State of Sikkim and gives the Council greater powers and responsibilities in regional planning and development.