
The Designs Rules, 2001 

 Register of Designs .- (1) The Controller shall maintain a Register of Designs in which shall be entered the names and addresses of proprietors of registered designs, notifications of assignments and transmissions of registered designs, the names, addresses and descriptions of registered designs, and such other matters as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

(2) The Register of Designs shall be prima facie evidence of any matters by law to be entered therein.

(3) The Controller may correct any error in the Register of Designs on such terms as he thinks fit.

(4) Any person interested may apply in the prescribed manner to the Controller to enter any change in the Register of Designs and the Controller may refuse such application on reasonable grounds or may enter such change on such terms as he thinks fit and may require any evidence he thinks fit in support of the application.

(5) Any person interested may, on payment of the prescribed fee, inspect the Register of Designs or obtain a certified or uncertified copy thereof or make extracts therefrom.

(6) Any person interested may, on payment of the prescribed fee, obtain a certified or uncertified copy of any registered design or of any other document filed in the Patent Office in connection with the registration of a design.

(7) The Controller may cause any entry in the Register of Designs to be removed from the Register if it appears to him that the entry was incorrectly made or that the registration of the design has been cancelled or has expired.

(8) The Controller may cause the name of any person to be removed from the Register of Designs in case such person has no registered design to his name and has not paid the annual fee for maintenance of his name on the Register for a period of five years.

(9) Any person may institute a proceeding for rectification of the Register of Designs in the prescribed manner on the ground that the entry of any name, address or description is incorrect or that the person in whose name the design is registered is not the true and first inventor or proprietor of the design.

(10) The Controller shall have power to decide any such proceeding and may make such order as he thinks fit for making or deleting entries in the Register of Designs or for correcting any error in the Register or for cancelling or varying the registration of a design.

The Designs Rules, 2001 

 [  Procedure for registration

].- [(1) Every application for registration of a design under the Act shall be made to the Controller in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee and statement containing the following particulars, namely:-

(a) title of the design;

(b) class of the article to which the design is applied;

(c) a brief description of the design;

(d) a statement of novelty;

(e) a drawing or photograph of the article to which the design is applied;

(f) the name and address of the applicant; and

(g) power of attorney, if the applicant is not the proprietor.

 (2) The Controller may refuse to register the design on the ground that the application does not comply with the provisions of the Act or of these rules or that the design is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(3) The Controller shall, if he thinks fit, cause an application for registration of a design to be advertised in the Official Journal and in such other manner as he thinks fit and invite the public to furnish observations within a period of three months from the date of advertisement.

(4) If no objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall register the design.

(5) If any objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall consider such objection and may refuse the registration of the design after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.

(6) Where any design is registered, the Controller shall issue a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the design.

(7) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(8) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, register a design provisionally on the request of the applicant and shall inform the applicant accordingly.

(9) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, require the applicant to furnish such information or such evidence as he may deem necessary in respect of the application for registration of the design.

(10) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse an application for registration of a design on the ground that the application relates to a design which is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(11) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(12) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against the decision of the Controller refusing to register a design.

(13) The Controller shall, if he thinks fit, cause an application for registration of a design to be advertised in the Official Journal and in such other manner as he thinks fit and invite the public to furnish observations within a period of three months from the date of advertisement.

(14) If no objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall register the design.

(15) If any objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall consider such objection and may refuse the registration of the design after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.

(16) Where any design is registered, the Controller shall issue a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the design.

(17) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(18) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, register a design provisionally on the request of the applicant and shall inform the applicant accordingly.

(19) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, require the applicant to furnish such information or such evidence as he may deem necessary in respect of the application for registration of the design.

(20) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse an application for registration of a design on the ground that the application relates to a design which is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(21) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(22) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against the decision of the Controller refusing to register a design.

(23) The Controller shall, if he thinks fit, cause an application for registration of a design to be advertised in the Official Journal and in such other manner as he thinks fit and invite the public to furnish observations within a period of three months from the date of advertisement.

(24) If no objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall register the design.

(25) If any objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall consider such objection and may refuse the registration of the design after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.

(26) Where any design is registered, the Controller shall issue a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the design.

(27) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(28) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, register a design provisionally on the request of the applicant and shall inform the applicant accordingly.

(29) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, require the applicant to furnish such information or such evidence as he may deem necessary in respect of the application for registration of the design.

(30) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse an application for registration of a design on the ground that the application relates to a design which is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(31) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(32) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against the decision of the Controller refusing to register a design.

(33) The Controller shall, if he thinks fit, cause an application for registration of a design to be advertised in the Official Journal and in such other manner as he thinks fit and invite the public to furnish observations within a period of three months from the date of advertisement.

(34) If no objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall register the design.

(35) If any objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall consider such objection and may refuse the registration of the design after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.

(36) Where any design is registered, the Controller shall issue a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the design.

(37) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(38) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, register a design provisionally on the request of the applicant and shall inform the applicant accordingly.

(39) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, require the applicant to furnish such information or such evidence as he may deem necessary in respect of the application for registration of the design.

(40) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse an application for registration of a design on the ground that the application relates to a design which is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(41) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(42) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against the decision of the Controller refusing to register a design.

(43) The Controller shall, if he thinks fit, cause an application for registration of a design to be advertised in the Official Journal and in such other manner as he thinks fit and invite the public to furnish observations within a period of three months from the date of advertisement.

(44) If no objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall register the design.

(45) If any objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall consider such objection and may refuse the registration of the design after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.

(46) Where any design is registered, the Controller shall issue a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the design.

(47) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(48) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, register a design provisionally on the request of the applicant and shall inform the applicant accordingly.

(49) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, require the applicant to furnish such information or such evidence as he may deem necessary in respect of the application for registration of the design.

(50) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse an application for registration of a design on the ground that the application relates to a design which is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(51) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(52) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against the decision of the Controller refusing to register a design.

(53) The Controller shall, if he thinks fit, cause an application for registration of a design to be advertised in the Official Journal and in such other manner as he thinks fit and invite the public to furnish observations within a period of three months from the date of advertisement.

(54) If no objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall register the design.

(55) If any objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall consider such objection and may refuse the registration of the design after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.

(56) Where any design is registered, the Controller shall issue a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the design.

(57) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(58) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, register a design provisionally on the request of the applicant and shall inform the applicant accordingly.

(59) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, require the applicant to furnish such information or such evidence as he may deem necessary in respect of the application for registration of the design.

(60) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse an application for registration of a design on the ground that the application relates to a design which is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(61) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(62) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against the decision of the Controller refusing to register a design.

(63) The Controller shall, if he thinks fit, cause an application for registration of a design to be advertised in the Official Journal and in such other manner as he thinks fit and invite the public to furnish observations within a period of three months from the date of advertisement.

(64) If no objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall register the design.

(65) If any objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall consider such objection and may refuse the registration of the design after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.

(66) Where any design is registered, the Controller shall issue a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the design.

(67) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(68) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, register a design provisionally on the request of the applicant and shall inform the applicant accordingly.

(69) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, require the applicant to furnish such information or such evidence as he may deem necessary in respect of the application for registration of the design.

(70) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse an application for registration of a design on the ground that the application relates to a design which is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(71) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(72) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against the decision of the Controller refusing to register a design.

(73) The Controller shall, if he thinks fit, cause an application for registration of a design to be advertised in the Official Journal and in such other manner as he thinks fit and invite the public to furnish observations within a period of three months from the date of advertisement.

(74) If no objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall register the design.

(75) If any objection is received within the said period, the Controller shall consider such objection and may refuse the registration of the design after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.

(76) Where any design is registered, the Controller shall issue a certificate of registration to the proprietor of the design.

(77) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(78) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, register a design provisionally on the request of the applicant and shall inform the applicant accordingly.

(79) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, require the applicant to furnish such information or such evidence as he may deem necessary in respect of the application for registration of the design.

(80) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse an application for registration of a design on the ground that the application relates to a design which is not a new or original design or that the design is not registrable under the Act.

(81) Where the Controller refuses to register a design, he shall communicate his decision to the applicant in writing, giving the reasons for the refusal and informing the applicant of his right to appeal.

(