Summary:

The Private Security Agencies (Private Security to Cash Transportation Activities) Rules, 2018 outlines the regulations for providing private security for cash transportation activities in India. These rules are made under the Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005. The rules define various terms related to cash transportation activities, such as cash handling agency, cash replenishment agency, cash-in-transit agency, and cash transportation activities.

The rules state that private security for cash transportation activities can only be provided by private security agencies that hold a license under the Act. A contract can be entered into between a private security agency and a bank, or between a cash handling agency and a bank, for providing private security for cash transportation activities. Cash transportation activities must be carried out in a secured cash van that complies with the conditions for design and specification specified in the First Schedule.

The rules also specify the requisite number of trained staff per cash van. Every cash van must have a minimum of four staff members, including a driver, two armed security guards, and an ATM officer or custodian. The cash van must always be escorted by at least two trained armed security guards on board.

The rules require that no private security agency shall appoint or engage or deploy any personnel for the cash transportation activities, unless such personnel has undergone thorough antecedent check and his proper KYC verification and police verification is done. The private security agency shall ensure that every personnel appointed or engaged for cash transportation activities shall be imparted training and certified for the security and safe handling of such activities as per the requirements of training laid down in the Second Schedule.

The rules also require that every cash transportation activities shall be carried out only in secured cash vans fitted with GPS tracking device. The private security agency shall ensure that each cash van shall be monitored at all times during cash transportation activities through a redundant communications protocol.

The rules specify the guideline for maximum cash carrying limit in a single cash van. The private security agency involved in cash transportation activities shall ensure that no cash van carries cash of more than five crores rupees per trip. The private security agency shall ensure that secured cash van shall be deployed for carrying cash of more than ten lakh rupees per trip.

The rules also specify the specification for private cash vaults used for holding and overnight vaulting of Bank currency. The private security agency shall ensure that all cash handling, including counting, sorting, and bundling activities shall be carried out in secured premises in accordance with the guidelines specified in the rule.

The rules also specify the measures for risk mitigation. The private security agency shall ensure that the ATM under its security shall be fitted with one time electronic combination locks for reducing the instances of crew pilferage losses and ATM frauds. The cash for loading in to an ATM machine shall be collected from the Bank on previous day or in the first half of the day so that operations can be concluded before the time stipulated in sub-rule (3). No cash loading of the ATMs or cash transportation activities shall be done after 9 PM in urban areas, after 6 PM in rural areas, and before 9 AM or after 4 PM in the districts notified by the Central Government as Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas.