The Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002, is a law in India that aims to regulate land and traffic within national highways. The Act establishes Highway Administrations, which are responsible for exercising powers and discharging functions related to the control of national highways land and traffic. The Act also establishes Tribunals to hear appeals from orders passed or actions taken under the Act.

Under the Act, unauthorized occupation of highway land is prohibited, and the Highway Administration or an officer authorized by such Administration may serve a notice on the person causing or responsible for such unauthorized occupation, requiring him to remove the occupation and restore the highway land in its original condition. If the person fails to comply with the notice, he may be liable to penalty and summary eviction.

The Act also regulates access to national highways. No person shall have right of access to a Highway except permitted by the Highway Administration either generally or specifically. The access to a Highway shall be subject to the guidelines and instructions issued by the Central Government from time to time. The Highway Administration may also declare a Highway or any portion thereof to be limited for access in the manner as specified in such notification and may impose any restriction or control on such access to, from or across such Highway as specified in that notification.

Furthermore, the Act gives the Highway Administration the power to regulate and control the plying of vehicles on the Highway for the proper management thereof. The Highway Administration may also refuse, regulate or divert any proposed or existing access to the Highway in the interest of the safety and convenience of the traffic.

Offenses under the Act, such as unauthorized occupation of highway land, are punishable with imprisonment, fine, or both. The Act also provides for the right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner and the finality of orders.