Summary:

The International Financial Services Centres Authority (Payment Services) Regulations, 2024, is a set of regulations made by the International Financial Services Centres Authority (IFSCA) under the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019. These regulations aim to regulate payment services in the International Financial Services Centres (IFSCs) in India.

The regulations define various terms such as "account issuance service", "applicable funds", "Authority", "certificate of authorisation", "company", "control", "cross-border money transfer service", "e-money", "e-money issuance service", "escrow service", "group entities", "holding company", "IFSC", "key managerial personnel", "merchant", "merchant acquisition service", "money", "nodal bank", "nth-party service provider", "payment account", "payment instrument", "payment order", "payment services", "payment service provider", "payment service user", "payment system", "payment transaction", "regular payment service provider", "safeguarding institution", "significant payment service provider", "specified foreign currency", "subsidiary", "third-party service provider", "third-party service relationship", "virtual digital asset", and "net worth".

The regulations provide for the requirement of authorisation for commencing or carrying on payment services. Any person seeking to provide payment services in or from IFSC shall require a certificate of authorisation under these regulations. The regulations also specify the application process for authorisation, the eligibility criteria for authorisation, and the conditions for grant of authorisation.

The regulations provide for certain minimum net worth requirements for payment service providers. A payment service provider shall, inter-alia, comply with the minimum net worth requirements, as specified in Schedule V of these regulations, on an ongoing basis. The minimum net worth requirement of a payment service provider shall be reviewed by the Authority from time to time to ensure their continued effectiveness and relevance.

The regulations provide for the fit and proper requirement for payment service providers. An applicant or a payment service provider shall ensure that its directors, key managerial personnel, and persons exercising control over it satisfy the fit and proper requirements, as specified in Schedule II of these regulations.

The regulations provide for the authorisation requirements for payment service providers. While evaluating an application for authorisation, the Authority shall take into account all matters which it deems relevant for grant of authorisation, including the experience, infrastructure, financial soundness, fit and proper requirements, and the interests of payment service users.

The regulations provide for the issuance of in-principle approval for payment service providers. After considering an application for authorisation, if the Authority is satisfied that the said application, prima facie, satisfies the conditions for granting authorisation, the Authority may issue an in-principle approval letter to the applicant.

The regulations provide for the grant of authorisation for payment service providers. The Authority may, on being satisfied that the applicant has complied with the conditions laid down in these regulations and is eligible to act as a payment service provider, grant a certificate of authorisation to the applicant subject to such conditions as the Authority may deem fit.

The regulations provide for the refusal of authorisation for payment service providers. If the Authority is of the opinion that the authorisation cannot be granted due to certain deficiencies, it shall communicate the same to the applicant advising it to rectify those within thirty days from the date of communication.

The regulations provide for the revocation of authorisation for payment service providers. If the Authority is satisfied that a payment service provider has failed to comply with any of the conditions of the authorisation, provision/s of these regulations, orders or directions of the Authority, or that the activity of the payment service provider is being carried on in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the payment service users, it may revoke the authorisation granted to such payment service provider.

The regulations provide for the surrender of authorisation for payment service providers. A payment service provider may file an application with the Authority for surrender of the authorisation granted to it. After consideration of the application made under sub-regulation (1), and on being satisfied that the surrender of authorisation is unlikely to cause any material adverse effect to the financial ecosystem of the IFSC or the interests of the payment service users, the Authority may permit surrender of such authorisation subject to such conditions as it deems fit.

The regulations provide for the appropriation of security deposit on revocation or surrender of authorisation. Where a payment service provider has surrendered its authorisation or the authorisation of a payment service provider has been revoked by the Authority, the Authority may apply the security deposit, if any, mentioned in sub-regulation (4) of regulation 10, to pay any sums outstanding and claimed by payment service users who are customers of the payment service provider.

The regulations provide for the commencement of operations for payment service providers. The payment service provider shall commence its operations within six months from the date of issuance of the certificate of authorisation.

The regulations provide for the governance arrangements for payment service providers. A payment service provider shall comprehensively and clearly document its governance arrangements, including the role and composition of the board and any committees or sub-committees, senior management structure, reporting lines between management and the board, ownership structure, internal governance policy, design of risk management and internal controls, procedures for the appointment of board members and senior management, and processes for ensuring performance accountability.

The regulations provide for the risk management of third-party service relationships for payment service providers. A payment service provider shall put in place a risk-based framework to assess the criticality of services that they receive or plan to receive from a third-party service provider. Such assessment shall be undertaken at the time of commencement of operations and at regular intervals thereafter to identify critical services.

The regulations provide for the duties of the payment service provider. The payment service provider shall protect applicable funds, comply with AML, CTF & KYC Guidelines, ensure compliance with all applicable laws in India as well all applicable laws of any jurisdiction/s outside India where it provides services or where the payment service users are based, deal with the Authority in an open and co-operative manner, ensure due regard is given to protecting the interests of payment service users and the relevant information is communicated to them in a clear and fair manner that minimises the possibility of them getting misled, secure its information technology systems and other infrastructure used for providing payment services, and maintain records regarding queries, complaints, and grievances received by it and redressal of such complaints and grievances.

The regulations provide for the redressal of grievances and dispute resolution for payment service providers. A payment service provider shall depute adequate staff at its permanent place of business or registered office in IFSC to address any queries, complaints, or grievances from a payment service user that uses one or more of the payment services provided by the payment service provider and shall do so within a period of thirty days from receipt of a complaint or a grievance. Disputes between a payment service user and a payment service provider, which could not be resolved by the internal grievance redressal mechanism, shall be resolved by harnessing online conciliation and/or online arbitration in the manner as specified by the Authority.

The regulations provide for the action in case of default for payment service providers. The Authority may initiate appropriate enforcement action in case a payment service provider contravenes any of the provisions of these regulations, direction, or order made thereunder.

The regulations provide for the place of business or registered office for payment service providers. A payment service provider shall have its place of business and registered office in IFSC. A payment service provider who wants to carry on some activities relating to a payment service from a place of business other than from IFSC shall seek prior approval from the Authority.

The regulations provide for the submission of returns, documents, or other information for payment service providers. Every payment service provider shall submit requisite documents and information in such format and in such manner as may be specified by the Authority.

The regulations provide for the furnishing of accounts and balance sheet for payment service providers. Every payment service provider shall submit to the Authority, a copy of the audited financial statements, which includes balance-sheet, profit and loss account, cash or fund flow statement along-with the auditor's report thereon within three (3) months from the date of its finalisation to the Authority, along with the remarks or observations of the auditor, if any, on the conduct of the business, state of accounts, etc., and a suitable explanation on auditor's observations/remarks.

The regulations provide for the maintenance of books of accounts, records, and other documents for payment service providers. Every payment service provider shall, inter-alia, maintain and preserve the following books of accounts, records, and documents, in a format suitable for electronic retrieval, for a minimum of ten (10) years from the date of commencement of operations, namely: - (a) a copy of the balance sheet at the end of each accounting period; (b) a copy of profit and loss account for each accounting period; (c) a copy of the auditor's report on the accounts for each accounting period; (d) a statement of net worth for each quarter; (e) documentation relating to compliance with International Financial Services Centres Authority (Anti Money Laundering, Counter-Terrorist Financing and Know Your Customer) Guidelines, 2022; (f) documents relating to account opening of each client and any power of attorney or signature authority forms of the clients; (g) relevant records and documents relating to its activities in capital markets; (h) such other books of accounts, records, and documents as may be specified by the Authority from time to time.