SCHEDULE 25- SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
(Refer Schedule 26, Notes to Accounts)
 
 


SCHEDULE 26- NOTES ON ACCOUNTS

 
(Amount Rs.)


1. BASES OF PREPARATION
 
 



The accounts of the Corporation are prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 (25 of 1990), the General Financial Rules, 2005, as amended from time to time and the directions issued by the Central Government from time to time.

 
 



2. TRANSFER OF FUNDS
 
 



The Corporation may transfer funds from one Station/Kendra/Office to another within the same Ministry or Department. Such transfers are made on the basis of the approval of the Chief Executive Officer.

 
 



3. FIXED ASSETS
 
 



The Corporation capitalizes all assets that have a useful life of more than one year and whose cost is Rs. 5,000 or more. The Corporation depreciates all such assets at the rate of 15% per annum on a straight-line basis.

 
 



4. DEPRECIATION
 
 



The Corporation charges depreciation on all fixed assets at the rate of 15% per annum on a straight-line basis.

 
 



5. INVESTMENTS
 
 



The Corporation invests its funds in government securities, approved securities, and other investments as permitted by the General Financial Rules, 2005.

 
 



6. LOANS AND ADVANCES
 
 



The Corporation provides loans and advances to its employees and other parties as permitted by the General Financial Rules, 2005.

 
 



7. PROVISIONS
 
 



The Corporation creates provisions for doubtful debts, bad debts, and other contingencies as required by the General Financial Rules, 2005.

 
 



8. CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
 
 



The Corporation discloses all contingent liabilities in its financial statements as required by the General Financial Rules, 2005.

 
 



9. INCOME TAX
 
 



The Corporation deducts income tax at the applicable rates from the income of its employees and other parties as required by the Income Tax Act, 1961.

 
 



10. PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
 



The financial statements of the Corporation are presented in accordance with the General Financial Rules, 2005, and the Schedule III of the Companies Act, 2013.

 
 



11. ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
 
 



The accounts of the Corporation are audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India as required by the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 (25 of 1990).

 
 



12. REPORTING OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION
 
 



The Corporation reports its financial information to the Central Government and the Parliament as required by the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 (25 of 1990).





Summary:

The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Annual Statement of Accounts of Corporation Rules, 2006 outlines the rules and regulations for the preparation and submission of the annual statement of accounts of the Corporation. The document includes definitions of key terms, rules for the maintenance and submission of accounts, and schedules for the preparation of financial statements. The annual statement of accounts must be prepared by the Member (Finance) or an authorized officer of the Corporation and submitted to the Central Government for laying before the Parliament. The accounts of the Corporation must be maintained in Form 'A' and signed and authenticated by the Chief Executive Officer and Member (Finance). The Audit Officer is responsible for auditing the accounts of the Corporation and reporting thereon. The Corporation is required to remedy any defects or irregularities pointed out in the Audit Report and report to the Central Government and Audit Officer about the action taken. The financial statements of the Corporation must be prepared in accordance with the General Financial Rules, 2005, and the Schedule III of the Companies Act, 2013. The accounts of the Corporation are audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The Corporation is required to report its financial information to the Central Government and the Parliament as required by the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990.