1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 2003.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.

Amendment of section 11.-

(1) In section 11 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (hereafter in this Act referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(c) an offence under this Act for which the maximum term of imprisonment is more than three years;".

(2) In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "five hundred rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

Amendment of section 12.-

(1) In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(aa) an offence under this Act for which the maximum term of imprisonment is more than three years;".

(2) In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "five hundred rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

Amendment of section 326.-

(1) In section 326 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(da) any person who is in charge of a ship, who knowingly or recklessly causes the ship to navigate in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both;".

(2) In section 326 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

Amendment of section 355.-

(1) In section 355 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(ba) any person who, being the master of a ship, knowingly or recklessly causes the ship to navigate in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both;".

(2) In section 355 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

Amendment of section 356.-

(1) In section 356 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(ba) any person who, being the owner of a ship, knowingly or recklessly causes the ship to navigate in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both;".

(2) In section 356 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

Amendment of section 357.-

(1) In section 357 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(ba) any person who, being the master of a ship, knowingly or recklessly causes the ship to navigate in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both;".

(2) In section 357 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

Amendment of section 358.-

(1) In section 358 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-

"(ba) any person who, being the owner of a ship, knowingly or recklessly causes the ship to navigate in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both;".

(2) In section 358 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

Insertion of new sections 358A and 358B.-

(1) After section 358 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:-

"358A. Penalty for contravention of provisions relating to safety of life at sea.-

(1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder relating to safety of life at sea shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.

(2) Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable under sub-section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.

358B. Penalty for contravention of provisions relating to marine pollution prevention.-

(1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder relating to marine pollution prevention shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.

(2) Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable under sub-section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.".

Amendment of section 360.-

(1) In section 360 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "two hundred rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

(2) In section 360 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "five hundred rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.

The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 2003, amends the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 to increase the penalties for various offenses. The Act adds new provisions for penalties related to safety of life at sea and marine pollution prevention. The Act also increases the maximum term of imprisonment for certain offenses from three years to five years. The Act provides for the appointment of a date for the coming into force of different provisions of the Act.