The Academy Of Scientific And Innovative Research Act, 2011 

 Summary:

The Academy Of Scientific And Innovative Research Act, 2011 establishes an Academy for the advancement of learning and prosecution of research in the field of science and technology in association with the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. The Academy is declared to be an institution of national importance and is authorized to grant degrees and diplomas. The Act defines various terms used in the Act, such as "Academy," "Board," "Council of Scientific and Industrial Research," "Chairperson," "Chancellor," "Director," "distinguished scientists" or "outstanding scientists," "existing Academy," "Faculty of the Academy," "notification," and "Statutes and Ordinances." The Academy is authorized to provide for instructions and conduct research in various branches of learning and to lay administrative standards and structures. The Academy is also authorized to establish centers and specialized laboratories, institute professorships, and establish schools, centers, and campuses. The Act also includes provisions for the transfer of assets, liabilities, and employees from the existing Academy to the Academy established under this Act. The Academy is open to all persons, regardless of caste, creed, race, or class, and it is required to make special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities, and persons belonging to the weaker sections of society. The Academy is governed by a Board of Governors, which is responsible for the general superintendence, direction, and control of the affairs of the Academy. The Board is composed of the Chairperson, the Director-General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, the President of the Indian National Science Academy, the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, the Chairman, Space Commission, the Chairman, University Grants Commission, the Finance Secretary in the Ministry of Finance, the heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting education in science and technology, four distinguished scientists or academicians of global eminence, three eminent industrialists or technologists, and four distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists or Directors of laboratories of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. The Chairperson is appointed by the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research on the recommendation of a selection committee. The term of office of the Chairperson and other members of the Board is four years, and they are not eligible to be re-appointed as Chairperson or nominated as a member, as the case may be. The Board is responsible for the general superintendence, direction, and control of the affairs of the Academy and has the power to review the acts of the Senate. The Senate is responsible for the control and general regulation of the maintenance of standards of instruction, education, and examinations in the Academy. The Chancellor is the Chairperson of the Board and is responsible for presiding at the Convocations of the Academy. The Director is the principal academic and executive officer of the Academy and is responsible for the administration of the Academy and imparting instruction, research, and maintenance of discipline. The Director is appointed by the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research on the recommendation of a selection committee. The term of the Director is five years. The Academy maintains a fund to which are credited all fees and other charges received by the Academy, all monies received by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests, or transfers, monies for projects undertaken by the Academy, income from investment made by the Academy or from any other source, and the funds received from the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, by way of loan or otherwise. The accounts of the Academy are audited annually by auditors appointed by the Board. The Statutes of the Academy are enacted by the Board and may provide for all or any of the matters considered necessary for the functioning of the Academy, including the conferment of degrees and diplomas, the constitution, powers, and functions of the Board of Studies, the tuition fee and other fees to be charged, the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes, the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Academy, the qualification of Faculty of the Academy, the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and conditions of service of Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy, the provision of insurance fund, provident fund and other retirement benefits for the benefit of the Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy, the constitution, powers and duties of authorities of the Academy, the establishment and maintenance of hostels, the conditions of residence of students of the Academy and the levying of fees for residence in the hostels and of other charges, the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and other members of the Board and any committee constituted by the Academy, and the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any committee, the quorum at such meetings and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business. The Ordinances of the Academy may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :-(a)the admission of the students;(b)the courses of study;(c)the conditions under which students shall be admitted and shall be eligible for degrees, diplomas and certificates and to the examinations of the Academy, and shall be eligible for the degrees, diplomas and certificates;(d)the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes;(e)the condition and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;(f)the conduct of examinations;(g)the maintenance of discipline among students of the Academy;(h)any other matter which by this Act or the Statute, is to be, or, may be, provided for by the Ordinances. The Academy is required to conduct a review of its functioning once every four years by persons of eminence appointed by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. The Academy shall meet the expenses for conducting the review and shall take appropriate action upon receipt of the report of such review. The Academy shall also conduct review of the functioning of its administrative and academic wings in such manner and at such intervals as may be provided in the Statutes. All appointments of the staff of the Academy (except appointment of the Director) shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statute by the Board for the academic staff and by the Director in any other case. Every employee of the Academy shall be appointed on contractual basis under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the Academy and a copy of which shall be furnished to the employee concerned. The Academy shall have a flexible compensation system which recognises performance. The Academy is authorized to refer any dispute arising out of a contract between the Academy and any of its employees to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Director, one member nominated by the employee, and such two arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who shall act as the presiding arbitrator. The arbitration shall be governed by the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The Chairperson or any Member of the Board or the Director may be removed from office by the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research for various reasons, including adjudication of insolvency, conviction of an offence involving moral turpitude, becoming physically or mentally incapable of acting, being of unsound mind and standing so declared by a competent court, acquiring financial or other interest likely to affect prejudicially the exercise of his functions, abusing his position, being guilty of proved misbehaviour, or having such other disqualifications as may be prescribed. The President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research may suspend such Chairperson or Member or Director against whom inquiry has been instituted for a period not exceeding six months if it is considered necessary in public interest. The President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-section (2). In case any nominated member under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 11 in the Board incurs any of the disqualifications under clauses (a) to (i) of sub-section (1), such nominated member shall not be eligible to be nominated as such and his nomination as nominated member shall be revoked by those who nominated such member. The meetings of the Board, Senate, or other committees constituted by the Academy may be held using contemporary tools of information and communication technologies (including video-conferencing) without the members necessarily having to be physically present. No act of the Board or the Academy or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof, any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof, or any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.