The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development And Regulation) Amendment Act, 2023, amends the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002. The amendments in the Act include changes to sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and the addition of new sections 13A, 13B, 13C, 16A, 19A, 34A, 34B, 34C, and new clauses (aa), (ab), (ja), (jb), (jc), (jd), (je), (jf), (jg), (jh), (ji), (jj), (jk), (jl), (jm), (ka), and (pa) in section 35.

The amendments in sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 include changes to the eligibility conditions, terms, and conditions for the grant of a composite licence or a production lease. Section 11 has been omitted.

Section 12 has been substituted to provide for the grant of a composite licence or a production lease through auction by method of competitive bidding. The section also specifies the terms and conditions for the grant of a production lease, including the duration of the lease, the area covered, the obligations of the lessee, and the exceptions to the provisions of the section.

Section 13 has also been substituted to provide for the grant of a production lease through auction by method of competitive bidding. The section specifies the eligibility conditions for the grant of a production lease, the terms and conditions for conducting competitive bidding, the manner and bidding parameters, and the conditions subject to which the production operations shall be commenced and carried out.

Section 13A prohibits any person from acquiring one or more exploration licence, composite licence, and production lease, all taken together and covering a total area of more than forty-five minutes latitude by forty-five minutes longitude. The section also provides for the determination of the total area, the transfer of a composite licence or a production lease, and the binding nature of the provisions of the Act, the rules made thereunder, and the terms and conditions of a composite licence or a production lease on the person to whom such licence or lease is transferred.

Section 13B provides for the transfer of a composite licence or a production lease by the relevant licensee or lessee to any person eligible for grant of such licence or lease, subject to certain conditions.

Section 13C provides for the ineligibility of certain applications and exploration licences for the grant of a production lease over the offshore area covered by such exploration licence.

Section 14 has been amended to include a new clause (aa) which specifies the duration of a composite licence as one year.

Section 16 has been amended to substitute the words "consumed by him from the area covered under the production" with the words "consumed from the area covered under his production".

Section 16A has been added to establish a Trust, called the Offshore Areas Mineral Trust, to use the funds accrued to it for research, administration, studies, relief upon the occurrence of any disaster in the offshore area, the purposes of exploration in the offshore area, for the interest and benefit of persons affected by exploration or production operations undertaken, and for such other purposes as may be prescribed. The composition and functions of the Offshore Areas Mineral Trust, the administration of the funds accrued to the Trust, and the payment of amounts to the Trust have also been specified.

Section 17 has been amended to substitute the words "consumed by him from the area" with the words "consumed from the area".

Section 18 has been added to provide for the payment of amounts to the International Seabed Authority in respect of the offshore area granted under a production lease falling in such part of the continental shelf extending beyond two hundred nautical miles, from the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured, towards fulfilment of the obligation of the Government of India under Article 82 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982.

Section 19A has been added to provide for the conservation and systematic development of minerals in the offshore areas and for the protection of the environment by preventing or controlling any pollution which may be caused by exploration or production operations.

Section 23 has been amended to provide for higher penalties for certain offences under the Act.

Section 28 has been amended to increase the amount of penalty for certain offences under the Act.

Section 34A has been added to provide for the revision of any order made by the administering authority or any officer under the Act or the rules made thereunder.

Section 34B has been added to provide for the giving of directions to the administering authority by the Central Government.

Section 34C has been added to provide for the power of the Central Government to require the furnishing of information by the administering authority, a permittee or a licensee or a lessee, or any person whom it has reason to believe to be connected with any activity in respect of minerals in the offshore area.

Section 35 has been amended to include new clauses (aa), (ab), (ja), (jb), (jc), (jd), (je), (jf), (jg), (jh), (ji), (jj), (jk), (jl), (jm), (ka), and (pa) which specify the conditions and manner for regulating the grant of mineral concessions, the parameters for adequately establishing existence of mineral resources, the terms and conditions for grant of a composite licence or a production lease to a Government company or corporation, the eligibility conditions to be fulfilled, the terms and conditions for conducting competitive bidding, the manner and bidding parameters for grant of a composite licence or a production lease, the conditions subject to which extension is to be granted to the licensee for completion of the exploration operations, terms, milestone and relinquishment requirements for commencing and carrying out exploration operation, the form of application to be made to the administering authority for grant of production lease and the procedure therefor, the eligibility conditions to be fulfilled, the terms and conditions for conducting competitive bidding, the manner and bidding parameters for grant of a production lease, the terms and conditions subject to which the production operations shall be commenced and carried out, the group of associated minerals to be specified, the manner and the conditions for transfer of a composite licence or a production lease, such other purposes for which the funds accrued to the Offshore Area Mineral Trust shall be used, the composition and functions of the Offshore Area Mineral Trust, the manner of administration of funds accrued to the Offshore Area Mineral Trust, the manner of payment of amounts to the OffshoreArea Mineral Trust, the steps necessary to be taken for conservation and systematic development of minerals in the offshore areas and for the protection of environment by preventing or controlling any pollution which may be caused by exploration or production operations, and the measures to be taken for preventing illegal mining, transportation, and storage of minerals and for the purposes connected therewith.