The Banking Service Commission Act, 1975, establishes a Commission for the selection of personnel for appointment to services and posts in certain banking institutions in India. The Commission is a body corporate with the power to acquire, hold, and dispose of property, and to contract. The Central Office of the Commission is located in New Delhi, with regional offices in specified States or groups of States.

The Chairman and members of the Commission are appointed by the Central Government and are men of ability, integrity, and standing with special knowledge of financial, economic, or business administration, or in the administration of government or in any other matter which would render them suitable for appointment. At least half of the members must have had experience for not less than ten years in a banking company, public sector bank, Reserve Bank, an institution wholly or substantially owned by the Reserve Bank or a public financial institution.

A person who holds office as Chairman or member is ineligible for re-appointment in the Commission or for employment under the Government of India or of any State or in the Reserve Bank or in any institution wholly or substantially owned by the Reserve Bank or a public sector Bank or any banking company or in a public financial institution.

The Central Government may remove the Chairman or any member from office on certain grounds, including being adjudged an insolvent, being convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, being unfit to continue in office due to infirmity of mind or body, engaging in paid employment outside the duties of his office, acquiring financial or other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functioning, or abusing his position to render his continuance in office undesirable.

The Commission may constitute one or more committees consisting of its members or other persons and delegate to any committee so constituted such of the functions and powers of the Commission as may be specified.

The Commission may appoint a Secretary and other employees as it may think necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.

All orders and instruments issued by the Commission shall be authenticated by the Secretary or any other officer of the Commission authorized by the Chairman in this behalf.

The Commission is responsible for conducting examinations for appointments in each public sector bank to posts in the clerical and allied cadres and the junior officers' cadre, and such other posts of, or posts in the cadres of, officers as the Central Government may specify.

It is the duty of every public sector bank to communicate to the Commission all the vacancies in the clerical and allied cadres, or in such other post or cadre as may be specified by the Central Government, and twenty-five per cent. of the estimated total number of vacancies in the junior officers' cadre, which are likely to occur during the unexpired portion of the calendar year in which this Act comes into force and thereafter.

The Commission shall call for applications from such category of persons and in such manner as may be specified by it in the regulations and conduct examinations in such State or group of States as may be necessary.

If any question arises as to whether any post or class of posts falls in any clerical and allied cadre or junior officers' cadre, such question shall be referred to the Central Government and that Government shall decide the same.

If the Commission is unable to make recommendation for appointment to all the vacancies communicated to it by a public sector bank, the vacancies may be carried forward to the subsequent calendar year, to be filled in the said manner.

The Commission shall discharge such functions of an advisory nature as the Central Government may, by notification, entrust to it.

The Central Government may, by order, direct that in relation to every public sector bank, reservations in favour of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other categories of persons shall be made in such manner and to such extent as it may specify.

The Commission shall have its own Fund and all the receipts of the Commission shall be credited to the Fund and all payments by the Commission shall be made therefrom.

The Central Government may, by general or special order and subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, direct every public sector bank to pay to the Commission such fee as it may determine and the aggregate amount of the fee so determined shall not exceed the expenses incurred by the Commission.

The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure, and submit the same to the Central Government for approval.

The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.

The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by a person who is qualified to act as an auditor of a company under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956, and the auditor shall receive such remuneration as the Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, fix.

The Commission shall prepare once every calendar year, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a full account of its activities during the previous year, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.

The Chairman and members and every officer or other employee of the Commission, and every member of any committee constituted under sub-section (1) of section 7, shall maintain strictest secrecy regarding the affairs of the Commission and shall not divulge, directly or indirectly, any information of a confidential nature to a member of the public unless compelled to do so by any judicial or other authority or unless instructed to do so by a superior officer in the discharge of his duties.

The Chairman and members of the Commission and every officer or other employee of the Commission, and every member of any committee constituted under sub-section (1) of section 7 shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

All acts done by the Chairman and members and the members of any committee constituted under sub-section (I) of section 7, acting in good faith, shall, notwithstanding any defect in their appointment or procedure, be valid.

No act or proceeding of the Commission or of any committee thereof shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy therein or defect in the constitution of the Commission or the committee, as the case may be.

No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Commission, the Central Government or the Chairman or member or Secretary or officer or other employee of the Commission for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder.

Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961, or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to income-tax, surtax or any other tax on income, profits or gains, the Commission shall not be liable to pay any tax or surtax in respect of-
(a) Any income, profits or gains accruing or arising of the Fund of the Commission or any amount received in that Fund; and
(b) Any income, profits or gains, derived, or any amount received, by the Commission.

The Commission may by general or special order, delegate to the Chairman, any, member or officer of the Commission, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified, therein, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem fit.

In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in section 2, in sub-clause (i) of clause (a); after the words and figures "of the Food Corporations Act, 1964, or", the words and figures "the Banking Service Commission established under section 3 of the Banking Service Commission Act, 1975, or" shall be inserted.

The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or other information with respect to its properties or activities as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.

The Commission may, for the purpose of enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act, call upon any public sector bank to give such statements or furnish such particulars as the Commission may deem fit and every such bank shall comply with the same.

The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

The Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification, make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.

The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, by notification, specify that all or such of the provisions of this Act as may be specified in the notification (hereinafter referred to as the "specified provisions") shall also apply to, or in relation to, a banking company and thereupon the specified provisions shall apply to such banking company in the same manner as they apply to a public sector bank and references in the specified provisions to a public sector bank shall be construed as references to the banking company: Provided that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the appointment to any service or post in a banking company unless a request in that behalf has been received by the Central Government from that banking company.