






The High Court Judges (Salaries And Conditions Of Service) Act, 1954 is a law that governs the salaries and conditions of service for judges in India's High Courts. The Act defines various terms used throughout the document, such as "acting Chief Justice," "acting Judge," "additional Judge," "former Indian High Court," "High Court," and "Judge." The Act specifies the kinds of leave that a judge is entitled to, including leave on full allowances, leave on half allowances, and leave partly on full allowances and partly on half allowances. The Act also outlines the leave account that must be kept for each judge, which shows the amount of leave due to the judge in terms of leave on half allowances. A judge is entitled to claim the cash equivalent of leave salary on his retirement in respect of the period of earned leave at his credit, to the extent of the maximum period prescribed for encashment of such leave under the All India Service (Leave) Rules, 1955. The Act specifies the maximum amount of leave that may be granted to a judge during the whole period of his service as such, as well as the maximum period of leave that may be granted at one time. The Act also allows for the commutation of leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances and the grant of leave not due to a judge. The Act also includes provisions for special disability leave and extraordinary leave. The Act specifies the monthly rate of leave allowances payable to a judge while on leave on full allowances or half allowances. The Act also provides for allowances for joining time and the combining of leave with vacation. The Act specifies the consequences of overstaying leave or vacation and the authority competent to grant leave, etc. The Act also specifies the salaries and pensions payable to judges. The Act also includes provisions for the addition of service for pension, extraordinary pensions, family pensions and gratuities, additional quantum of pension or family pension, conversion of sterling pension into rupees, commutation of pensions, provided fund, Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme, authority competent to grant pension, traveling allowances to a judge, facility of rent-free houses, conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance, exemption from liability to pay income-tax on certain perquisites received by a judge, facilities for medical treatment and other conditions of service, vacation of High Courts, special provisions in respect of continuing Judges, special provisions in respect of Judges transferred from the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir, medical facilities for retired Judges, power to make rules, and savings.