Summary:

The Life Insurance Corporation of India Information Technology Specialist Group (Selection, terms and conditions of service and payment of Allowance) Rules, 2007 outlines the guidelines for the selection, terms and conditions of service, and payment of allowance for the Information Technology Specialist Group within the Life Insurance Corporation of India. The rules apply to whole-time salaried employees of the Corporation in India only.

The Information Technology Specialist Group consists of Developers, Business System Analysts, and Project Leaders, and employees are posted at designated centers where Software Development Project teams are located. Employees in the cadre of Higher Grade Assistant and above are eligible for the following posts: Higher Grade Assistant (HGA), Assistant Administrative Officer (AAO), Administrative Officer (AO) for the post of Developer; Administrative Officer and Assistant Divisional Manager for the post of Business System Analyst; and Assistant Divisional Manager and above for the post of Project Leader.

Selection for the officials working in the Central office Software Development center, centralized information Technology projects is based on their work record and interview, while the selection for other officials is based on their work record, written test, and interview. Selected officials are required to execute an agreement with the Corporation, undertaking to serve the Corporation for a minimum period of five years. If they leave before the expiry of the bond period, they are liable to pay an amount of liquidated damages of Rupees five lakhs.

The allowance for the selected personnel on joining the Information Technology Specialist Group is a fixed amount, which is not counted as basic pay for any purpose. The allowance is paid in addition to the salary and other benefits applicable to the cadre. The allowance shall cease to be payable to an employee/officer who has given a notice of resignation or voluntary retirement.

The continuation of the allowance in the post is based on the half-yearly review of the performance and the recommendation of the Committee. In case of employees not found eligible for continuing in the Information Technology Specialist Group, the payment of allowance shall cease from the date, the employee is posted out of the Information Technology Specialist Group. The Chairman may relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or categories of persons with the approval of the Central Government.