The Companies (Listing of equity shares in permissible jurisdictions) Rules, 2024, are a set of rules made under the authority of the Companies Act, 2013. These rules apply to unlisted public companies and listed public companies that issue securities for the purpose of listing on permitted stock exchanges in permissible jurisdictions. The rules define various terms such as "Authority," "fees," "permissible jurisdiction," "Schedule," and "Scheme."

Under these rules, an unlisted public company, which does not fall under a specific category and which has no partly paid-up shares, may issue equity shares for the purposes of listing on a stock exchange in a permissible jurisdiction. The company or its existing shareholders must comply with the requirements of the Scheme. The listing of equity shares on permitted stock exchanges in permissible jurisdiction by an unlisted public company which also intends to get its equity shares listed with any recognized stock exchange in India must comply with conditions specified by the Securities and Exchange Board of India.

The unlisted public company shall file the prospectus in e-Form LEAP-1 within a period of seven days after the same has been finalized and filed in the permitted exchange. The company shall comply with Indian Accounting Standards in preparation of their financial statements, in addition to any other accounting standard, which they may be required to comply for the preparation of the financial statements filed before the securities regulator concerned, or with the stock exchange concerned.

A company shall not be eligible for issuing its equity shares for listing in accordance with these rules, in case it has been registered under section 8 or declared as Nidhi under section 406 of the Act, is a company limited by guarantee and also having share capital, has any outstanding deposits accepted from the public as per Chapter V of the Act and rules made thereunder, has a negative net worth, has defaulted in payment of dues to any bank or public financial institution or non-convertible debenture holder or any other secured creditor, has made any application for winding-up under the Act or for resolution or winding-up under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, and has defaulted in filing of an annual return under section 92 or financial statement under section 137 of the Act within the specified period.

The First Schedule to the rules lists out the permissible jurisdictions as India International Exchange, NSE Centre in India and the permitted stock exchange as International Financial Services International Exchange.

The Second Schedule to the rules specifies the FORM NO. LEAP-1(Listing of equity shares in permissible jurisdictions-1) for submission of Prospectus with the Registrar.