(i) the Indian Service of Engineers (Irrigation, Power, Buildings and Roads),


(ii) the Indian Forest Service, and


(iii) the Indian Medical and Health Service.


Under section 3 of the Act, the Central Government would be empowered to make rules for the regulation of recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed, to these services.


The present Bill seeks to fill a constitutional lacuna without proceeding to incorporate any detailed provisions. This course is necessitated, among other things, by the shortness of time available to Parliament this year. After the necessary transitional period is passed through, it will be possible to incorporate the major provisions in an Act of Parliament. The present Bill provides that recruitment and conditions of service of officers of the two All India services shall be regulated by rules to be made by the Central Government in consultation with the Governments of the participating States. The Bill, however, provides that all the rules so made shall be laid before Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament may make". - Gazette of India, 1951, Part II - Section 2, page 748.


The All India Services Act, 1951, empowers the Central Government, in consultation with the States concerned, to make rules for the regulation of recruitment, etc., to an All India Service. The object of this Bill is to make it clear that the expression "State concerned" in that Act includes the State of Jammu and Kashmir. - Gazette of India, 9-5-1958, Pt. II - Section 2, Ext., p. 710.


In service matters, occasions arise when it becomes an inescapable necessity to amend or make rules with retrospective effect. An instance in point is the implementation of the decisions of the Government on the recommendations of the Third Central Pay Commission. Section 3 of the All India Services Act, 1951, which empowers the Central Government to make rules for the regulation of recruitment and the conditions of service of persons appointed to an All India Service does not in terms permit the making of the rules with retrospective effect. In view of the opinion tendered by the Attorney-General in 1969 in connection with a point raised by the Public Accounts Committee regarding an exemption notification issued with retrospective effect under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and the subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court, particularly the decision in Hukum Chand v. Union of India [(1973) II S.C.W.R. 129], unless the section is suitably amended, it would not be permissible to make any rules thereunder with retrospective effect. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the section so as to empower the Central Government to make rules with retrospective effect subject to the safeguard that no rules shall be made retrospectively so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person who may be governed by such rules. This safeguard is in accordance with the directions of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation. It is also proposed to validate the rules which have been made in the past with retrospective effect.


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. - Gazette of India, 21-12-1974, Pt. II, Section 2, Ext., p. 1232.

[29th October, 1951]


The All India Services Act, 1951, regulates the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the All-India Services common to the Union and the States. The Act empowers the Central Government to make rules for the regulation of recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed, to these services. The Act originally applied to the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service, but it has been amended to include other All-India Services such as the Indian Service of Engineers (Irrigation, Power, Buildings and Roads), the Indian Forest Service, and the Indian Medical and Health Service. The Act also empowers the Central Government to make rules with retrospective effect, subject to certain safeguards.