Summary:

The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) grants the Central Government the power to specify the types of motor vehicles for certain purposes under sub-section (4) of section 41. In exercise of these powers, the Central Government has specified the types of motor vehicles mentioned in column 2 of the table below as the type in respect of motor vehicles specified in the corresponding entry in column 1. This specification supersedes the Notification No. S.O. 436(E), dated the 12th June, 1989, except for things done or omitted to be done before such supersession.

The table specifies two categories of motor vehicles: transport vehicles and non-transport vehicles. Transport vehicles include motor cycles with side cars for carrying goods, motor cycles with trailers to carry goods, motor cabs and luxury cabs, goods carrier trucks/tankers/mail carriers, trailers, motor cars, maxi cabs, fork lifts, stage carriers, contract carriages and tourist vehicles, three-wheeled vehicles for transport of passengers/goods, tractors, mobile clinic/X-ray vans/Library vans, two trucks breakdown van recovery vehicles, cash vans, articulated vehicles, camper vans/trailers, animal ambulances, hearses, mobile workshops, fire tenders, snorkeled ladders, auxiliary trailers and fire fighting vehicles, and omnibuses.

Non-transport vehicles include motor cycles with or without cars for personal use, motor cycles with trailers to carry personal effects, mopeds and motorised cycles (engine capacity exceeding 35cc), invalid carriages, three-wheeled vehicles for personal use, vehicles/trailers fitted with equipment like rig, generator, compressor, private service vehicles, educational institution buses, crane mounted vehicles, tower wagons and tree trimming vehicles, omnibus for private use, mobile canteens, and camper van/trailer for private use.

The specification also includes definitions for certain terms used in the table, such as "ambulance," "animal ambulance," "camper van," "camping trailer," and "omnibus." An "ambulance" is a vehicle specially designed, constructed or modified and equipped and intended to be used for emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated. An "animal ambulance" is intended to be used for the emergency transportation of sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated animals. A "camper van" is a motor vehicle designed or constructed to provide living quarters for recreational camping or travel use with direct walk through access to the living quarters from the driver's seat. A "camping trailer" is a trailer, not used for transport of goods, constructed with partial side walls which folds of towing and unfolds to provide temporary living accommodation for recreational camping and tourist purposes. An "omnibus" is a motor vehicle designed to carry more than nine passengers excluding the driver for hire or reward.