Summary:
The Treaty between the Republic of India and the People's Republic of Bangladesh Relating to Extradition is an agreement between the two countries to facilitate the reciprocal extradition of offenders who have committed or are wanted for committing an extraditable offence. An extraditable offence is defined as an act punishable by a term of imprisonment for a period of at least one year under the laws of both Contracting States. The Treaty covers offences related to taxation or revenue, and composite offences committed in part in the Requested State.

The Central Authority for the Republic of India is the Ministry of External Affairs and for the People's Republic of Bangladesh is the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Treaty does not preclude the extradition of nationals, but extradition may be refused if the offence is of a political character. The Political Offence Exception lists specific offences that are not considered political, including murder, manslaughter, assault, causing an explosion, possession of a firearm, and terrorism-related offences.

The Treaty also includes provisions for prosecution in the Requested State if the person cannot be extradited, grounds for refusal of extradition, temporary surrender, and extradition procedures. The Requested State may provisionally arrest the person sought in case of urgency, and the person shall be set at liberty upon the expiration of 60 days from the date of his arrest if request for his extradition is not received. The Rule of Specialty prohibits the person from being dealt with for any offence committed before he was returned to the Requesting State, except for the offence in respect of which he was returned.

The authorities of the Requested State shall admit as evidence any warrant, certificate of conviction, or judicial document if it is authenticated. If extradition is granted, the person sought shall be sent by the authorities of the Requested State to a convenient point of departure from the territory of that State. The Treaty shall apply to requests made after its entry into force, and either Contracting State may terminate the Treaty by giving notice to the other through the diplomatic channel. The Treaty is in Hindi, English and Bangla, all languages being equally authentic, and in case of any divergence of interpretation, the English text shall prevail.