 Summary:

The Puwad Seeds Grading and Marking Rules, 2009 is a set of regulations that apply to Puwad seeds, which are obtained from the Puwad pods or beans of the Plant Cassia tora of the family Leguminosae. These rules define the quality of Puwad seeds and establish grade designations to indicate the quality of the seeds. The grade designations are set out in the Schedule II of the rules. The rules also specify the grade designation mark, which is the "Agmark Insignia" along with the certificate of authorisation number, the word "Agmark", name of commodity, and grade designation.

Puwad seeds must be packed in a clean, sound, and suitable packing material that does not impart any toxic substance or undesirable odour or flavour to the product. The packing material should also not be infested with insects or fungus. The seeds must be packed in pack sizes as per the instructions issued by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser from time to time.

The grade designation mark must be securely affixed to or printed on each package in a manner specified by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser. Additionally, certain particulars must be clearly and indelibly marked on each package, including the name and address of the packer, place of packing or processing, date of packing, variety or trade name (optional), crop year (optional), grade, net weight, maximum retail price (inclusive of all taxes), and best before date.

Every authorized packer must follow all instructions specified by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser and have access to a laboratory for testing the quality of Puwad Seeds. The premises must be maintained in perfect hygienic and sanitary conditions with proper ventilation and well-lighted arrangements. The personnel engaged in these operations must be in sound health and free from any infectious, contagious, or communicable diseases. The premises must also have adequate storage facilities with pucca floor and free from rodent and insect infestation. The authorized packer and the approved chemist must follow all instructions regarding testing, grading, packing, marking, sealing, and maintenance of records, which may be issued by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser or any other officer authorized by him in this behalf.