Summary:
The Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 1956, is a law in India that aims to protect young people from harmful publications. The Act applies to the whole of India, except for the state of Jammu and Kashmir, and came into force on a date appointed by the Central Government.

The Act defines a "harmful publication" as any book, magazine, pamphlet, leaflet, newspaper, or other like publication that portrays the commission of offences, acts of violence or cruelty, or incidents of a repulsive or horrible nature in a way that would corrupt a young person. A "young person" is defined as a person under the age of twenty years.

The Act makes it an offence to sell, let to hire, distribute, publicly exhibit, or in any manner put into circulation any harmful publication. It is also an offence to print, make, or produce, or have in possession any harmful publication for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition, or circulation. Advertising or making known by any means that a harmful publication can be procured from or through any person is also an offence.

A person convicted under this Act can be punished with imprisonment up to six months, or with fine, or with both. On a conviction, the court may order the destruction of all copies of the harmful publication in respect of which the conviction was had.

The State Government may declare any publication as a harmful publication, and order the forfeiture of all copies of such publication. Any person aggrieved by an order of forfeiture may appeal to the High Court to set aside such order.

Any police officer or any other officer empowered by the State Government may seize any harmful publication. A magistrate of the first class may authorize any police officer to enter and search any place where any stock of harmful publications may be or may be reasonably suspected to be and seize any publication found in such place if in his opinion it is a harmful publication.

Any publication seized under this Act shall be produced before a magistrate of the first class, and if in the opinion of the magistrate or court, such publication is a harmful publication, the magistrate or court may cause it to be destroyed.

An offence punishable under this Act is cognizable, meaning that a police officer can arrest a person without a warrant if they have reason to believe that the person has committed an offence under this Act.