Summary:

The Extradition Treaty between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Tunisia was signed at Tunis, Tunisia on April 4, 2000, and the instruments of ratification were exchanged on July 28, 2004. The treaty provides for the extradition of persons accused or convicted of an extradition offence committed within the territory of one state and found within the territory of the other state. The treaty applies to offences punishable by imprisonment for a period of at least one year in both contracting states. The treaty also provides for the extradition of a person for an offence committed in a third state by a national of the requesting state. The treaty excludes the extradition of a person if that person is a national of the requested state at the time of the commission of the offence. The treaty also provides for the extradition of a person for an offence considered by the requested state as a political offence, except for certain offences specified in the treaty. The treaty also provides for the extradition of a person for an offence committed in the requested state, provided it is an offence under the law of that state punishable with imprisonment for a term of at least one year. The treaty also provides for the extradition of a person for an attempt or a conspiracy to commit, aiding or abetting, counselling or procuring the commission of, or being an accessory before or after the fact, to any offence described in the treaty. The treaty also provides for the non-extradition of nationals of the contracting states. The treaty also provides for the rule of speciality, which stipulates that a person extradited under this treaty shall not be proceeded against, sentenced, detained, or subjected to any other restriction of personal liberty in the territory of the requesting state for any offence committed before surrender other than the offence for which extradition was granted. The treaty also provides for the re-extradition of a person to a third state without the consent of the contracting state that extradited him, under certain conditions. The treaty also provides for concurrent requests for the extradition of the same person and the determination of to which of those states the person is to be extradited. The treaty also provides for the notification of the decision of the requested state with regard to the request for extradition and the reasons for any complete or partial rejection. The treaty also provides for the channel of communication and the required documents to be accompanied with a request for extradition. The treaty also provides for the form of evidence and the authenticity of documents. The treaty also provides for additional information to be submitted if the requested state considers that the evidence or information provided in a request of extradition is not sufficient. The treaty also provides for the waiver of extradition proceedings if the person claimed consents to surrender to the requesting state. The treaty also provides for mutual legal assistance in extradition. The treaty also provides for the surrender of the person, the postponement of surrender, and the surrender of property. The treaty also provides for provisional arrest, transit, language, expenses, obligations under international conventions and treaties, applicable laws, ratification, entry into force and termination.