Licence No. ...............Date of issue ...............Date of expiry ...............

1. Name and address of the Licencee.

2. Location of the retting field.
Survey No. Village (Taluk and District).

3. Capacity of the retting field (in 000's husks).

4. Number of husks intended to be retted in the year.

5. Average monthly earnings of the Licencee from the retting business.


6. Number and date of previous licence issued, if any.

7. Quantity and quality of husks in the possession of the Licencee.


This Licence is granted for the purpose of retting husks in the locality specified above and in accordance with the conditions subject to which it is granted.


Conditions

1. The Licencee shall not undertake or cause to undertake or engage in retting operations in any locality other than the locality specified in the licence.


2. The Licencee shall retted husks only in the retting field specified in the licence.


3. The Licencee shall not retted husks in excess of the number of husks specified in the licence.


4. The Licencee shall not retted husks other than the husks specified in the licence.


5. The Licencee shall not sell, offer for sale or dispose of in any manner retted husks other than in accordance with the provisions of this Order.


6. The Licencee shall not sell, offer for sale or dispose of in any manner raw husks in excess of such quantities as may be fixed by the State Government by general or special order.


7. The Licencee shall maintain such records of his business in such manner and submit to the Licensing Officer such returns relating to his business as the Licensing Officer may, by general or special order, direct.


8. The Licencee shall give notice of retting operations to the Inspector.


9. The Licencee shall obey all directions issued by the Licensing Officer under this Order.


10. The Licencee shall pay the fees and charges as specified in the Schedule of Fees and Charges appended to this Order.


In witness whereof this licence is issued under the hand of the Licensing Officer and sealed with the seal of his office.


Date .............
Licensing Officer


Station ...............


Seal of the office


The Coconut Husks Control Order, 1973[See Clause 7(2)]Form of application for the grant of a licence for the manufacture of fibre

1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Location of the factory.
Survey No. Village (Taluk and District).

3. Whether the applicant is the owner or occupier of thefactory or is he a lessee ?

4. If a lessee, the quantum of lease rent.

5. Capacity of the factory.

6. Number of husks intended to be processed into fibre in the year.


7. Average monthly earnings of the applicant from the manufacture of fibre.


8. Number of husks processed by the applicant during the last three years (financial year-wise).


9. Chart for disposal of fibre (unit one thousand husks) (on production Purchases if any Consumption) Sale Balance.

10. Number and date of previous licence issued, if any.

11. Number of workers employed in the factory.


DeclarationI do hereby declare that to the best of my knowledge and belief the above information is correct and complete and that I am aware of the conditions subject to which a licence is granted and that I agree to abide by them. I declare that [I havent] [Strike out whichever is inapplicable.] previously applied for the licence was refused/granted to me on .................Station ...............Signature of applicantDate .............Form VThe Coconut Husks Control Order, 1973[See Clause 7(3)]Form of Licence


Licence No. ...............Date of issue ...............Date of expiry ...............

1. Name and address of the Licencee.

2. Location of the factory.
Survey No. Village (Taluk and District).

3. Capacity of the factory.

4. Number of husks intended to be processed into fibre in the year.

5. Average monthly earnings of the Licencee from the manufacture of fibre.


6. Number and date of previous licence issued, if any.

7. Number of workers employed in the factory.


This Licence is granted for the purpose of manufacture of fibre in the factory specified above and in accordance with the conditions subject to which it is granted.


Conditions

1. The Licencee shall not undertake or cause to undertake or engage in the manufacture of fibre in any factory other than the factory specified in the licence.


2. The Licencee shall not manufacture fibre from raw or retted husks except under the authority and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this licence.


3. The Licencee shall not process husks in excess of the number of husks specified in the licence.


4. The Licencee shall not process husks other than the husks specified in the licence.


5. The Licencee shall not sell, offer for sale or dispose of in any manner fibre other than in accordance with the provisions of this Order.


6. The Licencee shall maintain such records of his business in such manner and submit to the Licensing Officer such returns relating to his business as the Licensing Officer may, by general or special order, direct.


7. The Licencee shall obey all directions issued by the Licensing Officer under this Order.


8. The Licencee shall pay the fees and charges as specified in the Schedule of Fees and Charges appended to this Order.


In witness whereof this licence is issued under the hand of the Licensing Officer and sealed with the seal of his office.


Date .............
Licensing Officer


Station ...............


Seal of the office


The Coconut Husks Control Order, 1973[See Clause 9(2)]Form of application for the grant of a permission to sell or dispose of husks

1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Location of the premises from which husks are to be sold or disposed of.
Survey No. Village (Taluk and District).

3. Quantity of husks intended to be sold or disposed of.


4. Purpose for which the husks are intended to be sold or disposed of.


5. Number and date of previous permission issued, if any.


DeclarationI do hereby declare that to the best of my knowledge and belief the above information is correct and complete and that I am aware of the conditions subject to which a permission is granted and that I agree to abide by them. I declare that [I havent] [Strike out whichever is inapplicable.] previously applied for the permission was refused/granted to me on .................Station ...............Signature of applicantDate .............Form VIIThe Coconut Husks Control Order, 1973[See Clause 13(2)]Form of application for the grant of a movement permit

1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Location of the premises from which husks are to be moved.
Survey No. Village (Taluk and District).

3. Quantity of husks to be moved.


4. Destination of the husks.


5. Purpose for which the husks are intended to be moved.


6. Number and date of previous movement permit issued, if any.


DeclarationI do hereby declare that to the best of my knowledge and belief the above information is correct and complete and that I am aware of the conditions subject to which a movement permit is granted and that I agree to abide by them. I declare that [I havent] [Strike out whichever is inapplicable.] previously applied for the movement permit was refused/granted to me on .................Station ...............Signature of applicantDate .............

The Coconut Husks Control Order, 1973 is a legal document that regulates the production, manufacture, sale, purchase, and distribution of coconut husks and fibre in the State of Kerala, India. The Order establishes an Advisory Board to advise on all matters concerning the production, manufacture, sale, purchase, and distribution of coconut husks and fibre. The Advisory Board consists of a Chairman and up to thirty other members appointed by the State Government from various groups, including dealers in coconut husks, holders of licences for retting, persons employed in the production of retted husks and the manufacture of fibre, coir co-operative societies, owners of factories producing fibre, manufacturers of yarn and other coir products, exporters of yarn and other coir products, and other persons or classes of persons who in the opinion of the State Government ought to be represented in the Advisory Board.

The Order also appoints a Licensing Officer and Inspectors to enforce the provisions of the Order. The Licensing Officer is responsible for determining localities in the State where retting may be undertaken or caused to be undertaken, and for issuing licences for retting in those localities. An application for a licence must be made in Form I and must be accompanied by a court-fee stamp of Rs. 2. The Licensing Officer may grant or reject the application, and must consider various factors when granting a licence, including the extent of the locality, the location of the retting place, the quality and quantity of husks proposed to be retted, the financial status of the applicant, the quality of green husks available, and the past performance of the applicant in retting operations.

A licence for the manufacture of fibre may also be obtained from the Licensing Officer, subject to certain conditions. An application for a licence must be made in Form IV and must be accompanied by a court-fee stamp of Rs. 2. The Licensing Officer must consider the demand for fibre, the facilities provided by the applicant for the manufacture of fibre, the financial capacity of the applicant, and other relevant factors when granting a licence.

The Order also regulates the sale, offer for sale, or disposal of husks. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or dispose of husks in excess of certain quantities except under the authority and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a permission granted by the Licensing Officer. An application for a permission must be made in Form VI and must be accompanied by a court-fee stamp of Rs. 2. The Licensing Officer may grant or reject the application, and must consider various factors when granting a permission, including the quantity of husks available in the locality, the transportation and retting facilities, the wages payable to persons employed in the locality, the price of yarn in the locality, and the export prices of coir products manufactured from yarn in the locality.

The Order also provides for the cancellation of licences or permissions if the holder has furnished incorrect information or has contravened any provisions of the Order or the terms and conditions of a licence or permission. The Order also empowers the Licensing Officer to fix the price at which raw husk or any type of raw husk may be sold for retting purposes, and the ex-retting price at which any retted husk or type of retted husk may be sold in the locality. No person, dealer, or holder of a licence shall purchase or sell or offer to sell husks at a price higher than the price fixed under the Order.

The Order also empowers the Licensing Officer to issue directions to any person who possesses husks in a locality to sell or deliver such quantity of husks at the price fixed under the Order to such persons and within such periods as he may specify. The Licensing Officer must have regard to various factors when issuing directions, including the quantity of husks available in the locality, the quantity of husks required to fulfil contracts for fibre or yarn entered into by the holder of a licence, and the information contained in returns furnished by the holder of a licence.

The Order also empowers the Licensing Officer to select any area in any locality as a project area for the establishment of institutions for the intensive development of retting of husks or for the manufacture of fibre. The Licensing Officer may authorize such number of Inspectors as he thinks fit to be in charge of the project area.

The Order also requires the holder of a licence or permission to maintain records of his business and to submit to the Licensing Officer such returns relating to his business as he may, by general or special order, direct.

The Order also requires every owner or occupier of land or any agent of such owner or occupier in charge of or management of that land, if retting operations are carried on in that land, to give notice of such retting operations to the Inspector.

The Order also provides for appeals to the State Government against any order of the Licensing Officer.

The Order also empowers the Licensing Officer or any officer not below the rank of an Inspector authorized by him in this behalf to enter and search premises, stop and search any vehicle, vessel or receptacle, and seize any article to which this Order applies in respect of which he has reason to believe that a contravention of this Order has been, is being or is about to be committed.

The Order also provides for penalties for contravention of the provisions of the Order or of the terms and conditions of a licence, permission or permit granted under the Order, or for failure to carry out any direction or requisition made thereunder.

The Order also empowers the Central Government to issue any direction to the State Government in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the Order, and such direction shall prevail over any order issued by the State Government or the Licensing Officer under the Order.

The Order repeals the Coir Retting (Licencing) Order, 1968, except as respects things done or omitted to be done under that Order before the commencement of this Order.

The Order also contains various forms, including Form I (application for the grant of a licence for retting), Form II (licence for retting), Form IV (application for the grant of a licence for the manufacture of fibre), Form V (licence for the manufacture of fibre), Form VI (application for the grant of a permission to sell or dispose of husks), Form VII (application for the grant of a movement permit), and Form VIII (movement permit).