Summary:

The International Copyright Order, 1999 is an Order made in exercise of the powers conferred by section 40 of the Copyright Act, 1957. It came into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette. This Order applies the provisions of the Copyright Act, 1957, except those in Chapter VIII and those other provisions which apply exclusively to Indian works, to works first made or published in certain countries mentioned in the Schedule. These countries include Berne Convention Countries, Phonograms Convention Countries, Universal Copyright Convention Countries, and World Trade Organisation Countries.

The Order defines various terms used in it, such as Berne Convention Country, Phonogram, Phonograms Convention Country, Schedule, Universal Copyright Convention Country, and World Trade Organisation Country. It also specifies the manner in which the provisions of the Copyright Act, 1957 apply to works first made or published in these countries.

Further, the Order provides that the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Copyright Act, 1957 shall apply to a Broadcasting Organisation and a Performer in a World Trade Organisation Country mentioned in Part VI of the Schedule. However, the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 32 of the Act shall not apply to a work first made or published in any Berne Convention Country mentioned in Part I or Part II of the Schedule or in any World Trade Organisation Country mentioned in Part VI of the Schedule. Instead, such provisions shall apply to a work first made or published in any Universal Copyright Convention Country mentioned in Part III or Part IV of the Schedule only in respect of the translation of such work into any language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India.

Lastly, the Order provides that the provisions of sections 32, excluding its sub-section (1), 32-A and 32-B shall apply to a work first made or published in a Berne Convention Country mentioned in Part I of the Schedule or in a Universal Copyright Convention Country mentioned in Part III of the Schedule or in a World Trade Organisation Country mentioned in Part VI of the Schedule.