Summary:

The High Court Judges Rules, 1956, outline the conditions of service for High Court judges in India. These rules apply to judges for whom no express provision has been made in the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954. The rules determine the conditions of service by referring to the rules applicable to a member of the Indian Administrative Service holding the rank of Secretary to the Government of the State in which the principal seat of the High Court is situated. However, in the case of a Judge of the High Court of Delhi and the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, the conditions of service are determined by the rules applicable to a member of the Indian Administrative Service on deputation to the Government of India and holding the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India stationed at New Delhi.

The rules also provide for facilities for medical treatment and accommodation in hospitals for judges. In the case of judges of High Courts other than the Delhi High Court and the Punjab and Haryana High Court, the rules and provisions as applicable to a Cabinet Minister of the State Government in which the principal seat of the High Court is situated apply. In the case of judges, other than the Chief Justices, of the Delhi High Court and the Punjab and Haryana High Court, the rules and provisions as applicable to a Union Deputy Minister shall apply. In the case of the Chief Justices of Delhi High Court and the Punjab and Haryana High Court, the rules and provisions as applicable to a Union Cabinet Minister shall apply.

The rules also provide for special compensatory allowances for judges. A judge of the High Court is entitled to any one of the following special compensatory allowances, at the same rates as applicable to a member of the Indian Administrative Service holding the rank of Secretary to the Government of the State in which the principal seat of the High Court is situated: Special Compensatory (Remote Locality) Allowance, Special Compensatory (Hill Area) Allowance, Special Compensatory (Bad Climate) Allowance, and Special Compensatory (Schedules/ Tribal Area) Allowance.

Rule 2-A, inserted by G.S.R. 1015, dated 21st July, 1979 (w.e.f. 1st October, 1974), provides that each judge who avails himself of the use of an official residence is entitled to without payment of rent to the use of a furnished residence throughout his term of office and for a period of one month immediately thereafter. This concession is also admissible to the members of the family of a judge who dies while in service for a period of one month immediately after his death.

Rule 2-B, substituted by G.S.R. 720(E), dated 3rd November, 1995 (w.e.f. 3rd November, 1995), provides for the value of free furnishing (including electrical appliances) provided free of rent in the official residence allotted to the Chief Justice and other judges. The value of free furnishing provided free of rent in the official residence allotted to the Chief Justice shall not exceed Rs. 8,00,000/- (Rupees eight lakhs only), and in the case of other judges, it shall not exceed Rs. 6,00,000/- (Rupees six lakhs only).