Summary:

The Cigarettes (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1975, regulates the production, supply, and distribution of cigarettes in India. The Act specifies that every package of cigarettes produced, supplied, or distributed must bear the specified warning, "Cigarette smoking is injurious to health," on not less than one of the largest panels of the package. The warning must be legible, prominent, and conspicuous in size and color. The Act also restricts advertisements of cigarettes and mandates that the specified warning must be included in such advertisements. The language in which the specified warning shall be expressed depends on the language used on the package or in the advertisement. The Act empowers police officers to enter and search any factory, building, business premises, or any other place where any trade or commerce in cigarettes is carried on or cigarettes are produced, supplied, or distributed. The Act also authorizes the confiscation of packages of cigarettes in respect of which any provision of this Act has been or is being contravened. The Act imposes penalties on any person who carries on any trade or commerce in, or who produces, supplies, or distributes, cigarettes if any package of such cigarettes does not contain the specified warning. The Act applies to companies and their officers, who shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence if the offence has been committed with their consent or connivance or is attributable to any neglect on their part. The Act specifies that offences punishable under this Act shall be bailable and cognizable. The Act also provides protection to the Central Government, State Government, and their officers for anything done in good faith under this Act. The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. The Act does not apply to any cigarette or package of cigarettes which is exported, provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize the export of any package of cigarettes, not containing the specified warning to any country if the law in force in that country requires that the same or similar warning shall be specified on each package of cigarettes.