The Representation Of The People (Second Amendment) Act,   2002 

 Amendment of Third Schedule to Act 43 of  1950  .- In the Third Schedule to the Representation of the People Act,  1950 , in the Table, after entry 3, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"3A. Every local authority in the State of Maharashtra.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this entry, the expression "local authority" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (e) of section 2 of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act,  1949  (Bom. XLI of  1949 )."

nan


The Representation Of The People (Second Amendment) Act,   2002 

 Amendment of First Schedule to Act 3 of  1951 .- In the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act,  1951 , after entry 4, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-

"4A. Every local authority in the State of Maharashtra.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this entry, the expression "local authority" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (e) of section 2 of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act,  1949  (Bom. XLI of  1949 )."


Summary:

The Representation Of The People (Second Amendment) Act,   2002 

This Act makes several amendments to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 

In the Fourth Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, the heading "BIHAR" and the entries relating to it are replaced with a new list of local authorities, including Nagar Parishads, Cantonment Boards, Nagar Panchayats, Zila Parishads, Panchayat Samitis, Nagar Nigams (Corporations), and Gram Panchayats.

The Third Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 is amended to include a new entry 3A, which states that every local authority in the State of Maharashtra shall be a constituency for the purpose of elections to the House of the People. The term "local authority" is defined in the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 to mean any municipal corporation, improvement trust, port trust, district board, or other local authority within the State of Maharashtra.

Similarly, the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1951 is also amended to include a new entry 4A, which states that every local authority in the State of Maharashtra shall be a constituency for the purpose of elections to the State Legislative Assembly. The definition of "local authority" is the same as in the Third Schedule.

Overall, these amendments seek to expand the scope of local authorities as constituencies for the purpose of elections to the House of the People and the State Legislative Assembly in the States of Bihar and Maharashtra.