**Summary:**

The Family Courts Act, 1984 establishes Family Courts for the purpose of exercising jurisdiction and powers in matters related to marriage and family disputes. The Act applies to the whole of India except Jammu and Kashmir and came into force on different dates for different states. The Act defines various terms such as "Judge", "notification", "prescribed", "Family Court", and other words and expressions used in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

The Act provides for the establishment of Family Courts for areas with a population of over one million and allows the State Government to establish Family Courts for other areas as it deems necessary. The State Government may also specify the local limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of a Family Court shall extend.

The Act lays down the qualifications for appointment of Judges and provides for the appointment of one or more persons as the Judge or Judges of a Family Court. A Family Court may consist of more than one Judge, and the State Government may appoint any of the Judges to be the Principal Judge and any other Judge to be the Additional Principal Judge. The Principal Judge may make arrangements for the distribution of business among the various Judges.

The Act provides for the association of institutions or organizations engaged in social welfare, persons professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the family, persons working in the field of social welfare, and any other person whose association with a Family Court would enable it to exercise its jurisdiction more effectively. The State Government shall determine the number and categories of counsellors, officers, and other employees required to assist a Family Court in the discharge of its functions and provide the Family Court with such counsellors, officers, and other employees as it may think fit.

The Act defines the jurisdiction of a Family Court, which includes all the jurisdiction exercisable by any district court or any subordinate civil court under any law for the time being in force in respect of suits and proceedings of the nature referred to in the Explanation. The suits and proceedings referred to in this sub-section are suits and proceedings of the following nature, namely:- (a) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage for a decree of nullity of marriage (declaring the marriage to be null and void or, as the case may be, annulling the marriage) or restitution of conjugal rights or judicial separation or dissolution of marriage; (b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the validity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of any person; (c) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties or of either of them; (d) a suit or proceeding for an order or injunction in circumstances arising out of a marital relationship; (e) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the legitimacy of any person; (f) a suit or proceeding for maintenance; (g) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the custody of, or access to, any minor.

The Act also provides for the exclusion of jurisdiction and pending proceedings, duty of Family Court to make efforts for settlement, procedure generally, proceedings to be held in camera, assistance of medical and welfare experts, right to legal representation, application of Indian Evidence Act, 1872, record of oral evidence, evidence of formal character on affidavit, judgment, execution of decrees and orders, appeal, act to have overriding effect, power of High Court to make rules, power of the Central Government to make rules, and power of the State Government to make rules.