The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006, is a law that aims to prevent and prohibit child marriages in India. The Act defines a child as a person who, if male, has not completed 21 years of age, and if female, has not completed 18 years of age. The Act also defines child marriage as a marriage to which either of the contracting parties is a child.

Under this Act, every child marriage is voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a child at the time of the marriage. This means that either party can file a petition in the district court to annul the marriage. However, the petition must be filed before the child completing two years of attaining majority.

The Act also provides for maintenance and residence to the female contracting party to a child marriage. The district court may make an interim or final order directing the male contracting party or his parents or guardians to pay maintenance to the female contracting party until her remarriage. The quantum of maintenance payable shall be determined by the district court having regard to the needs of the child, the lifestyle enjoyed by such child during her marriage, and the means of income of the paying party.

In cases where there are children born of the child marriage, the district court shall make an appropriate order for the custody of such children. The welfare and best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration to be given by the district court. An order for custody of a child may also include appropriate directions for giving to the other party access to the child in such a manner as may best serve the interests of the child.

The Act also provides that notwithstanding that a child marriage has been annulled by a decree of nullity under section 3, every child begotten or conceived of such marriage before the decree is made, whether born before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be a legitimate child for all purposes.

The Act provides for punishment for male adult marrying a child, solemnising a child marriage, and promoting or permitting solemnisation of child marriages. Whoever performs, conducts, directs or abets any child marriage shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall be liable to fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees unless he proves that he had reasons to believe that the marriage was not a child marriage.

The Act also provides for the power of the district court to modify orders issued under section 4 or section 5. The court shall have the power to add to, modify or revoke any order made under section 4 or section 5 and if there is any change in the circumstances at any time during the pendency of the petition and even after the final disposal of the petition.

The Act provides for the punishment for promoting or permitting solemnisation of child marriages. Where a child contracts a child marriage, any person having charge of the child, whether as parent or guardian or any other person or in any other capacity, lawful or unlawful, including any member of an organisation or association of persons who does any act to promote the marriage or permits it to be solemnised, or negligently fails to prevent it from being solemnised, including attending or participating in a child marriage, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees.

The Act also provides that where a child, being a minor, is taken or enticed out of the keeping of the lawful guardian, or by force compelled, or by any deceitful means induced to go from any place, or is sold for the purpose of marriage, and made to go through a form of marriage or if the minor is married after which the minor is sold or trafficked or used for immoral purposes, such marriage shall be null and void.

The Act also provides for the power of the court to issue injunction prohibiting child marriages. The court may issue an injunction against any person including a member of an organisation or an association of persons prohibiting such marriage.

The Act provides that any child marriage solemnised in contravention of an injunction order issued under section 13, whether interim or final, shall be void ab initio.

The Act provides that offences under this Act shall be cognisable and non-bailable.

The Act provides for the appointment of Child Marriage Prohibition Officers and invests them with powers of a police officer. It is the duty of the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer to prevent solemnisation of child marriages, collect evidence for the effective prosecution of persons contravening the provisions of this Act, advise residents of the locality not to indulge in promoting, helping, aiding or allowing the solemnisation of child marriages, create awareness of the evil which results from child marriages, and sensitise the community on the issue of child marriages.

The Child Marriage Prohibition Officers shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.

The Act provides for protection of action taken in good faith. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer in respect of anything in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.

The Act empowers the State Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

The Act repeals the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929, but provides that all cases and other proceedings pending or continued under the said Act at the commencement of this Act shall be continued and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act, as if this Act had not been passed.