Summary:

The Employees' Provident Funds Appellate Tribunal (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1997 outline the terms and conditions of service for the Presiding Officer of the Employees' Provident Funds Appellate Tribunal, which is a quasi-judicial body established under the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952. The rules cover various aspects such as pay, dearness allowance, city compensatory allowance, leave, pension, provident fund, travelling allowance, leave travel concession, accommodation, facilities for medical treatment, and staff of the tribunal.

The Presiding Officer is entitled to pay in the scale of Rs. 7300-7600 per mensem, with a reduction in pay if he is in receipt of retirement benefits from a previous service. The Presiding Officer is also entitled to dearness allowance and city compensatory allowance at the rates admissible to Group 'A' Officers of the Central Government drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 7300-7600.

In terms of leave, the Presiding Officer is entitled to earned leave, half pay leave, and extraordinary leave without pay and allowances up to a maximum period of 180 days in one term of Office. The Presiding Officer is also entitled to receive cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of the earned leave standing to his credit at the time of relinquishment of the Office in the Tribunal, subject to certain conditions.

The Presiding Officer is entitled to pension under rules of the parent employer and is also entitled to subscribe to the General Provident Fund. The Presiding Officer is also entitled to travelling allowances, daily allowance, transportation of personal effects and other similar matters at the same scales and the same rates as are prescribed in the rule applicable to officers holding equivalent post in the Central Government.

The Presiding Officer is entitled to residential accommodation on the terms and conditions as are made available to officers of the Central Government drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 7300-7600. When a Presiding Officer is not provided with or does not avail himself of the accommodation referred to in sub-rule (1), he may be paid every month an allowance at the rate admissible to officers of the Central Government drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 7300-7600.

The Presiding Officer shall be entitled to medical treatment and hospital facilities as provided in the Contributory Health Service Scheme Rules, 1954 and in places where the Central Health Services Scheme is not in operation, the Presiding Officer shall be entitled to the facilities as provided in the Central Services Medical Attendance Rules.

Where a sitting Judge of a High Court is appointed as the Presiding Officer of the Tribunal, the service conditions as contained in the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 28 of 1954 and the rules made thereunder shall apply to him. The conditions of service of the Presiding Officer for which no express provision is available in these rules shall be determined by the rules and orders for the time being applicable to officers of the Central Government drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 7300-7600.

The nature and categories of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal and the scale of pay attached thereto shall be as specified in the Schedule appended to these rules. The conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Tribunal in the matters of pay, Allowance, Leave, Provident Fund, age of superannuation, pension and retirement benefits, medical facilities and other conditions of service, shall be regulated in accordance with such rules and regulations as are for the time being applicable to officers and employees belonging to Group 'A', Group 'B', Group 'C' and Group 'D' as the case may be corresponding posts in the Central Government/Central Board.

The Central Government shall have power to relax the provisions of any of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons.