
(1)Every person desirous of carrying out reconnaissance operations for the purpose of search and exploration of minerals, other than major minerals, shall apply to the competent authority in Form No. 1 and shall accompany the application with the following fees:-(a)for reconnaissance operations in respect of a single mineral in an area not exceeding 100 square kilometers, rupees two thousand;(b)for reconnaissance operations in respect of a single mineral in an area exceeding 100 square kilometers but not exceeding 500 square kilometers, rupees five thousand;(c)for reconnaissance operations in respect of a single mineral in an area exceeding 500 square kilometers but not exceeding 1000 square kilometers, rupees ten thousand;(d)for reconnaissance operations in respect of more than one mineral in an area not exceeding 100 square kilometers, rupees three thousand;(e)for reconnaissance operations in respect of more than one mineral in an area exceeding 100 square kilometers but not exceeding 500 square kilometers, rupees eight thousand;(f)for reconnaissance operations in respect of more than one mineral in an area exceeding 500 square kilometers but not exceeding 1000 square kilometers, rupees fifteen thousand;(g)for reconnaissance operations in respect of more than one mineral in an area exceeding 1000 square kilometers, rupees twenty thousand.
(2)The competent authority shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the application, either grant or reject the application, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, and shall communicate its decision to the applicant.
(3)The reconnaissance permit granted under this rule shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of grant.
(4)Every person to whom a reconnaissance permit is granted shall submit to the competent authority, at the end of each year, an annual report in Form No. 2 giving details of the reconnaissance operations carried out during the year.
(5)The holder of a reconnaissance permit shall not carry out any operations in the area covered by the permit except those specified in the permit and shall not, without the previous permission of the competent authority, transfer the permit or any right or interest therein to any other person.
(6)The competent authority may, after giving the holder of a reconnaissance permit an opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel the permit if it is satisfied that the holder has contravened any of the provisions of these rules or of the permit.
(7)Every person who is aggrieved by the decision of the competent authority under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (6) may, within thirty days from the date of communication of such decision, appeal to the Central Government.
(8)The Central Government may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders on the appeal as it thinks fit.
(9)The fees prescribed under sub-rule (1) shall be paid by means of a demand draft drawn in favour of the competent authority and payable at the place where the competent authority is situated.
(10)The holder of a reconnaissance permit shall maintain a register showing the details of the reconnaissance operations carried out by him and shall produce the same for inspection by the competent authority or its authorized officer at any time during the period of validity of the permit.
(11)The holder of a reconnaissance permit shall not carry out any operations in the area covered by the permit except those specified in the permit and shall not, without the previous permission of the competent authority, transfer the permit or any right or interest therein to any other person.
(12)The competent authority may, after giving the holder of a reconnaissance permit an opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel the permit if it is satisfied that the holder has contravened any of the provisions of these rules or of the permit.
(13)Every person who is aggrieved by the decision of the competent authority under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (6) may, within thirty days from the date of communication of such decision, appeal to the Central Government.
(14)The Central Government may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders on the appeal as it thinks fit.
(15)The fees prescribed under sub-rule (1) shall be paid by means of a demand draft drawn in favour of the competent authority and payable at the place where the competent authority is situated.
(16)The holder of a reconnaissance permit shall maintain a register showing the details of the reconnaissance operations carried out by him and shall produce the same for inspection by the competent authority or its authorized officer at any time during the period of validity of the permit.


The Mineral Conservation And Development Rules, 1988 

 Mining plans.

- (1)Every owner or agent of a mine shall prepare a mining plan in respect of such mine in accordance with the provisions of the Act and these rules and submit the same to the Controller of Mines for approval.
(2)Every mining plan shall be prepared by a recognised person and shall be signed and sealed by such person and by the owner or agent of the mine.

(3)Every mining plan shall be in Form No. 3 and shall contain the following particulars, namely:-(a)general information relating to the mine and the owner or agent thereof;(b)a description of the mining methods to be adopted;(c)a description of the proposed development and mining operations;(d)a description of the measures to be taken for the conservation of mineral resources;(e)a description of the measures to be taken for the protection of the environment;(f)a description of the measures to be taken for the safety of persons employed in the mine;(g)a description of the measures to be taken for the reclamation and rehabilitation of the area affected by mining operations;(h)a description of the measures to be taken for the training of persons employed in the mine;(i)a description of the measures to be taken for the health of persons employed in the mine;(j)a description of the measures to be taken for the welfare of persons employed in the mine;(k)a description of the measures to be taken for the social and economic development of the locality in which the mine is situated;(l)such other particulars as may be prescribed by the Controller of Mines from time to time.

(4)Every mining plan shall be accompanied by the following documents, namely:-(a)a statement showing the estimated quantity of mineral reserves in the mine;(b)a statement showing the estimated cost of development and mining operations;(c)a statement showing the estimated cost of measures for the conservation of mineral resources;(d)a statement showing the estimated cost of measures for the protection of the environment;(e)a statement showing the estimated cost of measures for the safety of persons employed in the mine;(f)a statement showing the estimated cost of measures for the reclamation and rehabilitation of the area affected by mining operations;(g)a statement showing the estimated cost of measures for the training of persons employed in the mine;(h)a statement showing the estimated cost of measures for the health of persons employed in the mine;(i)a statement showing the estimated cost of measures for the welfare of persons employed in the mine;(j)a statement showing the estimated cost of measures for the social and economic development of the locality in which the mine is situated;(k)such other documents as may be prescribed by the Controller of Mines from time to time.

(5)Every mining plan shall be submitted to the Controller of Mines at least six months before the date on which the owner or agent intends to commence mining operations in the mine.

(6)The Controller of Mines may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, either approve the mining plan with or without modifications or reject the same.

(7)The Controller of Mines shall communicate his decision to the owner or agent of the mine within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the mining plan.

(8)Every owner or agent of a mine shall comply with the terms and conditions of the mining plan as approved by the Controller of Mines.

(9)The Controller of Mines may, after giving the owner or agent of the mine an opportunity of being heard, suspend or cancel the mining plan if he is satisfied that the owner or agent has contravened any of the provisions of the Act or these rules or of the mining plan as approved by the Controller of Mines.

(10)Every person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Controller of Mines under sub-rule (6) or sub-rule (9) may, within thirty days from the date of communication of such decision, appeal to the Central Government.

(11)The Central Government may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders on the appeal as it thinks fit.

(12)Every owner or agent of a mine shall maintain a register showing the details of the mining operations carried out by him and shall produce the same for inspection by the Controller of Mines or his authorized officer at any time during the period of validity of the mining plan.

(13)Every owner or agent of a mine shall submit to the Controller of Mines, at the end of each year, an annual report in Form No. 4 giving details of the mining operations carried out during the year.

(14)The holder of a mining plan shall not carry out any operations in the mine except those specified in the mining plan and shall not, without the previous permission of the Controller of Mines, transfer the mining plan or any right or interest therein to any other person.

(15)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that all persons employed in the mine are provided with such protective clothing and equipment as may be necessary for their safety and health.

(16)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that all persons employed in the mine are provided with such medical facilities as may be necessary for their health.

(17)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that all persons employed in the mine are provided with such training as may be necessary for their safety and health.

(18)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that all persons employed in the mine are provided with such welfare facilities as may be necessary for their well-being.

(19)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that all persons employed in the mine are provided with such social and economic benefits as may be necessary for their social and economic development.

(20)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that the area affected by mining operations is reclaimed and rehabilitated in accordance with the measures specified in the mining plan as approved by the Controller of Mines.

(21)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that the environment is protected in accordance with the measures specified in the mining plan as approved by the Controller of Mines.

(22)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that the safety of persons employed in the mine is ensured in accordance with the measures specified in the mining plan as approved by the Controller of Mines.

(23)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that the mineral resources are conserved in accordance with the measures specified in the mining plan as approved by the Controller of Mines.

(24)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that the measures specified in the mining plan as approved by the Controller of Mines are implemented in a timely and effective manner.

(25)Every owner or agent of a mine shall ensure that all records and reports required to be maintained and submitted under these rules are maintained and submitted in a timely and accurate manner.




The Mineral Conservation And Development Rules, 1988 

 Power to make rules.

- The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act and these rules.

(2)Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.




The Mineral Conservation And Development Rules, 1988 

 Amendment of rules.

- The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend these rules.

(2)Every amendment made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the amendment or both Houses agree that the amendment should not be made, the amendment shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that amendment.




The Mineral Conservation And Development Rules, 1988 

 Repeal and savings.

- The Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 1957 are hereby repealed.

(2)Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the repealed rules shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of these rules.

(3)Any rule, notification, order, instruction, scheme or bye-law made or issued under the repealed rules and in force immediately before the commencement of these rules shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of these rules, continue in force until it is repealed or amended under these rules.

The Mineral Conservation And Development Rules, 1988 

 Form No. 1

 [See rule 3] 

 Application for reconnaissance permit.




To,

The Competent Authority,

[Name and address of the Competent Authority]

Sir,

I, [Name and address of the applicant], hereby apply for a reconnaissance permit in respect of [mineral or minerals] in an area not exceeding [specify the area in square kilometers].

I enclose herewith a demand draft for [specify the amount] drawn in favour of the Competent Authority and payable at [place where the Competent Authority is situated].

I also enclose the following documents in support of my application:-

1. [List of documents]

I declare that the particulars given in this application and the documents submitted herewith are true and correct.

Yours faithfully,

[Name and signature of the applicant]




The Mineral Conservation And Development Rules, 1988 

 Form No. 2

 [See rule 3] 

 Annual report on reconnaissance operations.




To,

The Competent Authority,

[Name and address of the Competent Authority]

Sir,

I, [Name and address of the holder of the reconnaissance permit], hereby submit this annual report on the reconnaissance operations carried out by me during the year ending on the [last day of the year].

1. General information

(a) Name of the permit holder: [Name]

(b) Address of the permit holder: [Address]

(c) Name of the mineral or minerals for which the reconnaissance permit has been granted: [Mineral or minerals]

(d) Area covered by the permit: [Specify the area in square kilometers]

(e) Date of grant of the permit: [Date]

(f) Date of expiry of the permit: [Date]

2. Details of reconnaissance operations

(a) Number of boreholes drilled: [Number]

(b) Length of boreholes drilled: [Length in meters]

(c) Number of samples collected: [Number]

(d) Description of the geological formations encountered: [Description]

(e) Estimated quantity of mineral reserves in the area: [Quantity in metric tons]

(f) Other observations: [Any other observations or findings]

3. Conclusion

Based on the reconnaissance operations carried out during the year, I hereby submit the following conclusions:-

(a) [Conclusion 1]

(b) [Conclusion 2]

(c) [Conclusion 3]

(d) [Conclusion 4]

(e) [Conclusion 5]

Yours faithfully,

[Name and signature of the holder of the reconnaissance permit]




The Mineral Conservation And Development Rules, 1988 

 Form No. 3

 [See rule 4] 

 Mining plan.




To,

The Controller of Mines,

[Name and address of the Controller of Mines]

Sir,

I, [Name and address of the owner or agent of the mine], hereby submit this mining plan in respect of [name of the mine].

1. General information

