The Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969, was enacted to form an autonomous State within Assam called Meghalaya. This Act was added to the Constitution by the Constitution (Twenty second Amendment) Act, 1969, to enable Parliament to give effect to the scheme for reorganization of Assam by forming an autonomous State comprising all or any of the tribal areas specified in Part A of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule. The Act establishes Meghalaya as an autonomous State within Assam, comprising the United Khasi-Jaintia Hills District and the Garo Hills District. The Mikir Hills Autonomous District and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous District have the option to become a part of Meghalaya. The legislative powers of Meghalaya are set out in the Second Schedule to the Bill, and the executive power of Meghalaya extends to matters with respect to which the legislature of Meghalaya has power to make laws. The Bill makes detailed provisions regarding the constitution of the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya, delimitation of constituencies, elections to the Assembly and its procedure, council of Ministers for Meghalaya, administrative relations between the Governments of Assam and Meghalaya and between the Central Government and the Government of Meghalaya. The Bill also provides for transferring to Meghalaya such assets and liabilities of the Assam Government in the Meghalaya area as are relatable to matters of the Assam Government in the Meghalaya area as relatable to matters which fall within the purview of the autonomous State. The Bill also provides for the constitution of a provisional Legislative Assembly for Meghalaya pending general elections to the Assembly and treats the autonomous State as a State for certain provisions of the Constitution. The Sixth Schedule to the Constitution is amended to improve the procedures of the District Councils and make them function efficiently.
Summary:

The document summarizes various provisions related to the Indian state of Meghalaya's government structure, particularly the Legislature of Meghalaya. The Legislature consists of the Governor and the Legislative Assembly. The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly is fixed by the Central Government and shall not be less than thirty-five or more than fifty-five. The Governor may nominate not more than three members of minority communities to the Legislative Assembly if they are not adequately represented.

The Election Commission is responsible for delimiting constituencies, and the delimitation is based on the latest census figures, geographical features, and public convenience. The Election Commission may associate with itself not more than five associate members to assist in the performance of its functions.

The Representation of the People Act, 1950, and the Representation of the People Act, 1951, apply to and in relation to the elections to the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya, subject to such modifications as the President may direct. The Legislative Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, continues for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer. The said period may be extended by Parliament by law while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.
Summary:

The Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 outlines the rules and regulations for the Legislative Assembly in Meghalaya. According to this Act, the Governor has the power to summon, prorogue, and dissolve the Legislative Assembly, and may address the Assembly and send messages to it. The Governor may also require the attendance of members for addressing them. At the commencement of the first session after each general election and at the commencement of the first session of each year, the Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform the Assembly of the causes of its summons.

The Act also outlines the rights of Ministers as respects the Legislative Assembly, stating that every Minister and the Advocate-General for Meghalaya shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly, and to speak in, and otherwise take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislative Assembly of which he may be named a member. However, they shall not be entitled to vote.

The Act also provides for the election and removal of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly. A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly, may resign from his office, and may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Legislative Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly.

The Act also establishes a separate secretarial staff for the Legislative Assembly and regulates the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the secretarial staff. The Governor may make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the Legislative Assembly, until provision is made by the Legislature of Meghalaya under sub-section (2).

The Act also outlines the conduct of business in the Legislative Assembly, including the requirement for members to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before taking their seat, the rules for voting and quorum, and disqualifications for membership. No person shall be a member of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam and also of the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya. If a person is chosen a member of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of Assam and also of the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya, then, at the expiration of such period, as may be specified in rules made by the President, that person's seat in Parliament or, as the case may be in the Legislative Assembly of Assam, shall become vacant unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya.