Summary:
The Central Electricity Authority (Terms and Conditions of Service of Chairperson and other Members) Rules, 2024, regulate the terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Central Electricity Authority (Authority) established under section 70 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (Act).

The Authority consists of a Chairperson and eight Members, including Member (Economic and Commercial), Member (Grid Operations and Distribution), Member (Hydro), Member (Planning), Member (Power Systems), Member (Thermal), and Member (Renewable Energy). The Chairperson and Members are appointed on deputation (including short-term contract) for a term not exceeding five years or till they attain the age of superannuation. The eligibility criteria for the post of Chairperson and Members are specified in rule 4.

A person shall cease to be the Chairperson or a Member of the Authority if they remain absent from three consecutive meetings without prior permission, cease to be in service of the Central Government or the State Government or any other lending authority, are convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence involving moral turpitude, or are an undischarged insolvent.

The maximum age limit for being appointed as the Chairperson or a Member is not exceeding fifty-eight years as on the closing date of receipt of applications for unanticipated vacancy and as on the date on which the vacancy is expected to arise in case of anticipated vacancy.

The Chairperson and Members can resign from their office by giving notice of at least three months in writing to the Central Government and the Authority, respectively.

The Chairperson enjoys the status of ex-officio, Secretary to the Government of India, and shall carry the same pay and allowances as available to the Secretary to that Government. A Member enjoys the status of ex-officio, Additional Secretary to the Government of India, and shall carry the same pay and allowances as available to the Additional Secretary to that Government.

The other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members, like entitlement of leave, leave salary, leave travel concession, travelling allowance, medical benefits, etc., shall be as applicable to the Central Government officers of corresponding status.

The pension and leave salary contribution of the Chairperson and Member shall be paid by the Authority to the respective lending authority in accordance with their rules.

The other Members shall receive such allowances and fees for attending the meetings of the Authority as may be determined by the Central Government.

The Central Government may relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do.