Summary:

The Securities Contracts (Regulation) (Procedure for Holding Inquiry and Imposing Penalties) Rules, 2005, provide the procedure for holding an inquiry and imposing penalties under the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. These rules apply to the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and any officer appointed by SEBI as an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry.

Under these rules, SEBI may initiate an inquiry against any person who has committed contraventions under sections 23-A, 23-B, 23-C, 23-D, 23-E, 23-F, 23-G, and 23-H of the Act. The inquiry process begins with the issuance of a show-cause notice to the person, requiring them to show cause why an inquiry should not be held against them. The notice must indicate the nature of the offence alleged to have been committed by the person.

If, after considering the cause shown by the person, SEBI or the adjudicating officer is of the opinion that an inquiry should be held, a notice fixing a date for the appearance of the person either personally or through their lawyer or authorized representative is issued. On the date fixed, the adjudicating officer explains the offence alleged to have been committed by the person and gives them an opportunity to produce documents or evidence relevant to the inquiry. The adjudicating officer is not bound to observe the provisions of the Evidence Act, 1872, while taking evidence.

While holding an inquiry under these rules, the adjudicating officer has the power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any document which may be useful for or relevant to the subject-matter of the inquiry. If any person fails to appear before the adjudicating officer, the inquiry may proceed in their absence after recording the reasons for doing so.

Upon consideration of the evidence produced before the adjudicating officer, if SEBI or the adjudicating officer is satisfied that the person has become liable to penalty under any of the sections specified in sub-section (1) of section 23-I of the Act, they may impose such penalty as they think fit in accordance with the provisions of the relevant section or sections specified in section 23-I of the Act.

While adjudging the quantum of penalty, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a result of the default, the amount of loss caused to an investor or group of investors as a result of the default, and the repetitive nature of the default. The order imposing penalty shall specify the provisions of the Act in respect of which default has taken place and shall contain brief reasons for such decision.

A notice or an order issued under these rules shall be served on the person in the manner specified in rule 7, which includes delivering or tendering it to the person or their duly authorized agent, sending it by fax or electronic mail or by courier or speed post with acknowledge due or registered post with acknowledgement due to the address of their place of residence or their last known place of residence or the place where they carried on, or last carried on, business or personally works, or last worked, for gain. If it cannot be served in any of these ways, it may be affixed on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the premises in which the person resides or is known to have last resided, or carried on business or personally works or last worked for gain, and a written report thereof should be witnessed by two persons. If it cannot be affixed on the outer door, it may be published in at least two newspapers, one in an English daily newspaper having nationwide circulation, and another in a newspaper having wide circulation published in the language of the region where the person was last known to have resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain.