In this Convention, unless the context otherwise requires:

(a)the term "India" means the territory of India and includes the territorial sea areas adjacent to the territorial waters of India, and such other maritime zone as India may have under international law, and in particular, includes any area adjacent to the territorial waters of India, which may be included in the exclusive economic zone, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, and the seabed and subsoil beneath;

(b)the term "Uganda" means the Republic of Uganda and includes the territorial waters adjacent thereto;

(c)the terms "Contracting State" and "the other Contracting State" mean India or Uganda, as the context requires;

(d)the term "person" includes an individual, a company and any other body of persons;

(e)the term "company" means any body corporate or any entity which is treated as a body corporate for tax purposes;

(f)the terms "enterprise of a Contracting State" and "enterprise of the other Contracting State" mean respectively an enterprise carried on by a resident of a Contracting State and an enterprise carried on by a resident of the other Contracting State;

(g)the term "international traffic" means any transport by a ship or aircraft operated by an enterprise of a Contracting State, except when the ship or aircraft is operated solely between places in the other Contracting State;

(h)the term "competent authority" means, in the case of India, the Central Government in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) or their authorised representative and, in the case of Uganda, the Minister of Finance or his authorised representative;

(i)the term "national" means any individual possessing the nationality or citizenship of a Contracting State;

(j)the term "fiscal year" means:

(i)in the case of India the financial year beginning on the 1st day of April;

(ii)in the case of Uganda, the year beginning on the 1st day of July;

(k)the term "business" includes the performance of professional services and of other activities of an independent character.

Article 4Resident

1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term "resident of a Contracting State" means any person who, under the laws of that State, is liable to tax therein by reason of his domicile, residence, place of management or any other criterion of a similar nature, and also includes that State and any political subdivision or local authority thereof. This term, however, does not include any person who is liable to tax in that State in respect only of income from sources in that State.

2. Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 an individual is a resident of both Contracting States, then his status shall be determined as follows:

(a)he shall be deemed to be a resident of the Contracting State in which he has a permanent home available to him; if he has a permanent home available to him in both Contracting States, he shall be deemed to be a resident of the Contracting State with which his personal and economic relations are closer (centre of vital interests);

(b)if the Contracting State in which he has his centre of vital interests cannot be determined, or if he has not a permanent home available to him in either Contracting State, he shall be deemed to be a resident of the Contracting State in which he has an habitual abode;

(c)if he has an habitual abode in both Contracting States or in neither of them, he shall be deemed to be a resident of the Contracting State of which he is a national;

(d)if he is a national of both Contracting States or of neither of them, the competent authorities of the Contracting States shall settle the question by mutual agreement.

3. Where by reason of the provisions of paragraph 1 a person other than an individual is a resident of both Contracting States, then it shall be deemed to be a resident of the Contracting State in which its place of effective management is situated. If the place of effective management of a person other than an individual cannot be determined, then the competent authorities of the Contracting States shall settle the question by mutual agreement.

Article 5Permanent Establishment

1. For the purposes of this Convention, the term "permanent establishment" means a fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on.

2. The term "permanent establishment" includes especially:

(a)a place of management;

(b)a branch;

(c)an office;

(d)a factory;

(e)a workshop;

(f)a sales outlet;

(g)a warehouse in relation to a person providing storage facilities for others;

(h)a farm, plantation or other place where agricultural, forestry, plantation or related activities are carried on;

(i)a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of extraction of natural resources.

3. A building site or construction or installation project constitutes a permanent establishment only if it lasts more than twelve months.

4. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Article, the term "permanent establishment" shall be deemed not to include:

(a)the use of facilities solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise;

(b)the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery;

(c)the maintenance of a stock of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise solely for the purpose of processing by another enterprise;

(d)the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of purchasing goods or merchandise or of collecting information, for the enterprise;

(e)the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of carrying on, for the enterprise, any other activity of a preparatory or auxiliary character;

(f)the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for any combination of activities mentioned in sub-paragraphs (a) to (e), provided that the overall activity of the fixed place of business resulting from this combination is of a preparatory or auxiliary character.

5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2, where a person - other than an agent of an independent status to whom paragraph 6 applies - is acting on behalf of an enterprise and has, and habitually exercises, in a Contracting State an authority to conclude contracts on behalf of the enterprise, that enterprise shall be deemed to have a permanent establishment in that State in respect of any activities which that person undertakes for the enterprise, unless the activities of such person are limited to those mentioned in paragraph 4 which, if exercised through a fixed place of business, would not make this fixed place of business a permanent establishment under the provisions of that paragraph.

6. An enterprise shall not be deemed to have a permanent establishment in a Contracting State merely because it carries on business in that State through a broker, general commission agent or any other agent of an independent status, provided that such persons are acting in the ordinary course of their business.

7. The fact that a company which is a resident of a Contracting State controls or is controlled by a company which is a resident of the other Contracting State, or which carries on business in that other State (whether through a permanent establishment or otherwise), shall not of itself constitute either company a permanent establishment of the other.

Summary:

The Convention Between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income is an agreement between the two countries to avoid taxing the same income twice and to prevent fiscal evasion. The Convention applies to taxes on income imposed by either country, including taxes on total income, elements of income, taxes on gains from the alienation of property, and taxes on wages or salaries paid by enterprises. Specifically, the Convention applies to the income tax in Uganda and the income tax, including any surcharge, in India. The Convention also applies to any identical or substantially similar taxes imposed after the date of signature of the Convention. The Convention defines various terms used throughout the document, such as "India," "Uganda," "Contracting State," "person," "company," "enterprise," "international traffic," "competent authority," "national," and "fiscal year." The Convention also defines the term "resident," which means a person who, under the laws of a Contracting State, is liable to tax therein by reason of his domicile, residence, place of management, or any other criterion of a similar nature. The Convention also defines the term "permanent establishment," which means a fixed place of business through which the business of an enterprise is wholly or partly carried on. The Convention includes a list of what constitutes a permanent establishment, such as a place of management, a branch, an office, a factory, a workshop, a sales outlet, a warehouse, a farm, plantation or other place where agricultural, forestry, plantation or related activities are carried on, and a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of extraction of natural resources. However, certain activities are deemed not to be a permanent establishment, such as the use of facilities solely for the purpose of storage, display or delivery of goods or merchandise belonging to the enterprise, and the maintenance of a fixed place of business solely for the purpose of carrying on, for the enterprise, any other activity of a preparatory or auxiliary character.