Summary:
The Faridabad Development Corporation Act, 1956 establishes a corporation for the purpose of carrying on and promoting trade and industry in the town of Faridabad, assisting in the rehabilitation of displaced persons settled therein and for matters connected therewith. The Corporation is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. The Corporation shall consist of a Chairman and such other members, being not less than four and not more than eight, as the Central Government may appoint. The term of office and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members shall be such as may be prescribed. The Chairman or any other member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, but he shall continue in office until the appointment of his successor is notified in the Official Gazette. A member shall be disqualified for being appointed, or for continuing as a member of the Corporation if he has, directly or indirectly, any interest in a subsisting contract mad with, or in any work being done for, the Corporation except as a shareholder (other than a director) in an incorporated company. The Corporation may exercise all such powers as may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act. The Corporation shall have its own Fund and all receipts of the Corporation shall be carried thereto and all payments by the Corporation shall be made therefrom. The Corporation shall cause to be maintained such books of account and other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited at such times and in such manner as may be prescribed. When any money is due to the Corporation from any person, then, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, the Corporation may, after giving that person an opportunity of being heard, issue a certificate to the Collector of the amount due and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. The Corporation may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairman or any other member or any officer of the Corporation, subject to such conditions and limitations (if any) as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem necessary for the efficient running of the day-to-day administration of the Corporation. All members and officers of the Corporation shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government such returns, statistics, accounts and other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may from time to time require. The Corporation shall have power to spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund of the Corporation. The Corporation shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of every financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. The Corporation shall prepare in such form and at such time each year as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous financial year and copies thereof shall be sent to the Central Government and the Government of the State of Punjab. The Corporation may also take such further security as it may consider necessary for advancing any loan or for transferring any building. The Corporation shall make such provision for depreciation and for reserve and other funds as the Central Government may from time to time direct. The management of these funds, the sums to be carried from time to time to the credit thereof and the application of the moneys comprised therein shall be determined in accordance with such directions as the Central Government may from time to time issue. The Corporation shall comply with such directions as the Central Government may from time to time issue. The Central Government may, from time to time, give to the Corporation such general or special directions as the Central Government thinks fit and in the performance of the functions, the Corporation shall comply with such directions.