The Forfeiture Act of 1859 is a law that is in force in India, except for Part B and merged States, and the Scheduled Districts. It has been extended to the Union territory of Pondicherry and certain Scheduled Districts, including Kumaon and Garhwal, the Tarai of the Province of Agra, West Jalpaiguri, the District of Hazaribagh, the District of Lohardaga (now the Ranchi District), the District of Manbhum, Pargana Dhalbhum in the District of Singbhum, the Scheduled portion of the Mirzapur District, Jaunsar Bawar, the Scheduled Districts of the C. P. (now Madhya Pradesh), the Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and Vizagapatam, and Assam (except the North Lushai Hills).

The Act outlines the procedure for the forfeiture of property for offences, including the constitution, procedure, and other matters related to Special Commission Courts. Certain words in the Act were repealed by Act 12 of 1891.

The Act states that a conviction involving forfeiture cannot be questioned in suits relating to forfeited property. The validity of any such conviction cannot be questioned upon the ground that the record of the conviction does not show in what capacity the officer acted, or that it represents him to have acted in a different capacity from that in which he had power to convict.

If property is attached or seized without conviction or an adjudication of forfeiture, the validity of such attachment or seizure cannot be called in question by any court or other authority in any suit or proceeding, unless the offender or alleged offender surrenders himself for trial within one year after the seizure of his property and is acquitted of the offence.

The Act also states that nothing in this section shall extend to persons entitled to pardon upon Her Majesty's proclamation published in the Calcutta Gazette Extraordinary, dated the 1st of November, 1858, or to any person who having surrendered himself within the period of one year after the seizure of his property is duly discharged without a prosecution.

The Act also states that nothing in this Act shall be held to affect the rights of parties not charged with any offence for which upon conviction the property of the offender is forfeited in respect of any property attached or seized as forfeited or liable to be forfeited to Government. Provided that no suit brought by any party in respect of such property shall be entertained unless it be instituted within the period of one year from the date of the attachment or seizure of the property to which the suit relates.