Summary:
The International Financial Services Centres Authority (Assets, Liabilities, and Solvency Margin of General, Health and Re-insurance business) Regulations, 2023, are a set of rules that govern the capital and solvency requirements for International Financial Service Centre Insurance Offices (IIOs) undertaking general, health, or re-insurance business. These regulations are made under the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019, and the Insurance Act, 1938. The regulations specify the requirements related to assets, liabilities, and solvency margin for IIOs.

The regulations apply to all IIOs undertaking general, health, or re-insurance business. However, for an IIO set up in an unincorporated form, solvency margin and related requirements under these regulations are not applicable. The reporting formats specified under these regulations are still applicable for such IIOs.

The regulations define various terms related to insurance business, such as 'allocated loss adjustment expenses,' 'Appointed Actuary,' 'Authority,' 'claim reserves,' 'incurred but not enough reported reserves,' 'incurred but not reported claim reserves,' 'insurer,' 'International Financial Service Centre Insurance Office,' 'outstanding claim reserves,' 'premium deficiency reserve,' 're-insurer,' 'unearned premium reserve,' and 'unexpired risk reserves.'

The regulations specify the reporting requirements for IIOs. An IIO is required to prepare and submit to the Authority a statement of admissible assets, a statement of the amount of liabilities, and a statement of solvency margin. The IIO is also required to submit an annual actuarial report prepared by the Appointed Actuary, valuation of assets and liabilities, and the computation of solvency margin duly certified by the Appointed Actuary.

The regulations also provide for the Authority's power to inspect or investigate the affairs of an IIO, specify norms, procedures, processes and manners to be complied by IIOs, relax the strict enforcement of any of the provisions of these regulations, and remove any difficulty in the application or interpretation of the provisions of these regulations.

The regulations also provide for the non-applicability of certain regulations and savings. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Assets, Liabilities, and Solvency Margin of General Insurance Business) Regulations, 2016, and the circulars or guidelines issued thereunder, shall cease to apply in International Financial Services Centres. However, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under the regulations, circulars or guidelines mentioned in sub-regulation (1), before the commencement of these regulations, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of these regulations. An IIO operating in the International Financial Services Centre prior to the commencement of these regulations, shall comply with additional requirements stipulated in these regulations, if any, within a period of six (6) months from the commencement of these regulations or within such extended time as may be specified by the Authority.