Title: Surrender followed by an encounter of gangster Vikas Dubey Content: WHO IS VIKAS DUBEY? The Uttar Pradesh police started searching for Vikas Dubey after a resident of Bikru village, Rahul Tiwari, lodged a case of attempt to murder against the notorious gangster. The police conducted raids in several places on the basis of the FIR filed by Rahul Tiwari. Apart from this FIR of an attempt to murder case, Vikas Dubey has over 60 criminal cases lodged against him under CrPC. The criminal cases against him include murder, robberies and kidnapping charges. Vikas Dubey was also identified as the main accused in the murder of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Santosh Shukla, who was a minister of state (MoS). The dreadful criminal killed Santosh Shukla inside the Shivli police station in 2001. Two policemen also lost their lives during the attack. After committing this high-profile murder, Dubey, also known as Shivli's don, had surrendered before the court. However, Dubey was later acquitted from the murder charges by a session court. Dubey is also accused of plotting murders while in prison, including the murder of his cousin, Anurag. He also won the Nagar Panchayat elections from Shivrajpur while in jail, and was said to be well-connected with every party in the state. He allegedly used to keep an armed group of henchmen in the village and is feared in the region. He had also joined Mayawati’s Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP). Vikas Dubey was also involved in the murder of Siddheshwar Pandey, the principal and assistant manager of Tarachand Inter College, in 2000. He was sentenced to life imprisonment in the murder of Siddheshwar Pandey. Recently, he and his accomplices committed heinous crime of killing 8 policemen including a deputy superintendent of police, three sub-inspectors, and four constableswith semi-automatic weapons like AK-47. ARREST OF VIKAS DUBEY Gangster Vikas Dubey was taken into custody outside a temple in Madhya Pradesh’s Ujjain after a six-day long manhunt for a criminal accused of orchestrating one of the deadliest attacks on policemen in recent years which resulted in death of eight policemen. For the same, a bounty of Rs 1 lakh has been announced for his capture, which has now been increased to Rs 2.5 lakh, along with the affirmation that the tipster’s identity will not be disclosed. Across the state, fifty dedicated teams and more than 3,000 police officers were mobilized to apprehend him in a major manhunt. The day began with the arrest of two of his aides, namely, Prem Prakash Pandey and Atul Dubey. CRUCIAL HIGHLIGHTS OF THE ARREST Vikas Dubey is reported to have shouted his name out when being arrested outside the famous Mahakal temple in Ujjain. “Main Vikas Dubey hoon, Kanpur wala!,” he was heard saying by eyewitnesses. Though various versions of how his arrest being carried out emerged through the day. A Madhya Pradesh minister claimed Dubey was caught by a policeman, while police officials, eyewitnesses, and an administration official claimed he was spotted by locals first and may have surrendered before his arrest. Madhya Pradesh’s Policemen Vivek Johri claimed that a man selling flowers saw Dubey and informed the security agency at the Mahakal temple, following which the police outpost nearby was informed. When the cops checked Dubey’s identity card, they found out that he was there in the name of one Naveen Pal. A policeman told that Dubey purchased a ticket for Rs 250 from the temple counter at about 8.30am. He later told the flower shop owner that he was Vikas Dubey from Kanpur. The flower seller said he had identified Dubey as he behaved suspiciously and later informed the security agency guard at the gate of the temple. A police officer said Dubey kept changing his responses while initial questioning in Ujjain and didn’t correctly reveal how he reached Ujjain and from where and when. The police officer said that Dubey claimed to have arrived in MP through Kota on Wednesday by a busbut his account was not credible since the interstate bus service is still suspended, the officer added. A liquor company’s manager, who is a relative of Vikas Dubey, was reportedly picked up by police to find out whether he had called Dubey to Ujjain. The police did not confirm his detention. A police officer who interrogated him said most of the officers involved in the manhunt said Dubey was helped at every step, from leaving to a friend’s place at Shivli in Kanpur Dehat to reaching Ujjain while covering around 1,250 km across four states. The police are particularly looking at who Dubey may have reached out to after the Kanpur ambush, while hiding at a friend’s house in Kanpur Dehat’s Shivli town, three kilometres from his village. It was said he reached Shivli on a motorcycle as travel by car would have required him to go through the main roads. According to police officials, Dubey’s aide Prabhat Mishra claimed during his interrogation before he was killed in an encounter in Kanpur that Dubey had planned everything from his escape to eventual surrender. He used an SUV car to reach Auraiya and then switched multiple rides to reach Faridabad. Dubey is then alleged to have asked his key shooter Amar Dubey to reach Madhya Pradesh through the Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh. But the police nabbed Amar in Hamirpur and he was killed in an encounter when he tried to escape, the police said. Prabhat Mishra and the staff of the hotel, where Vikas Dubey stayed in Faridabad, said he was confident and relaxed.The other aide, Praveen alias Bauwa Dubey, also wanted in connection with the Kanpur ambush, was killed in an encounter in Etawah, the police said. Dubey’s wife, his son and their domestic help were also arrested later in the day. According to figures by Kanpur police, the number of people arrested could be as high as 20, including four women who were the spouses of some of the fugitives. Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra demanded a CBI probe to ascertain the facts about the alleged patronage and protection to Vikas Dubey. Former MP chief minister Kamal Nath said the gangster’s “safe departure” from Kanpur, arrival at Ujjain and the manner of arrest gave birth to a lot of suspicion. "Loved reading this piece by Namami Jain? Join LAWyersClubIndia's network for daily News Updates, Judgment Summaries, Articles, Forum Threads, Online Law Courses, and MUCH MORE!!" Join our Telegram group Join our Whatsapp group Click here to Get More Content on LCI Android App Tags :criminal law