Title: Spreading Covid-19: offence under IPC? Content: "Other Countries should learn from Italy's mistake". Italians are taking to social media to warn the rest of the world to learn from their mistakes before it's too late. Despite the alarming situation because of Covid-19, some "famous" people are on fault by not only risking health of people around them but also violating laws of IPC. By the "famous" in the previous statement, I want to address the singer Kanika Kapoor, who returned from UK some 10 days back, and has been tested positive with covid-19 flu. At this point of time when the self-quarantine and distancing has been strongly recommended for all the citizens especially for the people returned from foreign trips. Kanika Kapoor concealed her traveling history from the authorities and went out to attend lavish parties, risking the lives of people around her. In such a scenario, in my opinion, she has not only violated the basic citizen duties but also the IPC laws. Doesn't matter she did it intentionally or negligently in either case she has violated Section 269 or Section 270 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) 1860. Section 269 of IPC talks about negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life. The section reads as: Whoever unlawfully or negligently does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. Section 270 talks about malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life. This section reads as: Whoever malignantly does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. Negligently or intentionally Kanika Kapoor and people like her should get repercussions of their act. In this alarming scenario when the whole world is fighting against this pandemic because of the negligence of anyone other people should not suffer. The author is currently associated with "American Express" as a "Fraud Analyst". She can also be reached at "www.linkedin.com/in/pratiksha-977b89110". "Loved reading this piece by PRATIKSHA BHANDARI? Join LAWyersClubIndia's network for daily News Updates, Judgment Summaries, Articles, Forum Threads, Online Law Courses, and MUCH MORE!!" Join our Telegram group Join our Whatsapp group Click here to Get More Content on LCI Android App Tags :Criminal Law